<html><body><pre>
[Title 40 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - July 1, 1998 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


[[Page i]]

          40


<R02>
          Protection of Environment

<R03>

          PARTS 260 to 265

                         Revised as of July 1, 1998

          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT
          AS OF JULY 1, 1998

          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration
          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1998



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 40:
    Chapter I--Environmental Protection Agency (Continued)....       3
  Finding Aids:
    Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference..........     557
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     559
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     577
    Table of OMB Control Numbers..............................     587
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     607



[[Page iv]]


      


------------------------------------------------------------------

   Cite this Code:  CFR

   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part and
   section number. Thus,  40 CFR 260.1 refers to title 40, part
   260, section 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------





[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, July 1, 1998), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 523-4534.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.

[[Page vii]]

    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, The United States 
Government Manual, the Federal Register, Public Laws, Weekly Compilation 
of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available 
in electronic format at www.access.gpo.gov/nara (``GPO Access''). For 
more information, contact Electronic Information Dissemination Services, 
U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 
(toll-free). E-mail, gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.nara.gov/fedreg. The NARA 
site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

July 1, 1998.



[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 40--Protection of Environment is composed of twenty-three 
volumes. The parts in these volumes are arranged in the following order: 
parts 1-49, parts 50-51, parts 52.01-52.1018, part 52.1019-end, parts 
53-59, part 60, parts 61-62, part 63, parts 64-71, parts 72-80, parts 
81-85, part 86, parts 87-135, parts 136-149, parts 150-189, parts 190-
259, parts 260-265, parts 266-299, parts 300-399, parts 400-424, parts 
425-699, parts 700-789, and part 790 to end. The contents of these 
volumes represent all current regulations codified under this title of 
the CFR as of July 1, 1998.

    Chapter I--Environmental Protection Agency appears in all twenty-two 
volumes. A Pesticide Tolerance Commodity/Chemical Index appears in parts 
150-189. A Toxic Substances Chemical--CAS Number Index appears in parts 
700-789 and part 790 to end. Redesignation Tables appear in the volumes 
containing parts 50-51, parts 150-189, and parts 700-789. Regulations 
issued by the Council on Environmental Quality appear in the volume 
containing part 790 to end.

    The OMB control numbers for title 40 appear in Sec. 9.1 of this 
chapter. For the convenience of the user, Sec. 9.1 appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the volumes containing part 50 to the end.

    For this volume, Melanie L. Marcec was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>



[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                   TITLE 40--PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENT


<R02>

                  (This book contains parts 260 to 265)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--Environmental Protection Agency (Continued)......         260

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
                   CHAPTER I--ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION


<R03>


<R02>
                           AGENCY (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                 SUBCHAPTER I--SOLID WASTES (CONTINUED)
Part                                                                Page
260             Hazardous waste management system: General..           5
261             Identification and listing of hazardous 
                    waste...................................          29
262             Standards applicable to generators of 
                    hazardous waste.........................         127
263             Standards applicable to transporters of 
                    hazardous waste.........................         154
264             Standards for owners and operators of 
                    hazardous waste treatment, storage, and 
                    disposal facilities.....................         158
265             Interim status standards for owners and 
                    operators of hazardous waste treatment, 
                    storage, and disposal facilities........         377

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
                 SUBCHAPTER I--SOLID WASTES (Continued)

<R05>


<R03>
PART 260--HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
260.1  Purpose, scope, and applicability.
260.2  Availability of information; confidentiality of information.
260.3  Use of number and gender.

                         Subpart B--Definitions

260.10  Definitions.
260.11  References.

                     Subpart C--Rulemaking Petitions

260.20  General.
260.21  Petitions for equivalent testing or analytical methods.
260.22  Petitions to amend part 261 to exclude a waste produced at a 
          particular facility.
260.23  Petitions to amend 40 CFR part 273 to include additional 
          hazardous wastes.
260.30  Variances from classification as a solid waste.
260.31  Standards and criteria for variances from classification as a 
          solid waste.
260.32  Variances to be classified as a boiler.
260.33  Procedures for variances from classification as a solid waste or 
          to be classified as a boiler.
260.40  Additional regulation of certain hazardous waste recycling 
          activities on a case-by-case basis.
260.41  Procedures for case-by-case regulation of hazardous waste 
          recycling activities.

Appendix I to Part 260--Overview of Subtitle C Regulations

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 6905, 6912(a), 6921-6927, 6930, 6934, 6935, 
6937, 6938, 6939, and 6974.

    Source: 45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: The reporting or recordkeeping provisions 
included in the final rule published at 47 FR 32274, July 26, 1982, will 
be submitted for approval to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), 
and will not become effective until OMB approval has been obtained. EPA 
will publish a notice of the effective date of the reporting and 
recordkeeping provisions of this rule after it obtains OMB approval.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 260.1  Purpose, scope, and applicability.

    (a) This part provides definitions of terms, general standards, and 
overview information applicable to parts 260 through 265 and 268 of this 
chapter.
    (b) In this part: (1) Section 260.2 sets forth the rules that EPA 
will use in making information it receives available to the public and 
sets forth the requirements that generators, transporters, or owners or 
operators of treatment, storage, or disposal facilities must follow to 
assert claims of business confidentiality with respect to information 
that is submitted to EPA under parts 260 through 265 and 268 of this 
chapter.
    (2) Section 260.3 establishes rules of grammatical construction for 
parts 260 through 265 and 268 of this chapter.
    (3) Section 260.10 defines terms which are used in parts 260 through 
265 and 268 of this chapter.
    (4) Section 260.20 establishes procedures for petitioning EPA to 
amend, modify, or revoke any provision of parts 260 through 265 and 268 
of this chapter and establishes procedures governing EPA's action on 
such petitions.
    (5) Section 260.21 establishes procedures for petitioning EPA to 
approve testing methods as equivalent to those prescribed in parts 261, 
264, or 265 of this chapter.
    (6) Section 260.22 establishes procedures for petitioning EPA to 
amend subpart D of part 261 to exclude a waste from a particular 
facility.
[45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980, as amended at 51 FR 40636, Nov. 7, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 260.2  Availability of information; confidentiality of information.

    (a) Any information provided to EPA under parts 260 through 265 and 
268 of this chapter will be made available to the public to the extent 
and in the manner authorized by the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 
section 552, section 3007(b) of RCRA and EPA regulations implementing 
the Freedom of

[[Page 6]]

Information Act and section 3007(b), part 2 of this chapter, as 
applicable.
    (b) Any person who submits information to EPA in accordance with 
parts 260 through 266 and 268 of this chapter may assert a claim of 
business confidentiality covering part or all of that information by 
following the procedures set forth in Sec. 2.203(b) of this chapter. 
Information covered by such a claim will be disclosed by EPA only to the 
extent, and by means of the procedures, set forth in part 2, subpart B, 
of this chapter except that information required by Sec. 262.53(a) and 
Sec. 262.83 that is submitted in a notification of intent to export a 
hazardous waste will be provided to the U.S. Department of State and the 
appropriate authorities in the transit and receiving or importing 
countries regardless of any claims of confidentiality. However, if no 
such claim accompanies the information when it is received by EPA, it 
may be made available to the public without further notice to the person 
submitting it.
[45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980, as amended at 51 FR 28682, Aug. 8, 1986; 51 
FR 40636, Nov. 7, 1986; 61 FR 16309, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 260.3  Use of number and gender.

    As used in parts 260 through 265 and 268 of this chapter:
    (a) Words in the masculine gender also include the feminine and 
neuter genders; and
    (b) Words in the singular include the plural; and
    (c) Words in the plural include the singular.
[45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980, as amended at 51 FR 40636, Nov. 7, 1986]


<R04>
                         Subpart B--Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 260.10  Definitions.

    When used in parts 260 through 266, 268, and 270 through 273 of this 
chapter, the following terms have the meanings given below:
    When used in parts 260 through 266 and 268 of this chapter, the 
following terms have the meanings given below:
    Above ground tank means a device meeting the definition of ``tank'' 
in Sec. 260.10 and that is situated in such a way that the entire 
surface area of the tank is completely above the plane of the adjacent 
surrounding surface and the entire surface area of the tank (including 
the tank bottom) is able to be visually inspected.
    Act or RCRA means the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 
section 6901 et seq.
    Active life of a facility means the period from the initial receipt 
of hazardous waste at the facility until the Regional Administrator 
receives certification of final closure.
    Active portion means that portion of a facility where treatment, 
storage, or disposal operations are being or have been conducted after 
the effective date of part 261 of this chapter and which is not a closed 
portion. (See also ``closed portion'' and ``inactive portion''.)
    Administrator means the Administrator of the Environmental 
Protection Agency, or his designee.
    Ancillary equipment means any device including, but not limited to, 
such devices as piping, fittings, flanges, valves, and pumps, that is 
used to distribute, meter, or control the flow of hazardous waste from 
its point of generation to a storage or treatment tank(s), between 
hazardous waste storage and treatment tanks to a point of disposal 
onsite, or to a point of shipment for disposal off-site.
    Aquifer means a geologic formation, group of formations, or part of 
a formation capable of yielding a significant amount of ground water to 
wells or springs.
    Authorized representative means the person responsible for the 
overall operation of a facility or an operational unit (i.e., part of a 
facility), e.g., the plant manager, superintendent or person of 
equivalent responsibility.
    Battery means a device consisting of one or more electrically 
connected electrochemical cells which is designed to receive, store, and 
deliver electric energy. An electrochemical cell is a system consisting 
of an anode, cathode, and an electrolyte, plus such connections 
(electrical and mechanical) as may be needed to allow the cell to 
deliver or receive electrical energy. The term battery also includes an 
intact,

[[Page 7]]

unbroken battery from which the electrolyte has been removed.
    Boiler means an enclosed device using controlled flame combustion 
and having the following characteristics:
    (1)(i) The unit must have physical provisions for recovering and 
exporting thermal energy in the form of steam, heated fluids, or heated 
gases; and
    (ii) The unit's combustion chamber and primary energy recovery 
sections(s) must be of integral design. To be of integral design, the 
combustion chamber and the primary energy recovery section(s) (such as 
waterwalls and superheaters) must be physically formed into one 
manufactured or assembled unit. A unit in which the combustion chamber 
and the primary energy recovery section(s) are joined only by ducts or 
connections carrying flue gas is not integrally designed; however, 
secondary energy recovery equipment (such as economizers or air 
preheaters) need not be physically formed into the same unit as the 
combustion chamber and the primary energy recovery section. The 
following units are not precluded from being boilers solely because they 
are not of integral design: process heaters (units that transfer energy 
directly to a process stream), and fluidized bed combustion units; and
    (iii) While in operation, the unit must maintain a thermal energy 
recovery efficiency of at least 60 percent, calculated in terms of the 
recovered energy compared with the thermal value of the fuel; and
    (iv) The unit must export and utilize at least 75 percent of the 
recovered energy, calculated on an annual basis. In this calculation, no 
credit shall be given for recovered heat used internally in the same 
unit. (Examples of internal use are the preheating of fuel or combustion 
air, and the driving of induced or forced draft fans or feedwater 
pumps); or
    (2) The unit is one which the Regional Administrator has determined, 
on a case-by-case basis, to be a boiler, after considering the standards 
in Sec. 260.32.
    Carbon regeneration unit means any enclosed thermal treatment device 
used to regenerate spent activated carbon.
    Certification means a statement of professional opinion based upon 
knowledge and belief.
    Closed portion means that portion of a facility which an owner or 
operator has closed in accordance with the approved facility closure 
plan and all applicable closure requirements. (See also ``active 
portion'' and ``inactive portion''.)
    Component means either the tank or ancillary equipment of a tank 
system.
    Confined aquifer means an aquifer bounded above and below by 
impermeable beds or by beds of distinctly lower permeability than that 
of the aquifer itself; an aquifer containing confined ground water.
    Container means any portable device in which a material is stored, 
transported, treated, disposed of, or otherwise handled.
    Containment building means a hazardous waste management unit that is 
used to store or treat hazardous waste under the provisions of subpart 
DD of parts 264 or 265 of this chapter.
    Contingency plan means a document setting out an organized, planned, 
and coordinated course of action to be followed in case of a fire, 
explosion, or release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents 
which could threaten human health or the environment.
    Corrective action management unit or CAMU means an area within a 
facility that is designated by the Regional Administrator under part 264 
subpart S, for the purpose of implementing corrective action 
requirements under Sec. 264.101 and RCRA section 3008(h). A CAMU shall 
only be used for the management of remediation wastes pursuant to 
implementing such corrective action requirements at the facility.
    Corrosion expert means a person who, by reason of his knowledge of 
the physical sciences and the principles of engineering and mathematics, 
acquired by a professional education and related practical experience, 
is qualified to engage in the practice of corrosion control on buried or 
submerged metal piping systems and metal tanks. Such a person must be 
certified as being qualified by the National Association of Corrosion 
Engineers (NACE) or be a registered professional engineer who

[[Page 8]]

has certification or licensing that includes education and experience in 
corrosion control on buried or submerged metal piping systems and metal 
tanks.
    Designated facility means a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or 
disposal facility which (1) has received a permit (or interim status) in 
accordance with the requirements of parts 270 and 124 of this chapter, 
(2) has received a permit (or interim status) from a State authorized in 
accordance with part 271 of this chapter, or (3) is regulated under 
Sec. 261.6(c)(2) or subpart F of part 266 of this chapter, and (4) that 
has been designated on the manifest by the generator pursuant to 
Sec. 260.20. If a waste is destined to a facility in an authorized State 
which has not yet obtained authorization to regulate that particular 
waste as hazardous, then the designated facility must be a facility 
allowed by the receiving State to accept such waste.
    Destination facility means a facility that treats, disposes of, or 
recycles a particular category of universal waste, except those 
management activities described in paragraphs (a) and (c) of 
Secs. 273.13 and 273.33 of this chapter. A facility at which a 
particular category of universal waste is only accumulated, is not a 
destination facility for purposes of managing that category of universal 
waste.
    Dike means an embankment or ridge of either natural or man-made 
materials used to prevent the movement of liquids, sludges, solids, or 
other materials.
    Discharge or hazardous waste discharge means the accidental or 
intentional spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or 
dumping of hazardous waste into or on any land or water.
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, 
leaking, or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any 
land or water so that such solid waste or hazardous waste or any 
constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air 
or discharged into any waters, including ground waters.
    Disposal facility means a facility or part of a facility at which 
hazardous waste is intentionally placed into or on any land or water, 
and at which waste will remain after closure. The term disposal facility 
does not include a corrective action management unit into which 
remediation wastes are placed.
    Drip pad is an engineered structure consisting of a curbed, free-
draining base, constructed of non-earthen materials and designed to 
convey preservative kick-back or drippage from treated wood, 
precipitation, and surface water run-on to an associated collection 
system at wood preserving plants.
    Elementary neutralization unit means a device which:
    (1) Is used for neutralizing wastes that are hazardous only because 
they exhibit the corrosivity characteristic defined in Sec. 261.22 of 
this chapter, or they are listed in subpart D of part 261 of the chapter 
only for this reason; and
    (2) Meets the definition of tank, tank system, container, transport 
vehicle, or vessel in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter.
    EPA hazardous waste number means the number assigned by EPA to each 
hazardous waste listed in part 261, subpart D, of this chapter and to 
each characteristic identified in part 261, subpart C, of this chapter.
    EPA identification number means the number assigned by EPA to each 
generator, transporter, and treatment, storage, or disposal facility.
    EPA region means the states and territories found in any one of the 
following ten regions:
Region I--Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and 
Rhode Island.
Region II--New York, New Jersey, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the 
U.S. Virgin Islands.
Region III--Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, 
and the District of Columbia.
Region IV--Kentucky, Tennessee, North Carolina, Mississippi, Alabama, 
Georgia, South Carolina, and Florida.
Region V--Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana and Ohio.
Region VI--New Mexico, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas.
Region VII--Nebraska, Kansas, Missouri, and Iowa.
Region VIII--Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and 
Colorado.
Region IX--California, Nevada, Arizona, Hawaii, Guam, American Samoa, 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Region X--Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and Alaska.

[[Page 9]]

    Equivalent method means any testing or analytical method approved by 
the Administrator under Secs. 260.20 and 260.21.
    Existing hazardous waste management (HWM) facility or existing 
facility means a facility which was in operation or for which 
construction commenced on or before November 19, 1980. A facility has 
commenced construction if:
    (1) The owner or operator has obtained the Federal, State and local 
approvals or permits necessary to begin physical construction; and 
either
    (2)(i) A continuous on-site, physical construction program has 
begun; or
    (ii) The owner or operator has entered into contractual 
obligations--which cannot be cancelled or modified without substantial 
loss--for physical construction of the facility to be completed within a 
reasonable time.
    Existing portion means that land surface area of an existing waste 
management unit, included in the original Part A permit application, on 
which wastes have been placed prior to the issuance of a permit.
    Existing tank system or existing component means a tank system or 
component that is used for the storage or treatment of hazardous waste 
and that is in operation, or for which installation has commenced on or 
prior to July 14, 1986. Installation will be considered to have 
commenced if the owner or operator has obtained all Federal, State, and 
local approvals or permits necessary to begin physical construction of 
the site or installation of the tank system and if either (1) a 
continuous on-site physical construction or installation program has 
begun, or (2) the owner or operator has entered into contractual 
obligations--which cannot be canceled or modified without substantial 
loss--for physical construction of the site or installation of the tank 
system to be completed within a reasonable time.
    Explosives or munitions emergency means a situation involving the 
suspected or detected presence of unexploded ordnance (UXO), damaged or 
deteriorated explosives or munitions, an improvised explosive device 
(IED), other potentially explosive material or device, or other 
potentially harmful military chemical munitions or device, that creates 
an actual or potential imminent threat to human health, including 
safety, or the environment, including property, as determined by an 
explosives or munitions emergency response specialist. Such situations 
may require immediate and expeditious action by an explosives or 
munitions emergency response specialist to control, mitigate, or 
eliminate the threat.
    Explosives or munitions emergency response means all immediate 
response activities by an explosives and munitions emergency response 
specialist to control, mitigate, or eliminate the actual or potential 
threat encountered during an explosives or munitions emergency. An 
explosives or munitions emergency response may include in-place render-
safe procedures, treatment or destruction of the explosives or munitions 
and/or transporting those items to another location to be rendered safe, 
treated, or destroyed. Any reasonable delay in the completion of an 
explosives or munitions emergency response caused by a necessary, 
unforeseen, or uncontrollable circumstance will not terminate the 
explosives or munitions emergency. Explosives and munitions emergency 
responses can occur on either public or private lands and are not 
limited to responses at RCRA facilities.
    Explosives or munitions emergency response specialist means an 
individual trained in chemical or conventional munitions or explosives 
handling, transportation, render-safe procedures, or destruction 
techniques. Explosives or munitions emergency response specialists 
include Department of Defense (DOD) emergency explosive ordnance 
disposal (EOD), technical escort unit (TEU), and DOD-certified civilian 
or contractor personnel; and other Federal, State, or local government, 
or civilian personnel similarly trained in explosives or munitions 
emergency responses.
    Facility means:
    (1) All contiguous land, and structures, other appurtenances, and 
improvements on the land, used for treating, storing, or disposing of 
hazardous waste. A facility may consist of several

[[Page 10]]

treatment, storage, or disposal operational units (e.g., one or more 
landfills, surface impoundments, or combinations of them).
    (2) For the purpose of implementing corrective action under 
Sec. 264.101, all contiguous property under the control of the owner or 
operator seeking a permit under subtitle C of RCRA. This definition also 
applies to facilities implementing corrective action under RCRA Section 
3008(h).
    Federal agency means any department, agency, or other 
instrumentality of the Federal Government, any independent agency or 
establishment of the Federal Government including any Government 
corporation, and the Government Printing Office.
    Federal, State and local approvals or permits necessary to begin 
physical construction means permits and approvals required under 
Federal, State or local hazardous waste control statutes, regulations or 
ordinances.
    Final closure means the closure of all hazardous waste management 
units at the facility in accordance with all applicable closure 
requirements so that hazardous waste management activities under parts 
264 and 265 of this chapter are no longer conducted at the facility 
unless subject to the provisions in Sec. 262.34.
    Food-chain crops means tobacco, crops grown for human consumption, 
and crops grown for feed for animals whose products are consumed by 
humans.
    Free liquids means liquids which readily separate from the solid 
portion of a waste under ambient temperature and pressure.
    Freeboard means the vertical distance between the top of a tank or 
surface impoundment dike, and the surface of the waste contained 
therein.
    Generator means any person, by site, whose act or process produces 
hazardous waste identified or listed in part 261 of this chapter or 
whose act first causes a hazardous waste to become subject to 
regulation.
    Ground water means water below the land surface in a zone of 
saturation.
    Hazardous waste means a hazardous waste as defined in Sec. 261.3 of 
this chapter.
    Hazardous waste constituent means a constituent that caused the 
Administrator to list the hazardous waste in part 261, subpart D, of 
this chapter, or a constituent listed in table 1 of Sec. 261.24 of this 
chapter.
    Hazardous waste management unit is a contiguous area of land on or 
in which hazardous waste is placed, or the largest area in which there 
is significant likelihood of mixing hazardous waste constituents in the 
same area. Examples of hazardous waste management units include a 
surface impoundment, a waste pile, a land treatment area, a landfill 
cell, an incinerator, a tank and its associated piping and underlying 
containment system and a container storage area. A container alone does 
not constitute a unit; the unit includes containers and the land or pad 
upon which they are placed.
    In operation refers to a facility which is treating, storing, or 
disposing of hazardous waste.
    Inactive portion means that portion of a facility which is not 
operated after the effective date of part 261 of this chapter. (See also 
``active portion'' and ``closed portion''.)
    Incinerator means any enclosed device that:
    (1) Uses controlled flame combustion and neither meets the criteria 
for classification as a boiler, sludge dryer, or carbon regeneration 
unit, nor is listed as an industrial furnace; or
    (2) Meets the definition of infrared incinerator or plasma arc 
incinerator.
    Incompatible waste means a hazardous waste which is unsuitable for:
    (1) Placement in a particular device or facility because it may 
cause corrosion or decay of containment materials (e.g., container inner 
liners or tank walls); or
    (2) Commingling with another waste or material under uncontrolled 
conditions because the commingling might produce heat or pressure, fire 
or explosion, violent reaction, toxic dusts, mists, fumes, or gases, or 
flammable fumes or gases.


(See part 265, appendix V, of this chapter for examples.)

    Individual generation site means the contiguous site at or on which 
one or more hazardous wastes are generated. An individual generation 
site, such as a

[[Page 11]]

large manufacturing plant, may have one or more sources of hazardous 
waste but is considered a single or individual generation site if the 
site or property is contiguous.
    Industrial furnace means any of the following enclosed devices that 
are integral components of manufacturing processes and that use thermal 
treatment to accomplish recovery of materials or energy:
    (1) Cement kilns
    (2) Lime kilns
    (3) Aggregate kilns
    (4) Phosphate kilns
    (5) Coke ovens
    (6) Blast furnaces
    (7) Smelting, melting and refining furnaces (including 
pyrometallurgical devices such as cupolas, reverberator furnaces, 
sintering machine, roasters, and foundry furnaces)
    (8) Titanium dioxide chloride process oxidation reactors
    (9) Methane reforming furnaces
    (10) Pulping liquor recovery furnaces
    (11) Combustion devices used in the recovery of sulfur values from 
spent sulfuric acid
    (12) Halogen acid furnaces (HAFs) for the production of acid from 
halogenated hazardous waste generated by chemical production facilities 
where the furnace is located on the site of a chemical production 
facility, the acid product has a halogen acid content of at least 3%, 
the acid product is used in a manufacturing process, and, except for 
hazardous waste burned as fuel, hazardous waste fed to the furnace has a 
minimum halogen content of 20% as-generated.
    (13) Such other devices as the Administrator may, after notice and 
comment, add to this list on the basis of one or more of the following 
factors:
    (i) The design and use of the device primarily to accomplish 
recovery of material products;
    (ii) The use of the device to burn or reduce raw materials to make a 
material product;
    (iii) The use of the device to burn or reduce secondary materials as 
effective substitutes for raw materials, in processes using raw 
materials as principal feedstocks;
    (iv) The use of the device to burn or reduce secondary materials as 
ingredients in an industrial process to make a material product;
    (v) The use of the device in common industrial practice to produce a 
material product; and
    (vi) Other factors, as appropriate.
    Infrared incinerator means any enclosed device that uses electric 
powered resistance heaters as a source of radiant heat followed by an 
afterburner using controlled flame combustion and which is not listed as 
an industrial furnace.
    Inground tank means a device meeting the definition of ``tank'' in 
Sec. 260.10 whereby a portion of the tank wall is situated to any degree 
within the ground, thereby preventing visual inspection of that external 
surface area of the tank that is in the ground.
    Injection well means a well into which fluids are injected. (See 
also ``underground injection''.)
    Inner liner means a continuous layer of material placed inside a 
tank or container which protects the construction materials of the tank 
or container from the contained waste or reagents used to treat the 
waste.
    Installation inspector means a person who, by reason of his 
knowledge of the physical sciences and the principles of engineering, 
acquired by a professional education and related practical experience, 
is qualified to supervise the installation of tank systems.
    International shipment means the transportation of hazardous waste 
into or out of the jurisdiction of the United States.
    Landfill means a disposal facility or part of a facility where 
hazardous waste is placed in or on land and which is not a pile, a land 
treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an underground injection 
well, a salt dome formation, a salt bed formation, an underground mine, 
a cave, or a corrective action management unit.
    Landfill cell means a discrete volume of a hazardous waste landfill 
which uses a liner to provide isolation of wastes from adjacent cells or 
wastes. Examples of landfill cells are trenches and pits.

[[Page 12]]

    Land treatment facility means a facility or part of a facility at 
which hazardous waste is applied onto or incorporated into the soil 
surface; such facilities are disposal facilities if the waste will 
remain after closure.
    Leachate means any liquid, including any suspended components in the 
liquid, that has percolated through or drained from hazardous waste.
    Leak-detection system means a system capable of detecting the 
failure of either the primary or secondary containment structure or the 
presence of a release of hazardous waste or accumulated liquid in the 
secondary containment structure. Such a system must employ operational 
controls (e.g., daily visual inspections for releases into the secondary 
containment system of aboveground tanks) or consist of an interstitial 
monitoring device designed to detect continuously and automatically the 
failure of the primary or secondary containment structure or the 
presence of a release of hazardous waste into the secondary containment 
structure.
    Liner means a continuous layer of natural or man-made materials, 
beneath or on the sides of a surface impoundment, landfill, or landfill 
cell, which restricts the downward or lateral escape of hazardous waste, 
hazardous waste constituents, or leachate.
    Management or hazardous waste management means the systematic 
control of the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, 
processing, treatment, recovery, and disposal of hazardous waste.
    Manifest means the shipping document EPA form 8700-22 and, if 
necessary, EPA form 8700-22A, originated and signed by the generator in 
accordance with the instructions included in the appendix to part 262.
    Manifest document number means the U.S. EPA twelve digit 
identification number assigned to the generator plus a unique five digit 
document number assigned to the Manifest by the generator for recording 
and reporting purposes.
    Military munitions means all ammunition products and components 
produced or used by or for the U.S. Department of Defense or the U.S. 
Armed Services for national defense and security, including military 
munitions under the control of the Department of Defense, the U.S. Coast 
Guard, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), and National Guard 
personnel. The term military munitions includes: confined gaseous, 
liquid, and solid propellants, explosives, pyrotechnics, chemical and 
riot control agents, smokes, and incendiaries used by DOD components, 
including bulk explosives and chemical warfare agents, chemical 
munitions, rockets, guided and ballistic missiles, bombs, warheads, 
mortar rounds, artillery ammunition, small arms ammunition, grenades, 
mines, torpedoes, depth charges, cluster munitions and dispensers, 
demolition charges, and devices and components thereof. Military 
munitions do not include wholly inert items, improvised explosive 
devices, and nuclear weapons, nuclear devices, and nuclear components 
thereof. However, the term does include non-nuclear components of 
nuclear devices, managed under DOE's nuclear weapons program after all 
required sanitization operations under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended, have been completed.
    Mining overburden returned to the mine site means any material 
overlying an economic mineral deposit which is removed to gain access to 
that deposit and is then used for reclamation of a surface mine.
    Miscellaneous unit means a hazardous waste management unit where 
hazardous waste is treated, stored, or disposed of and that is not a 
container, tank, surface impoundment, pile, land treatment unit, 
landfill, incinerator, boiler, industrial furnace, underground injection 
well with appropriate technical standards under 40 CFR part 146, 
containment building, corrective action management unit, or unit 
eligible for research, development, and demonstration permit under 
Sec. 270.65.
    Movement means that hazardous waste transported to a facility in an 
individual vehicle.
    New hazardous waste management facility or new facility means a 
facility which began operation, or for which construction commenced 
after October 21, 1976. (See also ``Existing hazardous waste management 
facility''.)

[[Page 13]]

    New tank system or new tank component means a tank system or 
component that will be used for the storage or treatment of hazardous 
waste and for which installation has commenced after July 14, 1986; 
except, however, for purposes of Sec. 264.193(g)(2) and 
Sec. 265.193(g)(2), a new tank system is one for which construction 
commences after July 14, 1986. (See also ``existing tank system.'')
    On ground tank means a device meeting the definition of ``tank'' in 
Sec. 260.10 and that is situated in such a way that the bottom of the 
tank is on the same level as the adjacent surrounding surface so that 
the external tank bottom cannot be visually inspected.
    On-site means the same or geographically contiguous property which 
may be divided by public or private right-of-way, provided the entrance 
and exit between the properties is at a cross-roads intersection, and 
access is by crossing as opposed to going along, the right-of-way. Non-
contiguous properties owned by the same person but connected by a right-
of-way which he controls and to which the public does not have access, 
is also considered on-site property.
    Open burning means the combustion of any material without the 
following characteristics:
    (1) Control of combustion air to maintain adequate temperature for 
efficient combustion,
    (2) Containment of the combustion-reaction in an enclosed device to 
provide sufficient residence time and mixing for complete combustion, 
and
    (3) Control of emission of the gaseous combustion products.
    (See also ``incineration'' and ``thermal treatment''.)
    Operator means the person responsible for the overall operation of a 
facility.
    Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
    Partial closure means the closure of a hazardous waste management 
unit in accordance with the applicable closure requirements of parts 264 
and 265 of this chapter at a facility that contains other active 
hazardous waste management units. For example, partial closure may 
include the closure of a tank (including its associated piping and 
underlying containment systems), landfill cell, surface impoundment, 
waste pile, or other hazardous waste management unit, while other units 
of the same facility continue to operate.
    Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, 
Federal Agency, corporation (including a government corporation), 
partnership, association, State, municipality, commission, political 
subdivision of a State, or any interstate body.
    Personnel or facility personnel means all persons who work, at, or 
oversee the operations of, a hazardous waste facility, and whose actions 
or failure to act may result in noncompliance with the requirements of 
part 264 or 265 of this chapter.
    Pesticide means any substance or mixture of substances intended for 
preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pest, or intended 
for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant, other than any 
article that:
    (1) Is a new animal drug under FFDCA section 201(w), or
    (2) Is an animal drug that has been determined by regulation of the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services not to be a new animal drug, or
    (3) Is an animal feed under FFDCA section 201(x) that bears or 
contains any substances described by paragraph (1) or (2) of this 
definition.
    Pile means any non-containerized accumulation of solid, nonflowing 
hazardous waste that is used for treatment or storage and that is not a 
containment building.
    Plasma arc incinerator means any enclosed device using a high 
intensity electrical discharge or arc as a source of heat followed by an 
afterburner using controlled flame combustion and which is not listed as 
an industrial furnace.
    Point source means any discernible, confined, and discrete 
conveyance, including, but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, 
tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, 
concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating 
craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does 
not include return flows from irrigated agriculture.
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means any device or system

[[Page 14]]

used in the treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal 
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is owned by a 
``State'' or ``municipality'' (as defined by section 502(4) of the CWA). 
This definition includes sewers, pipes, or other conveyances only if 
they convey wastewater to a POTW providing treatment.
    Qualified Ground-Water Scientist means a scientist or engineer who 
has received a baccalaureate or post-graduate degree in the natural 
sciences or engineering, and has sufficient training and experience in 
ground-water hydrology and related fields as may be demonstrated by 
state registration, professional certifications, or completion of 
accredited university courses that enable that individual to make sound 
professional judgements regarding ground-water monitoring and 
contaminant fate and transport.
    Regional Administrator means the Regional Administrator for the EPA 
Region in which the facility is located, or his designee.
    Remediation waste means all solid and hazardous wastes, and all 
media (including groundwater, surface water, soils, and sediments) and 
debris, which contain listed hazardous wastes or which themselves 
exhibit a hazardous waste characteristic, that are managed for the 
purpose of implementing corrective action requirements under 
Sec. 264.101 and RCRA section 3008(h). For a given facility, remediation 
wastes may originate only from within the facility boundary, but may 
include waste managed in implementing RCRA sections 3004(v) or 3008(h) 
for releases beyond the facility boundary.
    Replacement unit means a landfill, surface impoundment, or waste 
pile unit (1) from which all or substantially all of the waste is 
removed, and (2) that is subsequently reused to treat, store, or dispose 
of hazardous waste. ``Replacement unit'' does not apply to a unit from 
which waste is removed during closure, if the subsequent reuse solely 
involves the disposal of waste from that unit and other closing units or 
corrective action areas at the facility, in accordance with an approved 
closure plan or EPA or State approved corrective action.
    Representative sample means a sample of a universe or whole (e.g., 
waste pile, lagoon, ground water) which can be expected to exhibit the 
average properties of the universe or whole.
    Run-off means any rainwater, leachate, or other liquid that drains 
over land from any part of a facility.
    Run-on means any rainwater, leachate, or other liquid that drains 
over land onto any part of a facility.
    Saturated zone or zone of saturation means that part of the earth's 
crust in which all voids are filled with water.
    Sludge means any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a 
municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water 
supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility exclusive of 
the treated effluent from a wastewater treatment plant.
    Sludge dryer means any enclosed thermal treatment device that is 
used to dehydrate sludge and that has a maximum total thermal input, 
excluding the heating value of the sludge itself, of 2,500 Btu/lb of 
sludge treated on a wet-weight basis.
    Small Quantity Generator means a generator who generates less than 
1000 kg of hazardous waste in a calendar month.
    Solid waste means a solid waste as defined in Sec. 261.2 of this 
chapter.
    Sorbent means a material that is used to soak up free liquids by 
either adsorption or absorption, or both. Sorb means to either adsorb or 
absorb, or both.
    State means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
    Storage means the holding of hazardous waste for a temporary period, 
at the end of which the hazardous waste is treated, disposed of, or 
stored elsewhere.
    Sump means any pit or reservoir that meets the definition of tank 
and those troughs/trenches connected to it that serve to collect 
hazardous waste for transport to hazardous waste storage, treatment, or 
disposal facilities; except that as used in the landfill, surface 
impoundment, and waste pile rules,

[[Page 15]]

``sump'' means any lined pit or reservoir that serves to collect liquids 
drained from a leachate collection and removal system or leak detection 
system for subsequent removal from the system.
    Surface impoundment or impoundment means a facility or part of a 
facility which is a natural topographic depression, man-made excavation, 
or diked area formed primarily of earthen materials (although it may be 
lined with man-made materials), which is designed to hold an 
accumulation of liquid wastes or wastes containing free liquids, and 
which is not an injection well. Examples of surface impoundments are 
holding, storage, settling, and aeration pits, ponds, and lagoons.
    Tank means a stationary device, designed to contain an accumulation 
of hazardous waste which is constructed primarily of non-earthen 
materials (e.g., wood, concrete, steel, plastic) which provide 
structural support.
    Tank system means a hazardous waste storage or treatment tank and 
its associated ancillary equipment and containment system.
    Thermal treatment means the treatment of hazardous waste in a device 
which uses elevated temperatures as the primary means to change the 
chemical, physical, or biological character or composition of the 
hazardous waste. Examples of thermal treatment processes are 
incineration, molten salt, pyrolysis, calcination, wet air oxidation, 
and microwave discharge. (See also ``incinerator'' and ``open 
burning''.)
    Thermostat means a temperature control device that contains metallic 
mercury in an ampule attached to a bimetal sensing element, and mercury-
containing ampules that have been removed from these temperature control 
devices in compliance with the requirements of 40 CFR 273.13(c)(2) or 
273.33(c)(2).
    Totally enclosed treatment facility means a facility for the 
treatment of hazardous waste which is directly connected to an 
industrial production process and which is constructed and operated in a 
manner which prevents the release of any hazardous waste or any 
constituent thereof into the environment during treatment. An example is 
a pipe in which waste acid is neutralized.
    Transfer facility means any transportation related facility 
including loading docks, parking areas, storage areas and other similar 
areas where shipments of hazardous waste are held during the normal 
course of transportation.
    Transport vehicle means a motor vehicle or rail car used for the 
transportation of cargo by any mode. Each cargo-carrying body (trailer, 
railroad freight car, etc.) is a separate transport vehicle.
    Transportation means the movement of hazardous waste by air, rail, 
highway, or water.
    Transporter means a person engaged in the offsite transportation of 
hazardous waste by air, rail, highway, or water.
    Treatability Study means a study in which a hazardous waste is 
subjected to a treatment process to determine: (1) Whether the waste is 
amenable to the treatment process, (2) what pretreatment (if any) is 
required, (3) the optimal process conditions needed to achieve the 
desired treatment, (4) the efficiency of a treatment process for a 
specific waste or wastes, or (5) the characteristics and volumes of 
residuals from a particular treatment process. Also included in this 
definition for the purpose of the Sec. 261.4 (e) and (f) exemptions are 
liner compatibility, corrosion, and other material compatibility studies 
and toxicological and health effects studies. A ``treatability study'' 
is not a means to commercially treat or dispose of hazardous waste.
    Treatment means any method, technique, or process, including 
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological 
character or composition of any hazardous waste so as to neutralize such 
waste, or so as to recover energy or material resources from the waste, 
or so as to render such waste non-hazardous, or less hazardous; safer to 
transport, store, or dispose of; or amenable for recovery, amenable for 
storage, or reduced in volume.
    Treatment zone means a soil area of the unsaturated zone of a land 
treatment unit within which hazardous constituents are degraded, 
transformed, or immobilized.

[[Page 16]]

    Underground injection means the subsurface emplacement of fluids 
through a bored, drilled or driven well; or through a dug well, where 
the depth of the dug well is greater than the largest surface dimension. 
(See also ``injection well''.)
    Underground tank means a device meeting the definition of ``tank'' 
in Sec. 260.10 whose entire surface area is totally below the surface of 
and covered by the ground.
    Unfit-for use tank system means a tank system that has been 
determined through an integrity assessment or other inspection to be no 
longer capable of storing or treating hazardous waste without posing a 
threat of release of hazardous waste to the environment.
    Unsaturated zone or zone of aeration means the zone between the land 
surface and the water table.
    United States means the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
    Universal Waste means any of the following hazardous wastes that are 
managed under the universal waste requirements of 40 CFR part 273:
    (1) Batteries as described in 40 CFR 273.2;
    (2) Pesticides as described in 40 CFR 273.3; and
    (3) Thermostats as described in 40 CFR 273.4.
    Universal Waste Handler:
    (1) Means:
    (i) A generator (as defined in this section) of universal waste; or
    (ii) The owner or operator of a facility, including all contiguous 
property, that receives universal waste from other universal waste 
handlers, accumulates universal waste, and sends universal waste to 
another universal waste handler, to a destination facility, or to a 
foreign destination.
    (2) Does not mean:
    (i) A person who treats (except under the provisions of 40 CFR 
273.13 (a) or (c), or 273.33 (a) or (c)), disposes of, or recycles 
universal waste; or
    (ii) A person engaged in the off-site transportation of universal 
waste by air, rail, highway, or water, including a universal waste 
transfer facility.
    Universal Waste Transporter means a person engaged in the off-site 
transportation of universal waste by air, rail, highway, or water.
    Uppermost aquifer means the geologic formation nearest the natural 
ground surface that is an aquifer, as well as lower aquifers that are 
hydraulically interconnected with this aquifer within the facility's 
property boundary.
    Used oil means any oil that has been refined from crude oil, or any 
synthetic oil, that has been used and as a result of such use in 
contaminated by physical or chemical impurities.
    Vessel includes every description of watercraft, used or capable of 
being used as a means of transportation on the water.
    Wastewater treatment unit means a device which:
    (1) Is part of a wastewater treatment facility that is subject to 
regulation under either section 402 or 307(b) of the Clean Water Act; 
and
    (2) Receives and treats or stores an influent wastewater that is a 
hazardous waste as defined in Sec. 261.3 of this chapter, or that 
generates and accumulates a wastewater treatment sludge that is a 
hazardous waste as defined in Sec. 261.3 of this chapter, or treats or 
stores a wastewater treatment sludge which is a hazardous waste as 
defined in Sec. 261.3 of this Chapter; and
    (3) Meets the definition of tank or tank system in Sec. 260.10 of 
this chapter.
    Water (bulk shipment) means the bulk transportation of hazardous 
waste which is loaded or carried on board a vessel without containers or 
labels.
    Well means any shaft or pit dug or bored into the earth, generally 
of a cylindrical form, and often walled with bricks or tubing to prevent 
the earth from caving in.
    Well injection: (See ``underground injection''.)
    Zone of engineering control means an area under the control of the 
owner/operator that, upon detection of a hazardous waste release, can be 
readily cleaned up prior to the release of hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents to ground water or surface water.

[45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980]


[[Page 17]]



    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 260.10, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 260.11  References.

    (a) When used in parts 260 through 270 of this chapter, the 
following publications are incorporated by reference:
    (1) ``ASTM Standard Test Methods for Flash Point of Liquids by 
Setaflash Closed Tester,'' ASTM Standard D-3278-78, available from 
American Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street, 
Philadelphia, PA 19103.
    (2) ``ASTM Standard Test Methods for Flash Point by Pensky-Martens 
Closed Tester,'' ASTM Standard D-93-79 or D-93-80. D-93-80 is available 
from American Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street, 
Philadelphia, PA 19103.
    (3) ``ASTM Standard Method for Analysis of Reformed Gas by Gas 
Chromatography,'' ASTM Standard D-1946-82, available from American 
Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19103.
    (4) ``ASTM Standard Test Method for Heat of Combustion of 
Hydrocarbon Fuels by Bomb Calorimeter (High-Precision Method),'' ASTM 
Standard D 2382-83, available from American Society for Testing and 
Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103.
    (5) ``ASTM Standard Practices for General Techniques of Ultraviolet-
Visible Quantitative Analysis,'' ASTM Standard E 169-87 available from 
American Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street, 
Philadelphia, PA 19103.
    (6) ``ASTM Standard Practices for General Techniques of Infrared 
Quantitative Analysis,'' ASTM Standard E 168-88, available from American 
Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19103.
    (7) ``ASTM Standard Practice for Packed Column Gas Chromatography,'' 
ASTM Standard E 260-85, available from American Society for Testing and 
Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103.
    (8) ``ASTM Standard Test Method for Aromatics in Light Naphthas and 
Aviation Gasolines by Gas Chromatography,'' ASTM Standard D 2267-88, 
available from American Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race 
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103.
    (9) ``APTI Course 415: Control of Gaseous Emissions,'' EPA 
Publication EPA-450/2-81-005, December 1981, available from National 
Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 
22161.
    (10) ``Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code'' (1977 or 1981), 
available from the National Fire Protection Association, 470 Atlantic 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02210.
    (11) ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical 
Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846 [Third Edition (November 1986), as 
amended by Updates I (July 1992), II (September 1994), IIA (August 
1993), IIB (January 1995), and III (December 1996)]. The Third Edition 
of SW-846 and Updates I, II, IIA, IIB, and III (document number 955-001-
00000-1) are available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, (202) 512-1800. Copies 
of the Third Edition and its updates are also available from the 
National Technical Information Service (NTIS), 5285 Port Royal Road, 
Springfield, VA 22161, (703) 487-4650. Copies may be inspected at the 
Library, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street, SW, 
Washington, DC 20460.
    (12) ``Screening Procedures for Estimating the Air Quality Impact of 
Stationary Sources, Revised'', October 1992, EPA Publication No. EPA-
450/R-92-019, Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, 
NC.
    (13) ``ASTM Standard Test Methods for Preparing Refuse-Derived Fuel 
(RDF) Samples for Analyses of Metals,'' ASTM Standard E926-88, Test 
Method C--Bomb, Acid Digestion Method, available from American Society 
for Testing Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103.
    (14) ``API Publication 2517, Third Edition'', February 1989, 
``Evaporative Loss from External Floating-Roof Tanks,'' available from 
the American Petroleum Institute, 1220 L Street, Northwest, Washington, 
DC 20005.
    (15) ``ASTM Standard Test Method for Vapor Pressure--Temperature 
Relationship and Initial Decomposition Temperature of Liquids by 
Isoteniscope,'' ASTM Standard D 2879-92, available from American Society 
for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19103.
    (b) The references listed in paragraph (a) of this section are also 
available for inspection at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 
North Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC. These 
incorporations by reference were approved by the Director of the Federal 
Register. These materials are incorporated as they exist on the date of 
approval and a notice of any change in these materials will be published 
in the Federal Register.
[46 FR 35247, July 7, 1981, as amended at 50 FR 18374, Apr. 30, 1985; 52 
FR 8073, Mar. 16, 1987; 52 FR 41295, Oct. 27, 1987; 54 FR 40266, Sept. 
29, 1989; 55 FR 8949, Mar. 9, 1990; 55 FR 25493, June 21, 1990; 56 FR 
7206, Feb. 21, 1991; 58 FR 38883, July 20, 1993; 58 FR 46049, Aug. 31, 
1993; 59 FR 468, Jan. 4, 1994; 59 FR 28484, June 2, 1994; 59 FR 62926, 
Dec. 6, 1994; 60 FR 17004, Apr. 4, 1995; 62 FR 32462, June 13, 1997]

[[Page 18]]


<R04>
                     Subpart C--Rulemaking Petitions


<R05>
Sec. 260.20  General.

    (a) Any person may petition the Administrator to modify or revoke 
any provision in parts 260 through 266, 268 and 273 of this chapter. 
This section sets forth general requirements which apply to all such 
petitions. Section 260.21 sets forth additional requirements for 
petitions to add a testing or analytical method to part 261, 264 or 265 
of this chapter. Section 260.22 sets forth additional requirements for 
petitions to exclude a waste or waste-derived material at a particular 
facility from Sec. 261.3 of this chapter or the lists of hazardous 
wastes in subpart D of part 261 of this chapter. Section 260.23 sets 
forth additional requirements for petitions to amend part 273 of this 
chapter to include additional hazardous wastes or categories of 
hazardous waste as universal waste.
    (b) Each petition must be submitted to the Administrator by 
certified mail and must include:

    (1) The petitioner's name and address;
    (2) A statement of the petitioner's interest in the proposed action;
    (3) A description of the proposed action, including (where 
appropriate) suggested regulatory language; and
    (4) A statement of the need and justification for the proposed 
action, including any supporting tests, studies, or other information.
    (c) The Administrator will make a tentative decision to grant or 
deny a petition and will publish notice of such tentative decision, 
either in the form of an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking, a 
proposed rule, or a tentative determination to deny the petition, in the 
Federal Register for written public comment.
    (d) Upon the written request of any interested person, the 
Administrator may, at his discretion, hold an informal public hearing to 
consider oral comments on the tentative decision. A person requesting a 
hearing must state the issues to be raised and explain why written 
comments would not suffice to communicate the person's views. The 
Administrator may in any case decide on his own motion to hold an 
informal public hearing.
    (e) After evaluating all public comments the Administrator will make 
a final decision by publishing in the Federal Register a regulatory 
amendment or a denial of the petition.
[45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980, as amended at 51 FR 40636, Nov. 7, 1986; 57 
FR 38564, Aug. 25, 1992; 60 FR 25540, May 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 260.21  Petitions for equivalent testing or analytical methods.

    (a) Any person seeking to add a testing or analytical method to part 
261, 264, or 265 of this chapter may petition for a regulatory amendment 
under this section and Sec. 260.20. To be successful, the person must 
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the proposed 
method is equal to or superior to the corresponding method prescribed in 
part 261, 264, or 265 of this chapter, in terms of its sensitivity, 
accuracy, and precision (i.e., reproducibility).
    (b) Each petition must include, in addition to the information 
required by Sec. 260.20(b):

    (1) A full description of the proposed method, including all 
procedural steps and equipment used in the method;
    (2) A description of the types of wastes or waste matrices for which 
the proposed method may be used;
    (3) Comparative results obtained from using the proposed method with 
those obtained from using the relevant or corresponding methods 
prescribed in part 261, 264, or 265 of this chapter;
    (4) An assessment of any factors which may interfere with, or limit 
the use of, the proposed method; and
    (5) A description of the quality control procedures necessary to 
ensure the sensitivity, accuracy and precision of the proposed method.
    (c) After receiving a petition for an equivalent method, the 
Administrator may request any additional information on the proposed 
method which he may reasonably require to evaluate the method.

[[Page 19]]

    (d) If the Administrator amends the regulations to permit use of a 
new testing method, the method will be incorporated in ``Test Methods 
for the Evaluation of Solid Waste: Physical/Chemical Methods,'' SW-846, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste, Washington, 
DC 20460.
[45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980, as amended at 49 FR 47391, Dec. 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 260.22  Petitions to amend part 261 to exclude a waste produced at a particular facility.

    (a) Any person seeking to exclude a waste at a particular generating 
facility from the lists in subpart D of part 261 may petition for a 
regulatory amendment under this section and Sec. 260.20. To be 
successful:
    (1) The petitioner must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the 
Administrator that the waste produced by a particular generating 
facility does not meet any of the criteria under which the waste was 
listed as a hazardous or an actutely hazardous waste; and
    (2) Based on a complete application, the Administrator must 
determine, where he has a reasonable basis to believe that factors 
(including additional constituents) other than those for which the waste 
was listed could cause the waste to be a hazardous waste, that such 
factors do not warrant retaining the waste as a hazardous waste. A waste 
which is so excluded, however, still may be a hazardous waste by 
operation of subpart C of part 261.
    (b) The procedures in this Section and Sec. 260.20 may also be used 
to petition the Administrator for a regulatory amendment to exclude from 
Sec. 261.3(a)(2)(ii) or (c), a waste which is described in these 
Sections and is either a waste listed in subpart D, or is derived from a 
waste listed in subpart D. This exclusion may only be issued for a 
particular generating, storage, treatment, or disposal facility. The 
petitioner must make the same demonstration as required by paragraph (a) 
of this section. Where the waste is a mixture of solid waste and one or 
more listed hazardous wastes or is derived from one or more hazardous 
wastes, his demonstration must be made with respect to the waste mixture 
as a whole; analyses must be conducted for not only those constituents 
for which the listed waste contained in the mixture was listed as 
hazardous, but also for factors (including additional constituents) that 
could cause the waste mixture to be a hazardous waste. A waste which is 
so excluded may still be a hazardous waste by operation of subpart C of 
part 261.
    (c) If the waste is listed with codes ``I'', ``C'', ``R'', or ``E'', 
in subpart D,
    (1) The petitioner must show that the waste does not exhibit the 
relevant characteristic for which the waste was listed as defined in 
Sec. 261.21, Sec. 261.22, Sec. 261.23, or Sec. 261.24 using any 
applicable methods prescribed therein. The petitioner also must show 
that the waste does not exhibit any of the other characteristics defined 
in Sec. 261.21, Sec. 261.22, Sec. 261.23, or Sec. 261.24 using any 
applicable methods prescribed therein;
    (2) Based on a complete application, the Administrator must 
determine, where he has a reasonable basis to believe that factors 
(including additional constituents) other than those for which the waste 
was listed could cause the waste to be hazardous waste, that such 
factors do not warrant retaining the waste as a hazardous waste. A waste 
which is so excluded, however, still may be a hazardous waste by 
operation of subpart C of part 261.
    (d) If the waste is listed with code ``T'' in subpart D,
    (1) The petitioner must demonstrate that the waste:
    (i) Does not contain the constituent or constituents (as defined in 
Appendix VII of part 261 of this chapter) that caused the Administrator 
to list the waste, using the appropriate test methods prescribed in 
``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' 
EPA Publication SW-846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11; or
    (ii) Although containing one or more of the hazrdous constituents 
(as defined in appendix VII of part 261) that caused the Administrator 
to list the waste, does not meet the criterion of Sec. 261.11(a)(3) when 
considering the factors used by the Administrator in Sec. 261.11(a)(3) 
(i) through (xi) under which the waste was listed as hazardous; and

[[Page 20]]

    (2) Based on a complete application, the Administrator must 
determine, where he has a reasonable basis to believe that factors 
(including additional constituents) other than those for which the waste 
was listed could cause the waste to be a hazardous waste, that such 
factors do not warrant retaining the waste as a hazardous waste; and
    (3) The petitioner must demonstrate that the waste does not exhibit 
any of the characteristics defined in Sec. 261.21, Sec. 261.22, 
Sec. 261.23, and Sec. 261.24 using any applicable methods prescribed 
therein;
    (4) A waste which is so excluded, however, still may be a hazardous 
waste by operation of subpart C of part 261.
    (e) If the waste is listed with the code ``H'' in subpart D,
    (1) The petitioner must demonstrate that the waste does not meet the 
criterion of Sec. 261.11(a)(2); and
    (2) Based on a complete application, the Administrator must 
determine, where he has a reasonable basis to believe that additional 
factors (including additional constituents) other than those for which 
the waste was listed could cause the waste to be a hazardous waste, that 
such factors do not warrant retaining the waste as a hazardous waste; 
and
    (3) The petitioner must demonstrate that the waste does not exhibit 
any of the characteristics defined in Sec. 261.21, Sec. 261.22, 
Sec. 261.23, and Sec. 261.24 using any applicable methods prescribed 
therein;
    (4) A waste which is so excluded, however, still may be a hazardous 
waste by operation of subpart C of part 261.
    (f) [Reserved for listing radioactive wastes.]
    (g) [Reserved for listing infectious wastes.]
    (h) Demonstration samples must consist of enough representative 
samples, but in no case less than four samples, taken over a period of 
time sufficient to represent the variability or the uniformity of the 
waste.
    (i) Each petition must include, in addition to the information 
required by Sec. 260.20(b):
    (1) The name and address of the laboratory facility performing the 
sampling or tests of the waste;
    (2) The names and qualifications of the persons sampling and testing 
the waste;
    (3) The dates of sampling and testing;
    (4) The location of the generating facility;
    (5) A description of the manufacturing processes or other operations 
and feed materials producing the waste and an assessment of whether such 
processes, operations, or feed materials can or might produce a waste 
that is not covered by the demonstration;
    (6) A description of the waste and an estimate of the average and 
maximum monthly and annual quantities of waste covered by the 
demonstration;
    (7) Pertinent data on and discussion of the factors delineated in 
the respective criterion for listing a hazardous waste, where the 
demonstration is based on the factors in Sec. 261.11(a)(3);
    (8) A description of the methodologies and equipment used to obtain 
the representative samples;
    (9) A description of the sample handling and preparation techniques, 
including techniques used for extraction, containerization and 
preservation of the samples;
    (10) A description of the tests performed (including results);
    (11) The names and model numbers of the instruments used in 
performing the tests; and
    (12) The following statement signed by the generator of the waste or 
his authorized representative:
    I certify under penalty of law that I have personally examined and 
am familiar with the information submitted in this demonstration and all 
attached documents, and that, based on my inquiry of those individuals 
immediately responsible for obtaining the information, I believe that 
the submitted information is true, accurate, and complete. I am aware 
that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, 
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (j) After receiving a petition for an exclusion, the Administrator 
may request any additional information which he may reasonably require 
to evaluate the petition.
    (k) An exclusion will only apply to the waste generated at the 
individual facility covered by the demonstration and will not apply to 
waste from any other facility.

[[Page 21]]

    (l) The Administrator may exclude only part of the waste for which 
the demonstration is submitted where he has reason to believe that 
variability of the waste justifies a partial exclusion.
[45 FR 33073, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 28742, July 15, 1985; 54 
FR 27116, June 27, 1989; 58 FR 46049, Aug. 31, 1994]

    Editorial Note: For information on the availability of a guidance 
manual for petitions to delist hazardous wastes, see 50 FR 21607, May 
28, 1985.


<R05>
Sec. 260.23  Petitions to amend 40 CFR part 273 to include additional hazardous wastes.

    (a) Any person seeking to add a hazardous waste or a category of 
hazardous waste to the universal waste regulations of part 273 of this 
chapter may petition for a regulatory amendment under this section, 40 
CFR 260.20, and subpart G of 40 CFR part 273.
    (b) To be successful, the petitioner must demonstrate to the 
satisfaction of the Administrator that regulation under the universal 
waste regulations of 40 CFR part 273: Is appropriate for the waste or 
category of waste; will improve management practices for the waste or 
category of waste; and will improve implementation of the hazardous 
waste program. The petition must include the information required by 40 
CFR 260.20(b). The petition should also address as many of the factors 
listed in 40 CFR 273.81 as are appropriate for the waste or category of 
waste addressed in the petition.
    (c) The Administrator will grant or deny a petition using the 
factors listed in 40 CFR 273.81. The decision will be based on the 
weight of evidence showing that regulation under 40 CFR part 273 is 
appropriate for the waste or category of waste, will improve management 
practices for the waste or category of waste, and will improve 
implementation of the hazardous waste program.
    (d) The Administrator may request additional information needed to 
evaluate the merits of the petition.
[60 FR 25540, May 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 260.30  Variances from classification as a solid waste.

    In accordance with the standards and criteria in Sec. 260.31 and the 
procedures in Sec. 260.33, the Administrator may determine on a case-by-
case basis that the following recycled materials are not solid wastes:
    (a) Materials that are accumulated speculatively without sufficient 
amounts being recycled (as defined in Sec. 261.1(c)(8) of this chapter);
    (b) Materials that are reclaimed and then reused within the original 
production process in which they were generated; and
    (c) Materials that have been reclaimed but must be reclaimed further 
before the materials are completely recovered.
[50 FR 661, Jan. 4, 1985; 50 FR 14219, Apr. 11, 1985, as amended at 59 
FR 48041, Sept. 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 260.31  Standards and criteria for variances from classification as a solid waste.

    (a) The Administrator may grant requests for a variance from 
classifying as a solid waste those materials that are accumulated 
speculatively without sufficient amounts being recycled if the applicant 
demonstrates that sufficient amounts of the material will be recycled or 
transferred for recycling in the following year. If a variance is 
granted, it is valid only for the following year, but can be renewed, on 
an annual basis, by filing a new application. The Administrator's 
decision will be based on the following criteria:
    (1) The manner in which the material is expected to be recycled, 
when the material is expected to be recycled, and whether this expected 
disposition is likely to occur (for example, because of past practice, 
market factors, the nature of the material, or contractual arrangements 
for recycling);
    (2) The reason that the applicant has accumulated the material for 
one or more years without recycling 75 percent of the volume accumulated 
at the beginning of the year;
    (3) The quantity of material already accumulated and the quantity 
expected to be generated and accumulated before the material is 
recycled;

[[Page 22]]

    (4) The extent to which the material is handled to minimize loss;
    (5) Other relevant factors.
    (b) The Administrator may grant requests for a variance from 
classifying as a solid waste those materials that are reclaimed and then 
reused as feedstock within the original production process in which the 
materials were generated if the reclamation operation is an essential 
part of the production process. This determination will be based on the 
following criteria:
    (1) How economically viable the production process would be if it 
were to use virgin materials, rather than reclaimed materials;
    (2) The prevalence of the practice on an industry-wide basis;
    (3) The extent to which the material is handled before reclamation 
to minimize loss;
    (4) The time periods between generating the material and its 
reclamation, and between reclamation and return to the original primary 
production process;
    (5) The location of the reclamation operation in relation to the 
production process;
    (6) Whether the reclaimed material is used for the purpose for which 
it was originally produced when it is returned to the original process, 
and whether it is returned to the process in substantially its original 
form;
    (7) Whether the person who generates the material also reclaims it;
    (8) Other relevant factors.
    (c) The Regional Administrator may grant requests for a variance 
from classifying as a solid waste those materials that have been 
reclaimed but must be reclaimed further before recovery is completed if, 
after initial reclamation, the resulting material is commodity-like 
(even though it is not yet a commercial product, and has to be reclaimed 
further). This determination will be based on the following factors:
    (1) The degree of processing the material has undergone and the 
degree of further processing that is required;
    (2) The value of the material after it has been reclaimed;
    (3) The degree to which the reclaimed material is like an analogous 
raw material;
    (4) The extent to which an end market for the reclaimed material is 
guaranteed;
    (5) The extent to which the reclaimed material is handled to 
minimize loss;
    (6) Other relevant factors.
[50 FR 662, Jan. 4, 1985, as amended at 59 FR 48041, Sept. 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 260.32  Variance to be classified as a boiler.

    In accordance with the standards and criteria in Sec. 260.10 
(definition of ``boiler''), and the procedures in Sec. 260.33, the 
Administrator may determine on a case-by-case basis that certain 
enclosed devices using controlled flame combustion are boilers, even 
though they do not otherwise meet the definition of boiler contained in 
Sec. 260.10, after considering the following criteria:
    (a) The extent to which the unit has provisions for recovering and 
exporting thermal energy in the form of steam, heated fluids, or heated 
gases; and
    (b) The extent to which the combustion chamber and energy recovery 
equipment are of integral design; and
    (c) The efficiency of energy recovery, calculated in terms of the 
recovered energy compared with the thermal value of the fuel; and
    (d) The extent to which exported energy is utilized; and
    (e) The extent to which the device is in common and customary use as 
a ``boiler'' functioning primarily to produce steam, heated fluids, or 
heated gases; and
    (f) Other factors, as appropriate.
[50 FR 662, Jan. 4, 1985, as amended at 59 FR 48041, Sept. 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 260.33  Procedures for variances from classification as a solid waste or to be classified as a boiler.

    The Administrator will use the following procedures in evaluating 
applications for variances from classification as a solid waste or 
applications to classify particular enclosed controlled flame combustion 
devices as boilers:
    (a) The applicant must apply to the Administrator for the variance. 
The application must address the relevant criteria contained in 
Sec. 260.31 or Sec. 260.32.
    (b) The Administrator will evaluate the application and issue a 
draft notice

[[Page 23]]

tentatively granting or denying the application. Notification of this 
tentative decision will be provided by newspaper advertisement or radio 
broadcast in the locality where the recycler is located. The 
Administrator will accept comment on the tentative decision for 30 days, 
and may also hold a public hearing upon request or at his discretion. 
The Administrator will issue a final decision after receipt of comments 
and after the hearing (if any).
[59 FR 48041, Sept. 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 260.40  Additional regulation of certain hazardous waste recycling activities on a case-by-case basis.

    (a) The Regional Administrator may decide on a case-by-case basis 
that persons accumulating or storing the recyclable materials described 
in Sec. 261.6(a)(2)(iv) of this chapter should be regulated under 
Sec. 261.6 (b) and (c) of this chapter. The basis for this decision is 
that the materials are being accumulated or stored in a manner that does 
not protect human health and the environment because the materials or 
their toxic constituents have not been adequately contained, or because 
the materials being accumulated or stored together are incompatible. In 
making this decision, the Regional Administrator will consider the 
following factors:
    (1) The types of materials accumulated or stored and the amounts 
accumulated or stored;
    (2) The method of accumulation or storage;
    (3) The length of time the materials have been accumulated or stored 
before being reclaimed;
    (4) Whether any contaminants are being released into the 
environment, or are likely to be so released; and
    (5) Other relevant factors.
    (b) [Reserved]

The procedures for this decision are set forth in Sec. 260.41 of this 
chapter.
[50 FR 662, Jan. 4, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 260.41  Procedures for case-by-case regulation of hazardous waste recycling activities.

    The Regional Administrator will use the following procedures when 
determining whether to regulate hazardous waste recycling activities 
described in Sec. 261.6(a)(2)(iv) under the provisions of Sec. 261.6 (b) 
and (c), rather than under the provisions of subpart F of part 266 of 
this chapter.
    (a) If a generator is accumulating the waste, the Regional 
Administrator will issue a notice setting forth the factual basis for 
the decision and stating that the person must comply with the applicable 
requirements of subparts A, C, D, and E of part 262 of this chapter. The 
notice will become final within 30 days, unless the person served 
requests a public hearing to challenge the decision. Upon receiving such 
a request, the Regional Administrator will hold a public hearing. The 
Regional Administrator will provide notice of the hearing to the public 
and allow public participation at the hearing. The Regional 
Administrator will issue a final order after the hearing stating whether 
or not compliance with part 262 is required. The order becomes effective 
30 days after service of the decision unless the Regional Administrator 
specifies a later date or unless review by the Administrator is 
requested. The order may be appealed to the Administrator by any person 
who participated in the public hearing. The Administrator may choose to 
grant or to deny the appeal. Final Agency action occurs when a final 
order is issued and Agency review procedures are exhausted.
    (b) If the person is accumulating the recyclable material as a 
storage facility, the notice will state that the person must obtain a 
permit in accordance with all applicable provisions of parts 270 and 124 
of this chapter. The owner or operator of the facility must apply for a 
permit within no less than 60 days and no more than six months of 
notice, as specified in the notice. If the owner or operator of the 
facility wishes to challenge the Regional Administrator's decision, he 
may do so in his permit application, in a public hearing held on the 
draft permit, or in comments filed on the draft permit or on the notice 
of intent to deny the permit. The fact sheet accompanying the permit 
will specify the reasons for the Agency's determination. The question of 
whether the Regional Administrator's decision

[[Page 24]]

was proper will remain open for consideration during the public comment 
period discussed under Sec. 124.11 of this chapter and in any subsequent 
hearing.
[50 FR 663, Jan. 4, 1985]`

       Appendix I to Part 260--Overview of Subtitle C Regulations

    The Agency believes that there are many people who suspect, but are 
not sure, that their activities are subject to control under the RCRA 
Subtitle C rules. This appendix is written for these people. It is 
designed to help those who are unfamiliar with the hazardous waste 
control program to determine with which, if any, of the regulations they 
should comply.

                        Definition of Solid Waste

    The first question which such a person should ask himself is: ``Is 
the material I handle a solid waste?'' If the answer to this question is 
``No'', then the material is not subject to control under RCRA and, 
therefore, the person need not worry about whether he should comply with 
the Subtitle C rules.
    Section 261.2 of this chapter provides a definition of ``solid 
waste'' which expands the statutory definition of that term given in 
section 1004(27) of RCRA. This definition is diagrammed in Figure 1 
below.
    Figure 1 explains that all materials are either: (1) Garbage refuse, 
or sludge; (2) solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material; 
or (3) something else. No materials in the third category are solid 
waste. All materials in the first category are solid waste. Materials in 
the second category are solid waste unless they are one of the five 
exclusions specified in Sec. 261.4(a).

                      Definition of Hazardous Waste

    If a person has determined that his material is a ``solid waste'', 
the next question he should ask is: ``Is the solid waste I handle a 
hazardous waste?''
    Hazardous waste is defined in Sec. 261.3 of this chapter. Section 
261.3 provides that, in general, a solid waste is a hazardous waste if: 
(1) It is, or contains, a hazardous waste listed in subpart D of part 
261 of this chapter, or (2) the waste exhibits any of the 
characteristics defined in subpart C of part 261. However, parts 260 and 
261 also contain provisions which exclude (Secs. 261.4(b), 260.20, and 
260.22) certain solid wastes from the definition of ``hazardous waste'', 
even though they are listed in subpart D or exhibit one or more of the 
characteristics defined in subpart C. Figure 2 depicts the interplay of 
these special provisions with the definition of ``hazardous waste''. It 
presents a series of questions which a person should ask himself 
concerning his waste. After doing so, the person should be able to 
determine if the solid waste he handles is a hazardous waste.

                       Hazardous Waste Regulations

    If this is the case, the person should look at Figure 3. Figure 3 
depicts the special provisions specified in the final part 261 rules for 
hazardous waste which:
1. Is generated by a small quantity generator
2. Is or is intended to be legitimately and beneficially used, re-used, 
recycled, or reclaimed
3. Is a sludge; is listed in part 261, subpart D; or is a mixture 
containing a waste listed in part 261, subpart D.

    For each of these Groups, Figure 3 indicates with which subtitle C 
regulations (if any) the person handling these wastes must comply. 
Figure 3 also explains that, if a person handles hazardous waste which 
is not included in any one of the above three categories, his waste is 
subject to the subtitle C regulations diagrammed in Figure 4.
    Figure 4 is a flowchart which identifies the three categories of 
activities regulated under the subtitle C rules, and the corresponding 
set of rules with which people in each of these categories must comply. 
It points out that all people who handle hazardous waste are either: (1) 
Generators of hazardous waste, (2) transporters of hazardous waste, (3) 
owners or operators of hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal 
facilities, or (4) a combination of the above. Figure 4 indicates that 
all of these people must notify EPA of their hazardous waste activities 
in accordance with the Section 3010 Notification Procedures (see 45 FR 
12746 et seq.), and obtain an EPA identification number.
    It should be noted that people handling wastes listed in subpart D 
of part 261 who have filed, or who intend to file an application to 
exempt their waste from regulation under the subtitle C rules, must also 
comply with the notification requirements of section 3010.
    If a person generates hazardous waste, Figure 4 indicates that he 
must comply with the part 262 rules. If he transports it, he must comply 
with the part 263 rules. The standards in both these parts are designed 
to ensure, among other things, proper recordkeeping and reporting, the 
use of a manifest system to track shipments of hazardous waste, the use 
of proper labels and containers, and the delivery of the waste to a 
permitted treatment, storage, or disposal facility.
    If a person owns or operates a facility which treats, stores, or 
disposes of hazardous waste, the standards with which he must comply 
depend on a number of factors. First of all, if the owner or operator of 
a storage facility is also the person who generates the waste, and the 
waste is stored at the facility

[[Page 25]]

for less than 90 days for subsequent shipment off-site, then the person 
must comply with Sec. 262.34 of the part 262 rules.
    All other owners or operators of treatment, storage, or disposal 
facilities must comply with either the part 264 or the part 265 rules. 
To determine with which of these sets of rules an owner or operator must 
comply, he must find out whether his facility qualifies for interim 
status. To qualify, the owner or operator must: (1) Have been treating, 
storing, or disposing of the hazardous waste, or commenced facility 
construction on or before October 21, 1976, (2) comply with the section 
3010 notification requirements, and (3) apply for a permit under part 
270 of this chapter.
    If the owner or operator has done all of the above, he qualifies for 
interim status, and he must comply with the part 265 rules. These rules 
contain administrative requirements, monitoring and closure standards, 
and an abbreviated set of technical and closure and post-closure cost 
estimate requirements. The owner or operator must comply with these 
standards until final administrative disposition of his permit 
application is made. If a permit is issued to the owner or operator, he 
must then comply with the permit which will be based on the part 264 
rules.
    If the owner or operator has not carried out the above three 
requirements, he does not qualify for interim status. Until he is issued 
a permit for his facility, the owner or operator must stop waste 
management operations (if any) at the facility, and send his hazardous 
waste (if any) to a facility whose owner or operator has interim status 
or to a storage facility following the part 262 rules.
    In order to apply for a permit, the owner or operator must comply 
with the procedures specified in part 270 of this chapter.
    It should be noted that the Agency will be periodically revising the 
rules depicted in Figures 3 and 4. All persons are encouraged to write 
to EPA to verify that the regulations which they are reading are up-to-
date. To obtain this verification, contact: Solid Waste Information, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 26 West St. Clair Street, 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45268 (513) 684-5362.

[[Page 26]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.000


[[Page 27]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.001


[[Page 28]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.002


[[Page 29]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.003


<R03>
PART 261--IDENTIFICATION AND LISTING OF HAZARDOUS WASTE--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
261.1  Purpose and scope.
261.2  Definition of solid waste.
261.3  Definition of hazardous waste.
261.4  Exclusions.
261.5  Special requirements for hazardous waste generated by 
          conditionally exempt small quantity generators.
261.6  Requirements for recyclable materials.
261.7  Residues of hazardous waste in empty containers.
261.8  PCB wastes regulated under Toxic Substance Control Act.
261.9  Requirements for Universal Waste.

[[Page 30]]

  Subpart B--Criteria for Identifying the Characteristics of Hazardous 
                 Waste and for Listing Hazardous Wastes

261.10  Criteria for identifying the characteristics of hazardous waste.
261.11  Criteria for listing hazardous waste.

              Subpart C--Characteristics of Hazardous Waste

261.20  General.
261.21  Characteristic of ignitability.
261.22  Characteristic of corrosivity.
261.23  Characteristic of reactivity.
261.24  Toxicity characteristic.

                  Subpart D--Lists of Hazardous Wastes

261.30  General.
261.31  Hazardous wastes from non-specific sources.
261.32  Hazardous wastes from specific sources.
261.33  Discarded commercial chemical products, off-specification 
          species, container residues, and spill residues thereof.
261.35  Deletion of certain hazardous waste codes following equipment 
          cleaning and replacement.
261.38  Comparable/Syngas Fuel Exclusion.

Appendix I to Part 261--Representative Sampling Methods
Appendix II to Part 261--Method 1311 Toxicity Characteristic Leaching 
          Procedure (TCLP)
Appendix III to Part 261--Chemical Analysis Test Methods
Appendix IV to Part 261--[Reserved for Radioactive Waste Test Methods]
Appendix V to Part 261--[Reserved for Infectious Waste Treatment 
          Specifications]
Appendix VI to Part 261--[Reserved for Etiologic Agents]
Appendix VII to Part 261--Basis for Listing Hazardous Waste
Appendix VIII to Part 261--Hazardous Constituents
Appendix IX to Part 261--Wastes Excluded Under Secs. 260.20 and 260.22

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 6905, 6912(a), 6921, 6922, 6924(y) and 6938.

    Source: 45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 261.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) This part identifies those solid wastes which are subject to 
regulation as hazardous wastes under parts 262 through 265, 268, and 
parts 270, 271, and 124 of this chapter and which are subject to the 
notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA. In this part:
    (1) Subpart A defines the terms ``solid waste'' and ``hazardous 
waste'', identifies those wastes which are excluded from regulation 
under parts 262 through 266, 268 and 270 and establishes special 
management requirements for hazardous waste produced by conditionally 
exempt small quantity generators and hazardous waste which is recycled.
    (2) Subpart B sets forth the criteria used by EPA to identify 
characteristics of hazardous waste and to list particular hazardous 
wastes.
    (3) Subpart C identifies characteristics of hazardous waste.
    (4) Subpart D lists particular hazardous wastes.
    (b)(1) The definition of solid waste contained in this part applies 
only to wastes that also are hazardous for purposes of the regulations 
implementing subtitle C of RCRA. For example, it does not apply to 
materials (such as non-hazardous scrap, paper, textiles, or rubber) that 
are not otherwise hazardous wastes and that are recycled.
    (2) This part identifies only some of the materials which are solid 
wastes and hazardous wastes under sections 3007, 3013, and 7003 of RCRA. 
A material which is not defined as a solid waste in this part, or is not 
a hazardous waste identified or listed in this part, is still a solid 
waste and a hazardous waste for purposes of these sections if:
    (i) In the case of sections 3007 and 3013, EPA has reason to believe 
that the material may be a solid waste within the meaning of section 
1004(27) of RCRA and a hazardous waste within the meaning of section 
1004(5) of RCRA; or
    (ii) In the case of section 7003, the statutory elements are 
established.
    (c) For the purposes of Secs. 261.2 and 261.6:
    (1) A ``spent material'' is any material that has been used and as a 
result of contamination can no longer serve the purpose for which it was 
produced without processing;
    (2) ``Sludge'' has the same meaning used in Sec. 260.10 of this 
chapter;
    (3) A ``by-product'' is a material that is not one of the primary 
products of a production process and is not solely or

[[Page 31]]

separately produced by the production process. Examples are process 
residues such as slags or distillation column bottoms. The term does not 
include a co-product that is produced for the general public's use and 
is ordinarily used in the form it is produced by the process.
    (4) A material is ``reclaimed'' if it is processed to recover a 
usable product, or if it is regenerated. Examples are recovery of lead 
values from spent batteries and regeneration of spent solvents.
    (5) A material is ``used or reused'' if it is either:
    (i) Employed as an ingredient (including use as an intermediate) in 
an industrial process to make a product (for example, distillation 
bottoms from one process used as feedstock in another process). However, 
a material will not satisfy this condition if distinct components of the 
material are recovered as separate end products (as when metals are 
recovered from metal-containing secondary materials); or
    (ii) Employed in a particular function or application as an 
effective substitute for a commercial product (for example, spent pickle 
liquor used as phosphorous precipitant and sludge conditioner in 
wastewater treatment).
    (6) ``Scrap metal'' is bits and pieces of metal parts (e.g.,) bars, 
turnings, rods, sheets, wire) or metal pieces that may be combined 
together with bolts or soldering (e.g., radiators, scrap automobiles, 
railroad box cars), which when worn or superfluous can be recycled.
    (7) A material is ``recycled'' if it is used, reused, or reclaimed.
    (8) A material is ``accumulated speculatively'' if it is accumulated 
before being recycled. A material is not accumulated speculatively, 
however, if the person accumulating it can show that the material is 
potentially recyclable and has a feasible means of being recycled; and 
that--during the calendar year (commencing on January 1)--the amount of 
material that is recycled, or transferred to a different site for 
recycling, equals at least 75 percent by weight or volume of the amount 
of that material accumulated at the beginning of the period. In 
calculating the percentage of turnover, the 75 percent requirement is to 
be applied to each material of the same type (e.g., slags from a single 
smelting process) that is recycled in the same way (i.e., from which the 
same material is recovered or that is used in the same way). Materials 
accumulating in units that would be exempt from regulation under 
Sec. 261.4(c) are not to be included in making the calculation. 
(Materials that are already defined as solid wastes also are not to be 
included in making the calculation.) Materials are no longer in this 
category once they are removed from accumulation for recycling, however.
    (9) ``Excluded scrap metal'' is processed scrap metal, unprocessed 
home scrap metal, and unprocessed prompt scrap metal.
    (10) ``Processed scrap metal'' is scrap metal which has been 
manually or physically altered to either separate it into distinct 
materials to enhance economic value or to improve the handling of 
materials. Processed scrap metal includes, but is not limited to scrap 
metal which has been baled, shredded, sheared, chopped, crushed, 
flattened, cut, melted, or separated by metal type (i.e., sorted), and, 
fines, drosses and related materials which have been agglomerated. 
(Note: shredded circuit boards being sent for recycling are not 
considered processed scrap metal. They are covered under the exclusion 
from the definition of solid waste for shredded circuit boards being 
recycled (Sec. 261.4(a)(13)).
    (11) ``Home scrap metal'' is scrap metal as generated by steel 
mills, foundries, and refineries such as turnings, cuttings, punchings, 
and borings.
    (12) ``Prompt scrap metal'' is scrap metal as generated by the metal 
working/fabrication industries and includes such scrap metal as 
turnings, cuttings, punchings, and borings. Prompt scrap is also known 
as industrial or new scrap metal.
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14293, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 
FR 663, Jan. 4, 1985; 51 FR 10174, Mar. 24, 1986; 51 FR 40636, Nov. 7, 
1986; 62 FR 26018, May 12, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 261.2  Definition of solid waste.

    (a)(1) A solid waste is any discarded material that is not excluded 
by Sec. 261.4(a) or that is not excluded by

[[Page 32]]

variance granted under Secs. 260.30 and 260.31.
    (2) A discarded material is any material which is:
    (i) Abandoned, as explained in paragraph (b) of this section; or
    (ii) Recycled, as explained in paragraph (c) of this section; or
    (iii) Considered inherently waste-like, as explained in paragraph 
(d) of this section; or
    (iv) A military munition identified as a solid waste in 40 CFR 
266.202.
    (b) Materials are solid waste if they are abandoned by being:
    (1) Disposed of; or
    (2) Burned or incinerated; or
    (3) Accumulated, stored, or treated (but not recycled) before or in 
lieu of being abandoned by being disposed of, burned, or incinerated.
    (c) Materials are solid wastes if they are recycled--or accumulated, 
stored, or treated before recycling--as specified in paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (4) of this section.
    (1) Used in a manner constituting disposal. (i) Materials noted with 
a ``*'' in Column 1 of Table I are solid wastes when they are:
    (A) Applied to or placed on the land in a manner that constitutes 
disposal; or
    (B) Used to produce products that are applied to or placed on the 
land or are otherwise contained in products that are applied to or 
placed on the land (in which cases the product itself remains a solid 
waste).
    (ii) However, commercial chemical products listed in Sec. 261.33 are 
not solid wastes if they are applied to the land and that is their 
ordinary manner of use.
    (2) Burning for energy recovery. (i) Materials noted with a ``*'' in 
column 2 of Table 1 are solid wastes when they are:
    (A) Burned to recover energy;
    (B) Used to produce a fuel or are otherwise contained in fuels (in 
which cases the fuel itself remains a solid waste).
    (ii) However, commercial chemical products listed in Sec. 261.33 are 
not solid wastes if they are themselves fuels.
    (3) Reclaimed. Materials noted with a ``*'' in column 3 of Table 1 
are solid wastes when reclaimed (except as provided under 40 CFR 
261.4(a)(15)). Materials noted with a ``--'' in column 3 of Table 1 are 
not solid wastes when reclaimed (except as provided under 40 CFR 
261.4(a)(15)).
    (4) Accumulated speculatively. Materials noted with a ``*'' in 
column 4 of Table 1 are solid wastes when accumulated speculatively.

                                                     Table 1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                         Reclamation (Sec.
                                                                            261.2(c)(3))
                                Use constituting     Energy recovery/   (except as provided      Speculative
                                 disposal (Sec.         fuel (Sec.      in 261.4(a)(15) for   accumulation (Sec.
                                  261.2(c)(1))         261.2(c)(2))      mineral processing      261.2(c)(4))
                                                                             secondary
                                                                             materials)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            1                    2                    3                    4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spent Materials.............              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
Sludges (listed in 40 CFR
 Part 261.31 or 261.32......              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
Sludges exhibiting a
 characteristic of hazardous
 waste......................              (*)                  (*)                   --                  (*)
By-products (listed in 40
 CFR 261.31 or 261.32)......              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
By-products exhibiting a
 characteristic of hazardous
 waste......................              (*)                  (*)                   --                  (*)
Commercial chemical products
 listed in 40 CFR 261.33....              (*)                  (*)                   --                   --
Scrap metal other than
 excluded scrap metal (see
 261.1(c)(9))...............              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: The terms ``spent materials,'' ``sludges,'' ``by-products,'' and ``scrap metal'' and ``processed scrap
  metal'' are defined in Sec.  261.1.

    (d) Inherently waste-like materials. The following materials are 
solid wastes when they are recycled in any manner:
    (1) Hazardous Waste Nos. F020, F021 (unless used as an ingredient to 
make a product at the site of generation), F022, F023, F026, and F028.

[[Page 33]]

    (2) Secondary materials fed to a halogen acid furnace that exhibit a 
characteristic of a hazardous waste or are listed as a hazardous waste 
as defined in subparts C or D of this part, except for brominated 
material that meets the following criteria:
    (i) The material must contain a bromine concentration of at least 
45%; and
    (ii) The material must contain less than a total of 1% of toxic 
organic compounds listed in appendix VIII; and
    (iii) The material is processed continually on-site in the halogen 
acid furnace via direct conveyance (hard piping).
    (3) The Administrator will use the following criteria to add wastes 
to that list:
    (i)(A) The materials are ordinarily disposed of, burned, or 
incinerated; or
    (B) The materials contain toxic constituents listed in appendix VIII 
of part 261 and these constituents are not ordinarily found in raw 
materials or products for which the materials substitute (or are found 
in raw materials or products in smaller concentrations) and are not used 
or reused during the recycling process; and
    (ii) The material may pose a substantial hazard to human health and 
the environment when recycled.
    (e) Materials that are not solid waste when recycled. (1) Materials 
are not solid wastes when they can be shown to be recycled by being:
    (i) Used or reused as ingredients in an industrial process to make a 
product, provided the materials are not being reclaimed; or
    (ii) Used or reused as effective substitutes for commercial 
products; or
    (iii) In cases where the materials are generated and reclaimed 
within the primary mineral processing industry, the conditions of the 
exclusion found at Sec. 261.4(a)(15) apply rather than this provision.
    (2) The following materials are solid wastes, even if the recycling 
involves use, reuse, or return to the original process (described in 
paragraphs (e)(1) (i) through (iii) of this section):
    (i) Materials used in a manner constituting disposal, or used to 
produce products that are applied to the land; or
    (ii) Materials burned for energy recovery, used to produce a fuel, 
or contained in fuels; or
    (iii) Materials accumulated speculatively; or
    (iv) Materials listed in paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this 
section.
    (f) Documentation of claims that materials are not solid wastes or 
are conditionally exempt from regulation. Respondents in actions to 
enforce regulations implementing subtitle C of RCRA who raise a claim 
that a certain material is not a solid waste, or is conditionally exempt 
from regulation, must demonstrate that there is a known market or 
disposition for the material, and that they meet the terms of the 
exclusion or exemption. In doing so, they must provide appropriate 
documentation (such as contracts showing that a second person uses the 
material as an ingredient in a production process) to demonstrate that 
the material is not a waste, or is exempt from regulation. In addition, 
owners or operators of facilities claiming that they actually are 
recycling materials must show that they have the necessary equipment to 
do so.
[50 FR 664, Jan. 4, 1985, as amended at 50 FR 33542, Aug. 20, 1985; 56 
FR 7206, Feb. 21, 1991; 56 FR 32688, July 17, 1991; 56 FR 42512, Aug. 
27, 1991; 57 FR 38564, Aug. 25, 1992; 59 FR 48042, Sept. 19, 1994; 62 FR 
6651, Feb. 12, 1997; 62 FR 26019, May 12, 1997; 63 FR 28636, May 26, 
1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 28636, May 26, 1998, Sec. 261.2 was 
amended by revising paragraph (c)(3), Table 1 in paragraph (c)(4), and 
(e)(1)(iii), effective Aug. 24, 1998. For the convenience of the user, 
the superseded text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 261.2  Definition of solid waste.

                                * * * * *

    (c) * * *
    (3) Reclaimed. Materials noted with a ``*'' in column 3 of Table 1 
are solid wastes when reclaimed.
    (4) * * *

[[Page 34]]



                                                     Table 1
                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spent Materials.............              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
Sludges (listed in 40 CFR
 Part 261.31 or 261.32......              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
Sludges exhibiting a
 characteristic of hazardous
 waste......................              (*)                  (*)      ...................              (*)
By-products (listed in 40
 CFR 261.31 or 261.32)......              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
By-products exhibiting a
 characteristic of hazardous
 waste......................              (*)                  (*)      ...................              (*)
Commercial chemical products
 listed in 40 CFR 261.33....              (*)                  (*)      ...................  ...................
Scrap metal other than
 excluded scrap metal (see
 261.1(c)(9))...............              (*)                  (*)                  (*)                  (*)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: The terms ``spent materials'', ``sludges'', ``by-products'', and ``scrap metal'' and ``processed scrap
  metal'' are defined in Sec.  261.1.

                                * * * * *

    (e) * * *
    (1) * * *
    (iii) Returned to the original process from which they are 
generated, without first being reclaimed or land disposed. The material 
must be returned as a substitute for feedstock materials. In cases where 
the original process to which the material is returned is a secondary 
process, the materials must be managed such that there is no placement 
on the land.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 261.3  Definition of hazardous waste.

    (a) A solid waste, as defined in Sec. 261.2, is a hazardous waste 
if:
    (1) It is not excluded from regulation as a hazardous waste under 
Sec. 261.4(b); and
    (2) It meets any of the following criteria:
    (i) It exhibits any of the characteristics of hazardous waste 
identified in subpart C of this part. However, any mixture of a waste 
from the extraction, beneficiation, and processing of ores and minerals 
excluded under Sec. 261.4(b)(7) and any other solid waste exhibiting a 
characteristic of hazardous waste under subpart C is a hazardous waste 
only if it exhibits a characteristic that would not have been exhibited 
by the excluded waste alone if such mixture had not occurred, or if it 
continues to exhibit any of the characteristics exhibited by the non-
excluded wastes prior to mixture. Further, for the purposes of applying 
the Toxicity Characteristic to such mixtures, the mixture is also a 
hazardous waste if it exceeds the maximum concentration for any 
contaminant listed in table I to Sec. 261.24 that would not have been 
exceeded by the excluded waste alone if the mixture had not occurred or 
if it continues to exceed the maximum concentration for any contaminant 
exceeded by the nonexempt waste prior to mixture.
    (ii) It is listed in subpart D of this part and has not been 
excluded from the lists in subpart D of this part under Secs. 260.20 and 
260.22 of this chapter.
    (iii) It is a mixture of a solid waste and a hazardous waste that is 
listed in subpart D of this part solely because it exhibits one or more 
of the characteristics of hazardous waste identified in subpart C of 
this part, unless the resultant mixture no longer exhibits any 
characteristic of hazardous waste identified in subpart C of this part, 
or unless the solid waste is excluded from regulation under 
Sec. 261.4(b)(7) and the resultant mixture no longer exhibits any 
characteristic of hazardous waste identified in subpart C of this part 
for which the hazardous waste listed in subpart D of this part was 
listed. (However, nonwastewater mixtures are still subject to the 
requirements of part 268 of this chapter, even if they no longer exhibit 
a characteristic at the point of land disposal).
    (iv) It is a mixture of solid waste and one or more hazardous wastes 
listed in subpart D of this part and has not been excluded from 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section under Secs. 260.20 and 260.22 of this 
chapter; however, the following mixtures of solid wastes and hazardous 
wastes listed in subpart D of this part are not hazardous wastes (except 
by application of paragraph (a)(2) (i) or (ii)

[[Page 35]]

of this section) if the generator can demonstrate that the mixture 
consists of wastewater the discharge of which is subject to regulation 
under either section 402 or section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act 
(including wastewater at facilities which have eliminated the discharge 
of wastewater) and:
    (A) One or more of the following solvents listed in Sec. 261.31--
carbon tetrachloride, tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene--Provided, 
That the maximum total weekly usage of these solvents (other than the 
amounts that can be demonstrated not to be discharged to wastewater) 
divided by the average weekly flow of wastewater into the headworks of 
the facility's wastewater treatment or pretreatment system does not 
exceed 1 part per million; or
    (B) One or more of the following spent solvents listed in 
Sec. 261.31--methylene chloride, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, chlorobenzene, 
o-dichlorobenzene, cresols, cresylic acid, nitrobenzene, toluene, methyl 
ethyl ketone, carbon disulfide, isobutanol, pyridine, spent 
chlorofluorocarbon solvents--provided that the maximum total weekly 
usage of these solvents (other than the amounts that can be demonstrated 
not to be discharged to wastewater) divided by the average weekly flow 
of wastewater into the headworks of the facility's wastewater treatment 
or pretreatment system does not exceed 25 parts per million; or
    (C) One of the following wastes listed in Sec. 261.32--heat 
exchanger bundle cleaning sludge from the petroleum refining industry 
(EPA Hazardous Waste No. K050); or
    (D) A discarded commercial chemical product, or chemical 
intermediate listed in Sec. 261.33, arising from de minimis losses of 
these materials from manufacturing operations in which these materials 
are used as raw materials or are produced in the manufacturing process. 
For purposes of this paragraph (a)(2)(iv)(D), ``de minimis'' losses 
include those from normal material handling operations (e.g., spills 
from the unloading or transfer of materials from bins or other 
containers, leaks from pipes, valves or other devices used to transfer 
materials); minor leaks of process equipment, storage tanks or 
containers; leaks from well maintained pump packings and seals; sample 
purgings; relief device discharges; discharges from safety showers and 
rinsing and cleaning of personal safety equipment; and rinstate from 
empty containers or from containers that are rendered empty by that 
rinsing; or
    (E) Wastewater resulting from laboratory operations containing toxic 
(T) wastes listed in subpart D of this part, Provided, That the 
annualized average flow of laboratory wastewater does not exceed one 
percent of total wastewater flow into the headworks of the facility's 
wastewater treatment or pre-treatment system or provided the wastes, 
combined annualized average concentration does not exceed one part per 
million in the headworks of the facility's wastewater treatment or pre-
treatment facility. Toxic (T) wastes used in laboratories that are 
demonstrated not to be discharged to wastewater are not to be included 
in this calculation; or
    (F) One or more of the following wastes listed in Sec. 261.32--
wastewaters from the production of carbamates and carbamoyl oximes (EPA 
Hazardous Waste No. K157)--Provided that the maximum weekly usage of 
formaldehyde, methyl chloride, methylene chloride, and triethylamine 
(including all amounts that can not be demonstrated to be reacted in the 
process, destroyed through treatment, or is recovered, i.e., what is 
discharged or volatilized) divided by the average weekly flow of process 
wastewater prior to any dilutions into the headworks of the facility's 
wastewater treatment system does not exceed a total of 5 parts per 
million by weight; or
    (G) Wastewaters derived from the treatment of one or more of the 
following wastes listed in Sec. 261.32--organic waste (including heavy 
ends, still bottoms, light ends, spent solvents, filtrates, and 
decantates) from the production of carbamates and carbamoyl oximes (EPA 
Hazardous Waste No. K156).--Provided, that the maximum concentration of 
formaldehyde, methyl chloride, methylene chloride, and triethylamine 
prior to any dilutions into the headworks of the facility's wastewater 
treatment system does not exceed a total of 5 milligrams per liter.

[[Page 36]]

    (v) Rebuttable presumption for used oil. Used oil containing more 
than 1000 ppm total halogens is presumed to be a hazardous waste because 
it has been mixed with halogenated hazardous waste listed in subpart D 
of part 261 of this chapter. Persons may rebut this presumption by 
demonstrating that the used oil does not contain hazardous waste (for 
example, by using an analytical method from SW-846, Third Edition, to 
show that the used oil does not contain significant concentrations of 
halogenated hazardous constituents listed in appendix VIII of part 261 
of this chapter). EPA Publication SW-846, Third Edition, is available 
for the cost of $110.00 from the Government Printing Office, 
Superintendent of Documents, PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. 
202-512-1800 (document number 955-001-00000-1).
    (A) The rebuttable presumption does not apply to metalworking oils/
fluids containing chlorinated paraffins, if they are processed, through 
a tolling agreement, to reclaim metalworking oils/fluids. The 
presumption does apply to metalworking oils/fluids if such oils/fluids 
are recycled in any other manner, or disposed.
    (B) The rebuttable presumption does not apply to used oils 
contaminated with chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) removed from refrigeration 
units where the CFCs are destined for reclamation. The rebuttable 
presumption does apply to used oils contaminated with CFCs that have 
been mixed with used oil from sources other than refrigeration units.
    (b) A solid waste which is not excluded from regulation under 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section becomes a hazardous waste when any of 
the following events occur:
    (1) In the case of a waste listed in subpart D of this part, when 
the waste first meets the listing description set forth in subpart D of 
this part.
    (2) In the case of a mixture of solid waste and one or more listed 
hazardous wastes, when a hazardous waste listed in subpart D is first 
added to the solid waste.
    (3) In the case of any other waste (including a waste mixture), when 
the waste exhibits any of the characteristics identified in subpart C of 
this part.
    (c) Unless and until it meets the criteria of paragraph (d) of this 
section:
    (1) A hazardous waste will remain a hazardous waste.
    (2)(i) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this 
section, any solid waste generated from the treatment, storage, or 
disposal of a hazardous waste, including any sludge, spill residue, ash, 
emission control dust, or leachate (but not including precipitation run-
off) is a hazardous waste. (However, materials that are reclaimed from 
solid wastes and that are used beneficially are not solid wastes and 
hence are not hazardous wastes under this provision unless the reclaimed 
material is burned for energy recovery or used in a manner constituting 
disposal.)
    (ii) The following solid wastes are not hazardous even though they 
are generated from the treatment, storage, or disposal of a hazardous 
waste, unless they exhibit one or more of the characteristics of 
hazardous waste:
    (A) Waste pickle liquor sludge generated by lime stabilization of 
spent pickle liquor from the iron and steel industry (SIC Codes 331 and 
332).
    (B) Waste from burning any of the materials exempted from regulation 
by Sec. 261.6(a)(3)(iv) through (vi).
    (C)(1) Nonwastewater residues, such as slag, resulting from high 
temperature metals recovery (HTMR) processing of K061, K062 or F006 
waste, in units identified as rotary kilns, flame reactors, electric 
furnaces, plasma arc furnaces, slag reactors, rotary hearth furnace/
electric furnace combinations or industrial furnaces (as defined in 
paragraphs (6), (7), and (13) of the definition for ``Industrial 
furnace'' in 40 CFR 260.10), that are disposed in subtitle D units, 
provided that these residues meet the generic exclusion levels 
identified in the tables in this paragraph for all constituents, and 
exhibit no characteristics of hazardous waste. Testing requirements must 
be incorporated in a facility's waste analysis plan or a generator's 
self-implementing waste analysis plan; at a minimum, composite samples 
of residues must be collected and analyzed quarterly and/or when the 
process or operation generating the waste changes. Persons claiming this 
exclusion in an enforcement

[[Page 37]]

action will have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence 
that the material meets all of the exclusion requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Maximum for any
                                                              single
                      Constituent                           composite
                                                           sample--TCLP
                                                              (mg/l)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Generic exclusion levels for K061 and K062 nonwastewater HTMR residues
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Antimony...............................................            0.10
Arsenic................................................            0.50
Barium.................................................            7.6
Beryllium..............................................            0.010
Cadmium................................................            0.050
Chromium (total).......................................            0.33
Lead...................................................            0.15
Mercury................................................            0.009
Nickel.................................................            1.0
Selenium...............................................            0.16
Silver.................................................            0.30
Thallium...............................................            0.020
Zinc...................................................           70
------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Generic exclusion levels for F006 nonwastewater HTMR residues
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Antimony...............................................            0.10
Arsenic................................................            0.50
Barium.................................................            7.6
Beryllium..............................................            0.010
Cadmium................................................            0.050
Chromium (total).......................................            0.33
Cyanide (total) (mg/kg)................................            1.8
Lead...................................................            0.15
Mercury................................................            0.009
Nickel.................................................            1.0
Selenium...............................................            0.16
Silver.................................................            0.30
Thallium...............................................            0.020
Zinc...................................................           70
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) A one-time notification and certification must be placed in the 
facility's files and sent to the EPA region or authorized state for 
K061, K062 or F006 HTMR residues that meet the generic exclusion levels 
for all constituents and do not exhibit any characteristics that are 
sent to subtitle D units. The notification and certification that is 
placed in the generators or treaters files must be updated if the 
process or operation generating the waste changes and/or if the subtitle 
D unit receiving the waste changes. However, the generator or treater 
need only notify the EPA region or an authorized state on an annual 
basis if such changes occur. Such notification and certification should 
be sent to the EPA region or authorized state by the end of the calendar 
year, but no later than December 31. The notification must include the 
following information: The name and address of the subtitle D unit 
receiving the waste shipments; the EPA Hazardous Waste Number(s) and 
treatability group(s) at the initial point of generation; and, the 
treatment standards applicable to the waste at the initial point of 
generation. The certification must be signed by an authorized 
representative and must state as follows: ``I certify under penalty of 
law that the generic exclusion levels for all constituents have been met 
without impermissible dilution and that no characteristic of hazardous 
waste is exhibited. I am aware that there are significant penalties for 
submitting a false certification, including the possibility of fine and 
imprisonment.''
    (D) Biological treatment sludge from the treatment of one of the 
following wastes listed in Sec. 261.32--organic waste (including heavy 
ends, still bottoms, light ends, spent solvents, filtrates, and 
decantates) from the production of carbamates and carbamoyl oximes (EPA 
Hazardous Waste No. K156), and wastewaters from the production of 
carbamates and carbamoyl oximes (EPA Hazardous Waste No. K157).
    (d) Any solid waste described in paragraph (c) of this section is 
not a hazardous waste if it meets the following criteria:
    (1) In the case of any solid waste, it does not exhibit any of the 
characteristics of hazardous waste identified in subpart C of this part. 
(However, wastes that exhibit a characteristic at the point of 
generation may still be subject to the requirements of part 268, even if 
they no longer exhibit a characteristic at the point of land disposal.)
    (2) In the case of a waste which is a listed waste under subpart D 
of this part, contains a waste listed under subpart D of this part or is 
derived from a waste listed in subpart D of this part, it also has been 
excluded from paragraph (c) of this section under Secs. 260.20 and 
260.22 of this chapter.
    (e)  [Reserved]
    (f) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section and 
provided the debris as defined in part 268 of this chapter does not 
exhibit a characteristic identified at subpart C of this part, the 
following materials are not subject to regulation under 40 CFR parts 
260, 261 to 266, 268, or 270:

[[Page 38]]

    (1) Hazardous debris as defined in part 268 of this chapter that has 
been treated using one of the required extraction or destruction 
technologies specified in Table 1 of Sec. 268.45 of this chapter; 
persons claiming this exclusion in an enforcement action will have the 
burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the material 
meets all of the exclusion requirements; or
    (2) Debris as defined in part 268 of this chapter that the Regional 
Administrator, considering the extent of contamination, has determined 
is no longer contaminated with hazardous waste.
[57 FR 7632, Mar. 3, 1992; 57 FR 23063, June 1, 1992, as amended at 57 
FR 37263, Aug. 18, 1992; 57 FR 41611, Sept. 10, 1992; 57 FR 49279, Oct. 
30, 1992; 59 FR 38545, July 28, 1994; 60 FR 7848, Feb. 9, 1995; 63 FR 
28637, May 26, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 28637, May 26, 1998, Sec. 261.3 was 
amended by revising paragraphs (a)(2)(i) and (iii), effective Aug. 24, 
1998. For the convenience of the user, the superseded text is set forth 
as follows:

Sec. 261.3  Definition of hazardous waste.

    (a) * * *
    (2) * * *
    (i) It exhibits any of the characteristics of hazardous waste 
identified in subpart C except that any mixture of a waste from the 
extraction, beneficiation, and processing of ores and minerals excluded 
under Sec. 261.4(b)(7) and any other solid waste exhibiting a 
characteristic of hazardous waste under subpart C of this part only if 
it exhibits a characteristic that would not have been exhibited by the 
excluded waste alone if such mixture had not occurred or if it continues 
to exhibit any of the characteristics exhibited by the non-excluded 
wastes prior to mixture. Further, for the purposes of applying the 
Toxicity Characteristic to such mixtures, the mixture is also a 
hazardous waste if it exceeds the maximum concentration for any 
contaminant listed in table I to Sec. 261.24 that would not have been 
exceeded by the excluded waste alone if the mixture had not occurred or 
if it continues to exceed the maximum concentration for any contaminant 
exceeded by the nonexempt waste prior to mixture.

                                * * * * *

    (iii) It is a mixture of a solid waste and a hazardous waste that is 
listed in subpart D of this part solely because it exhibits one or more 
of the characteristics of hazardous waste identified in subpart C of 
this part, unless the resultant mixture no longer exhibits any 
characteristic of hazardous waste identified in subpart C of this part, 
or unless the solid waste is excluded from regulation under 
Sec. 261.4(b)(7) and the resultant mixture no longer exhibits any 
characteristic of hazardous waste identified in subpart C of this part 
for which the hazardous waste listed in subpart D of this part was 
listed. (However, nonwastewater mixtures are still subject to the 
requirements of part 268 of this chapter, even if they no longer exhibit 
a characteristic at the point of land disposal).

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 261.4  Exclusions.

    (a) Materials which are not solid wastes. The following materials 
are not solid wastes for the purpose of this part:
    (1)(i) Domestic sewage; and
    (ii) Any mixture of domestic sewage and other wastes that passes 
through a sewer system to a publicly-owned treatment works for 
treatment. ``Domestic sewage'' means untreated sanitary wastes that pass 
through a sewer system.
    (2) Industrial wastewater discharges that are point source 
discharges subject to regulation under section 402 of the Clean Water 
Act, as amended.
[Comment: This exclusion applies only to the actual point source 
discharge. It does not exclude industrial wastewaters while they are 
being collected, stored or treated before discharge, nor does it exclude 
sludges that are generated by industrial wastewater treatment.]
    (3) Irrigation return flows.
    (4) Source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined by the 
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.
    (5) Materials subjected to in-situ mining techniques which are not 
removed from the ground as part of the extraction process.
    (6) Pulping liquors (i.e., black liquor) that are reclaimed in a 
pulping liquor recovery furnace and then reused in the pulping process, 
unless it is accumulated speculatively as defined in Sec. 261.1(c) of 
this chapter.
    (7) Spent sulfuric acid used to produce virgin sulfuric acid, unless 
it is accumulated speculatively as defined in Sec. 261.1(c) of this 
chapter.
    (8) Secondary materials that are reclaimed and returned to the 
original

[[Page 39]]

process or processes in which they were generated where they are reused 
in the production process provided:
    (i) Only tank storage is involved, and the entire process through 
completion of reclamation is closed by being entirely connected with 
pipes or other comparable enclosed means of conveyance;
    (ii) Reclamation does not involve controlled flame combustion (such 
as occurs in boilers, industrial furnaces, or incinerators);
    (iii) The secondary materials are never accumulated in such tanks 
for over twelve months without being reclaimed; and
    (iv) The reclaimed material is not used to produce a fuel, or used 
to produce products that are used in a manner constituting disposal.
    (9)(i) Spent wood preserving solutions that have been reclaimed and 
are reused for their original intended purpose; and
    (ii) Wastewaters from the wood preserving process that have been 
reclaimed and are reused to treat wood.
    (iii) Prior to reuse, the wood preserving wastewaters and spent wood 
preserving solutions described in paragraphs (a)(9)(i) and (a)(9)(ii) of 
this section, so long as they meet all of the following conditions:
    (A) The wood preserving wastewaters and spent wood preserving 
solutions are reused on-site at water borne plants in the production 
process for their original intended purpose;
    (B) Prior to reuse, the wastewaters and spent wood preserving 
solutions are managed to prevent release to either land or groundwater 
or both;
    (C) Any unit used to manage wastewaters and/or spent wood preserving 
solutions prior to reuse can be visually or otherwise determined to 
prevent such releases;
    (D) Any drip pad used to manage the wastewaters and/or spent wood 
preserving solutions prior to reuse complies with the standards in part 
265, subpart W of this chapter, regardless of whether the plant 
generates a total of less than 100 kg/month of hazardous waste; and
    (E) Prior to operating pursuant to this exclusion, the plant owner 
or operator submits to the appropriate Regional Administrator or State 
Director a one-time notification stating that the plant intends to claim 
the exclusion, giving the date on which the plant intends to begin 
operating under the exclusion, and containing the following language: 
``I have read the applicable regulation establishing an exclusion for 
wood preserving wastewaters and spent wood preserving solutions and 
understand it requires me to comply at all times with the conditions set 
out in the regulation.'' The plant must maintain a copy of that document 
in its on-site records for a period of no less than 3 years from the 
date specified in the notice. The exclusion applies only so long as the 
plant meets all of the conditions. If the plant goes out of compliance 
with any condition, it may apply to the appropriate Regional 
Administrator or State Director for reinstatement. The Regional 
Administrator or State Director may reinstate the exclusion upon finding 
that the plant has returned to compliance with all conditions and that 
violations are not likely to recur.
    (10) EPA Hazardous Waste Nos. K060, K087, K141, K142, K143, K144, 
K145, K147, and K148, and any wastes from the coke by-products processes 
that are hazardous only because they exhibit the Toxicity Characteristic 
(TC) specified in section 261.24 of this part when, subsequent to 
generation, these materials are recycled to coke ovens, to the tar 
recovery process as a feedstock to produce coal tar, or mixed with coal 
tar prior to the tar's sale or refining. This exclusion is conditioned 
on there being no land disposal of the wastes from the point they are 
generated to the point they are recycled to coke ovens or tar recovery 
or refining processes, or mixed with coal tar.
    (11) Nonwastewater splash condenser dross residue from the treatment 
of K061 in high temperature metals recovery units, provided it is 
shipped in drums (if shipped) and not land disposed before recovery.
    (12) Recovered oil from petroleum refining, exploration and 
production, and from transportation incident thereto, which is to be 
inserted into the petroleum refining process (SIC Code 2911) at

[[Page 40]]

or before a point (other than direct insertion into a coker) where 
contaminants are removed. This exclusion applies to recovered oil stored 
or transported prior to insertion, except that the oil must not be 
stored in a manner involving placement on the land, and must not be 
accumulated speculatively, before being so recycled. Recovered oil is 
oil that has been reclaimed from secondary materials (such as 
wastewater) generated from normal petroleum refining, exploration and 
production, and transportation practices. Recovered oil includes oil 
that is recovered from refinery wastewater collection and treatment 
systems, oil recovered from oil and gas drilling operations, and oil 
recovered from wastes removed from crude oil storage tanks. Recovered 
oil does not include (among other things) oil-bearing hazardous waste 
listed in 40 CFR part 261 D (e.g., K048-K052, F037, F038). However, oil 
recovered from such wastes may be considered recovered oil. Recovered 
oil also does not include used oil as defined in 40 CFR 279.1.
    (13) Excluded scrap metal (processed scrap metal, unprocessed home 
scrap metal, and unprocessed prompt scrap metal) being recycled.
    (14) Shredded circuit boards being recycled provided that they are:
    (i) Stored in containers sufficient to prevent a release to the 
environment prior to recovery; and
    (ii) Free of mercury switches, mercury relays and nickel-cadmium 
batteries and lithium batteries.
    (15) Condensates derived from the overhead gases from kraft mill 
steam strippers that are used to comply with 40 CFR 63.446(e). The 
exemption applies only to combustion at the mill generating the 
condensates.
    (16) Secondary materials (i.e., sludges, by-products, and spent 
materials as defined in Sec. 261.1) (other than hazardous wastes listed 
in subpart D of this part) generated within the primary mineral 
processing industry from which minerals, acids, cyanide, water or other 
values are recovered by mineral processing, provided that:
    (i) The secondary material is legitimately recycled to recover 
minerals, acids, cyanide, water or other values;
    (ii) The secondary material is not accumulated speculatively;
    (iii) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(15)(iv) of this section, 
the secondary material is stored in tanks, containers, or buildings 
meeting the following minimum integrity standards: a building must be an 
engineered structure with a floor, walls, and a roof all of which are 
made of non-earthen materials providing structural support (except 
smelter buildings may have partially earthen floors provided the 
secondary material is stored on the non-earthen portion), and have a 
roof suitable for diverting rainwater away from the foundation; a tank 
must be free standing, not be a surface impoundment (as defined in 40 
CFR 260.10), and be manufactured of a material suitable for containment 
of its contents; a container must be free standing and be manufactured 
of a material suitable for containment of its contents. If tanks or 
containers contain any particulate which may be subject to wind 
dispersal, the owner/operator must operate these units in a manner which 
controls fugitive dust. Tanks, containers, and buildings must be 
designed, constructed and operated to prevent significant releases to 
the environment of these materials.
    (iv) The Regional Administrator or the State Director may make a 
site-specific determination, after public review and comment, that only 
solid mineral processing secondary materials may be placed on pads, 
rather than in tanks, containers, or buildings. Solid mineral processing 
secondary materials do not contain any free liquid. The decision-maker 
must affirm that pads are designed, constructed and operated to prevent 
significant releases of the secondary material into the environment. 
Pads must provide the same degree of containment afforded by the non-
RCRA tanks, containers and buildings eligible for exclusion.
    (A) The decision-maker must also consider if storage on pads poses 
the potential for significant releases via groundwater, surface water, 
and air exposure pathways. Factors to be considered for assessing the 
groundwater, surface water, air exposure pathways

[[Page 41]]

are: the volume and physical and chemical properties of the secondary 
material, including its potential for migration off the pad; the 
potential for human or environmental exposure to hazardous constituents 
migrating from the pad via each exposure pathway, and the possibility 
and extent of harm to human and environmental receptors via each 
exposure pathway.
    (B) Pads must meet the following minimum standards: be designed of 
non-earthen material that is compatible with the chemical nature of the 
mineral processing secondary material, capable of withstanding physical 
stresses associated with placement and removal, have run on/runoff 
controls, be operated in a manner which controls fugitive dust, and have 
integrity assurance through inspections and maintenance programs.
    (C) Before making a determination under this paragraph, the Regional 
Administrator or State Director must provide notice and the opportunity 
for comment to all persons potentially interested in the determination. 
This can be accomplished by placing notice of this action in major local 
newspapers, or broadcasting notice over local radio stations.
    (v) The owner or operator provides a notice to the Regional 
Administrator or State Director, identifying the following information: 
the types of materials to be recycled; the type and location of the 
storage units and recycling processes; and the annual quantities 
expected to be placed in land-based units. This notification must be 
updated when there is a change in the type of materials recycled or the 
location of the recycling process.
    (vi) For purposes of Sec. 261.4(b)(7), mineral processing secondary 
materials must be the result of mineral processing and may not include 
any listed hazardous wastes. Listed hazardous wastes and characteristic 
hazardous wastes generated by non-mineral processing industries are not 
eligible for the conditional exclusion from the definition of solid 
waste.

    Editorial Note: At 63 FR 33823, June 19, 1998, the following 
paragraph (a)(16) was added to Sec. 261.4; however paragraph 
261.4(a)(16) above was already added at 63 FR 28637, May 26, 1998, 
effective Aug. 24, 1998.
    (16) Comparable fuels or comparable syngas fuels (i.e., comparable/
syngas fuels) that meet the requirements of Sec. 261.38.
    (b) Solid wastes which are not hazardous wastes. The following solid 
wastes are not hazardous wastes:
    (1) Household waste, including household waste that has been 
collected, transported, stored, treated, disposed, recovered (e.g., 
refuse-derived fuel) or reused. ``Household waste'' means any material 
(including garbage, trash and sanitary wastes in septic tanks) derived 
from households (including single and multiple residences, hotels and 
motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic 
grounds and day-use recreation areas). A resource recovery facility 
managing municipal solid waste shall not be deemed to be treating, 
storing, disposing of, or otherwise managing hazardous wastes for the 
purposes of regulation under this subtitle, if such facility:
    (i) Receives and burns only
    (A) Household waste (from single and multiple dwellings, hotels, 
motels, and other residential sources) and
    (B) Solid waste from commercial or industrial sources that does not 
contain hazardous waste; and
    (ii) Such facility does not accept hazardous wastes and the owner or 
operator of such facility has established contractual requirements or 
other appropriate notification or inspection procedures to assure that 
hazardous wastes are not received at or burned in such facility.
    (2) Solid wastes generated by any of the following and which are 
returned to the soils as fertilizers:
    (i) The growing and harvesting of agricultural crops.
    (ii) The raising of animals, including animal manures.
    (3) Mining overburden returned to the mine site.
    (4) Fly ash waste, bottom ash waste, slag waste, and flue gas 
emission control waste, generated primarily from the combusion of coal 
or other fossil fuels, except as provided by Sec. 266.112 of this 
chapter for facilities that burn or process hazardous waste.
    (5) Drilling fluids, produced waters, and other wastes associated 
with the

[[Page 42]]

exploration, development, or production of crude oil, natural gas or 
geothermal energy.
    (6)(i) Wastes which fail the test for the Toxicity Characteristic 
because chromium is present or are listed in subpart D due to the 
presence of chromium, which do not fail the test for the Toxicity 
Characteristic for any other constituent or are not listed due to the 
presence of any other constituent, and which do not fail the test for 
any other characteristic, if it is shown by a waste generator or by 
waste generators that:
    (A) The chromium in the waste is exclusively (or nearly exclusively) 
trivalent chromium; and
    (B) The waste is generated from an industrial process which uses 
trivalent chromium exlcusively (or nearly exclusively) and the process 
does not generate hexavalent chromium; and
    (C) The waste is typically and frequently managed in non-oxidizing 
environments.
    (ii) Specific waste which meet the standard in paragraphs (b)(6)(i) 
(A), (B), and (C) (so long as they do not fail the test for the toxicity 
characteristic for any other constituent, and do not exhibit any other 
characteristic) are:
    (A) Chrome (blue) trimmings generated by the following subcategories 
of the leather tanning and finishing industry; hair pulp/chrome tan/
retan/wet finish; hair save/chrome tan/retan/wet finish; retan/wet 
finish; no beamhouse; through-the-blue; and shearling.
    (B) Chrome (blue) shavings generated by the following subcategories 
of the leather tanning and finishing industry: Hair pulp/chrome tan/
retan/wet finish; hair save/chrome tan/retan/wet finish; retan/wet 
finish; no beamhouse; through-the-blue; and shearling.
    (C) Buffing dust generated by the following subcategories of the 
leather tanning and finishing industry; hair pulp/chrome tan/retan/wet 
finish; hair save/chrome tan/retan/wet finish; retan/wet finish; no 
beamhouse; through-the-blue.
    (D) Sewer screenings generated by the following subcategories of the 
leather tanning and finishing industry: Hair pulp/crome tan/retan/wet 
finish; hair save/chrome tan/retan/wet finish; retan/wet finish; no 
beamhouse; through-the-blue; and shearling.
    (E) Wastewater treatment sludges generated by the following 
subcategories of the leather tanning and finishing industry: Hair pulp/
chrome tan/retan/wet finish; hair save/chrome tan/retan/wet finish; 
retan/wet finish; no beamhouse; through-the-blue; and shearling.
    (F) Wastewater treatment sludes generated by the following 
subcategories of the leather tanning and finishing industry: Hair pulp/
chrome tan/retan/wet finish; hair save/chrometan/retan/wet finish; and 
through-the-blue.
    (G) Waste scrap leather from the leather tanning industry, the shoe 
manufacturing industry, and other leather product manufacturing 
industries.
    (H) Wastewater treatment sludges from the production of TiO<INF>2</INF> 
pigment using chromium-bearing ores by the chloride process.
    (7) Solid waste from the extraction, beneficiation, and processing 
of ores and minerals (including coal, phosphate rock, and overburden 
from the mining of uranium ore), except as provided by Sec. 266.112 of 
this chapter for facilities that burn or process hazardous waste.
    (i) For purposes of Sec. 261.4(b)(7) beneficiation of ores and 
minerals is restricted to the following activities; crushing; grinding; 
washing; dissolution; crystallization; filtration; sorting; sizing; 
drying; sintering; pelletizing; briquetting; calcining to remove water 
and/or carbon dioxide; roasting, autoclaving, and/or chlorination in 
preparation for leaching (except where the roasting (and/or autoclaving 
and/or chlorination)/leaching sequence produces a final or intermediate 
product that does not undergo further beneficiation or processing); 
gravity concentration; magnetic separation; electrostatic separation; 
flotation; ion exchange; solvent extraction; electrowinning; 
precipitation; amalgamation; and heap, dump, vat, tank, and in situ 
leaching.
    (ii) For the purposes of Sec. 261.4(b)(7), solid waste from the 
processing of ores and minerals includes only the following wastes as 
generated:

[[Page 43]]

    (A) Slag from primary copper processing;
    (B) Slag from primary lead processing;
    (C) Red and brown muds from bauxite refining;
    (D) Phosphogypsum from phosphoric acid production;
    (E) Slag from elemental phosphorus production;
    (F) Gasifier ash from coal gasification;
    (G) Process wastewater from coal gasification;
    (H) Calcium sulfate wastewater treatment plant sludge from primary 
copper processing;
    (I) Slag tailings from primary copper processing;
    (J) Fluorogypsum from hydrofluoric acid production;
    (K) Process wastewater from hydrofluoric acid production;
    (L) Air pollution control dust/sludge from iron blast furnaces;
    (M) Iron blast furnace slag;
    (N) Treated residue from roasting/leaching of chrome ore;
    (O) Process wastewater from primary magnesium processing by the 
anhydrous process;
    (P) Process wastewater from phosphoric acid production;
    (Q) Basic oxygen furnace and open hearth furnace air pollution 
control dust/sludge from carbon steel production;
    (R) Basic oxygen furnace and open hearth furnace slag from carbon 
steel production;
    (S ) Chloride process waste solids from titanium tetrachloride 
production;
    (T) Slag from primary zinc processing.
    (iii) A residue derived from co-processing mineral processing 
secondary materials with normal beneficiation raw materials remains 
excluded under paragraph (b) of this section if the owner or operator:
    (A) Processes at least 50 percent by weight normal beneficiation raw 
materials; and,
    (B) Legitimately reclaims the secondary mineral processing 
materials.
    (8) Cement kiln dust waste, except as provided by Sec. 266.112 of 
this chapter for facilities that burn or process hazardous waste.
    (9) Solid waste which consists of discarded arsenical-treated wood 
or wood products which fails the test for the Toxicity Characteristic 
for Hazardous Waste Codes D004 through D017 and which is not a hazardous 
waste for any other reason if the waste is generated by persons who 
utilize the arsenical-treated wood and wood product for these materials' 
intended end use.
    (10) Petroleum-contaminated media and debris that fail the test for 
the Toxicity Characteristic of Sec. 261.24 (Hazardous Waste Codes D018 
through D043 only) and are subject to the corrective action regulations 
under part 280 of this chapter.
    (11) Injected groundwater that is hazardous only because it exhibits 
the Toxicity Characteristic (Hazardous Waste Codes D018 through D043 
only) in Sec. 261.24 of this part that is reinjected through an 
underground injection well pursuant to free phase hydrocarbon recovery 
operations undertaken at petroleum refineries, petroleum marketing 
terminals, petroleum bulk plants, petroleum pipelines, and petroleum 
transportation spill sites until January 25, 1993. This extension 
applies to recovery operations in existence, or for which contracts have 
been issued, on or before March 25, 1991. For groundwater returned 
through infiltration galleries from such operations at petroleum 
refineries, marketing terminals, and bulk plants, until [insert date six 
months after publication]. New operations involving injection wells 
(beginning after March 25, 1991) will qualify for this compliance date 
extension (until January 25, 1993) only if:
    (i) Operations are performed pursuant to a written state agreement 
that includes a provision to assess the groundwater and the need for 
further remediation once the free phase recovery is completed; and
    (ii) A copy of the written agreement has been submitted to: 
Characteristics Section (OS-333), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460.
    (12) Used chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants from totally enclosed heat 
transfer equipment, including mobile

[[Page 44]]

air conditioning systems, mobile refrigeration, and commercial and 
industrial air conditioning and refrigeration systems that use 
chlorofluorocarbons as the heat transfer fluid in a refrigeration cycle, 
provided the refrigerant is reclaimed for further use.
    (13) Non-terne plated used oil filters that are not mixed with 
wastes listed in subpart D of this part if these oil filters have been 
gravity hot-drained using one of the following methods:
    (i) Puncturing the filter anti-drain back valve or the filter dome 
end and hot-draining;
    (ii) Hot-draining and crushing;
    (iii) Dismantling and hot-draining; or
    (iv) Any other equivalent hot-draining method that will remove used 
oil.
    (14) Used oil re-refining distillation bottoms that are used as 
feedstock to manufacture asphalt products.
    (c) Hazardous wastes which are exempted from certain regulations. A 
hazardous waste which is generated in a product or raw material storage 
tank, a product or raw material transport vehicle or vessel, a product 
or raw material pipeline, or in a manufacturing process unit or an 
associated non-waste-treatment-manufacturing unit, is not subject to 
regulation under parts 262 through 265, 268, 270, 271 and 124 of this 
chapter or to the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA 
until it exits the unit in which it was generated, unless the unit is a 
surface impoundment, or unless the hazardous waste remains in the unit 
more than 90 days after the unit ceases to be operated for 
manufacturing, or for storage or transportation of product or raw 
materials.
    (d) Samples. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section, a sample of solid waste or a sample of water, soil, or air, 
which is collected for the sole purpose of testing to determine its 
characteristics or composition, is not subject to any requirements of 
this part or parts 262 through 268 or part 270 or part 124 of this 
chapter or to the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA, 
when:
    (i) The sample is being transported to a laboratory for the purpose 
of testing; or
    (ii) The sample is being transported back to the sample collector 
after testing; or
    (iii) The sample is being stored by the sample collector before 
transport to a laboratory for testing; or
    (iv) The sample is being stored in a laboratory before testing; or
    (v) The sample is being stored in a laboratory after testing but 
before it is returned to the sample collector; or
    (vi) The sample is being stored temporarily in the laboratory after 
testing for a specific purpose (for example, until conclusion of a court 
case or enforcement action where further testing of the sample may be 
necessary).
    (2) In order to qualify for the exemption in paragraphs (d)(1) (i) 
and (ii) of this section, a sample collector shipping samples to a 
laboratory and a laboratory returning samples to a sample collector 
must:
    (i) Comply with U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS), or any other applicable shipping requirements; or
    (ii) Comply with the following requirements if the sample collector 
determines that DOT, USPS, or other shipping requirements do not apply 
to the shipment of the sample:
    (A) Assure that the following information accompanies the sample:
    (1) The sample collector's name, mailing address, and telephone 
number;
    (2) The laboratory's name, mailing address, and telephone number;
    (3) The quantity of the sample;
    (4) The date of shipment; and
    (5) A description of the sample.
    (B) Package the sample so that it does not leak, spill, or vaporize 
from its packaging.
    (3) This exemption does not apply if the laboratory determines that 
the waste is hazardous but the laboratory is no longer meeting any of 
the conditions stated in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
    (e) Treatability Study Samples. (1) Except as provided in paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section, persons who generate or collect samples for the 
purpose of conducting treatability studies as defined in section 260.10, 
are not subject to any requirement of parts 261 through 263 of

[[Page 45]]

this chapter or to the notification requirements of Section 3010 of 
RCRA, nor are such samples included in the quantity determinations of 
Sec. 261.5 and Sec. 262.34(d) when:
    (i) The sample is being collected and prepared for transportation by 
the generator or sample collector; or
    (ii) The sample is being accumulated or stored by the generator or 
sample collector prior to transportation to a laboratory or testing 
facility; or
    (iii) The sample is being transported to the laboratory or testing 
facility for the purpose of conducting a treatability study.
    (2) The exemption in paragraph (e)(1) of this section is applicable 
to samples of hazardous waste being collected and shipped for the 
purpose of conducting treatability studies provided that:
    (i) The generator or sample collector uses (in ``treatability 
studies'') no more than 10,000 kg of media contaminated with non-acute 
hazardous waste, 1000 kg of non-acute hazardous waste other than 
contaminated media, 1 kg of acute hazardous waste, 2500 kg of media 
contaminated with acute hazardous waste for each process being evaluated 
for each generated waste stream; and
    (ii) The mass of each sample shipment does not exceed 10,000 kg; the 
10,000 kg quantity may be all media contaminated with non-acute 
hazardous waste, or may include 2500 kg of media contaminated with acute 
hazardous waste, 1000 kg of hazardous waste, and 1 kg of acute hazardous 
waste; and
    (iii) The sample must be packaged so that it will not leak, spill, 
or vaporize from its packaging during shipment and the requirements of 
paragraph A or B of this subparagraph are met.
    (A) The transportation of each sample shipment complies with U.S. 
Department of Transportation (DOT), U.S. Postal Service (USPS), or any 
other applicable shipping requirements; or
    (B) If the DOT, USPS, or other shipping requirements do not apply to 
the shipment of the sample, the following information must accompany the 
sample:
    (1) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the 
originator of the sample;
    (2) The name, address, and telephone number of the facility that 
will perform the treatability study;
    (3) The quantity of the sample;
    (4) The date of shipment; and
    (5) A description of the sample, including its EPA Hazardous Waste 
Number.
    (iv) The sample is shipped to a laboratory or testing facility which 
is exempt under Sec. 261.4(f) or has an appropriate RCRA permit or 
interim status.
    (v) The generator or sample collector maintains the following 
records for a period ending 3 years after completion of the treatability 
study:
    (A) Copies of the shipping documents;
    (B) A copy of the contract with the facility conducting the 
treatability study;
    (C) Documentation showing:
    (1) The amount of waste shipped under this exemption;
    (2) The name, address, and EPA identification number of the 
laboratory or testing facility that received the waste;
    (3) The date the shipment was made; and
    (4) Whether or not unused samples and residues were returned to the 
generator.
    (vi) The generator reports the information required under paragraph 
(e)(v)(C) of this section in its biennial report.
    (3) The Regional Administrator may grant requests on a case-by-case 
basis for up to an additional two years for treatability studies 
involving bioremediation. The Regional Administrator may grant requests 
on a case-by-case basis for quantity limits in excess of those specified 
in paragraphs (e)(2) (i) and (ii) and (f)(4) of this section, for up to 
an additional 5000 kg of media contaminated with non-acute hazardous 
waste, 500 kg of non-acute hazardous waste, 2500 kg of media 
contaminated with acute hazardous waste and 1 kg of acute hazardous 
waste:
    (i) In response to requests for authorization to ship, store and 
conduct

[[Page 46]]

treatabilty studies on additional quantities in advance of commencing 
treatability studies. Factors to be considered in reviewing such 
requests include the nature of the technology, the type of process 
(e.g., batch versus continuous), size of the unit undergoing testing 
(particularly in relation to scale-up considerations), the time/quantity 
of material required to reach steady state operating conditions, or test 
design considerations such as mass balance calculations.
    (ii) In response to requests for authorization to ship, store and 
conduct treatability studies on additional quantities after initiation 
or completion of initial treatability studies, when: There has been an 
equipment or mechanical failure during the conduct of a treatability 
study; there is a need to verify the results of a previously conducted 
treatability study; there is a need to study and analyze alternative 
techniques within a previously evaluated treatment process; or there is 
a need to do further evaluation of an ongoing treatability study to 
determine final specifications for treatment.
    (iii) The additional quantities and timeframes allowed in paragraph 
(e)(3) (i) and (ii) of this section are subject to all the provisions in 
paragraphs (e) (1) and (e)(2) (iii) through (vi) of this section. The 
generator or sample collector must apply to the Regional Administrator 
in the Region where the sample is collected and provide in writing the 
following information:
    (A) The reason why the generator or sample collector requires 
additional time or quantity of sample for treatability study evaluation 
and the additional time or quantity needed;
    (B) Documentation accounting for all samples of hazardous waste from 
the waste stream which have been sent for or undergone treatability 
studies including the date each previous sample from the waste stream 
was shipped, the quantity of each previous shipment, the laboratory or 
testing facility to which it was shipped, what treatability study 
processes were conducted on each sample shipped, and the available 
results on each treatability study;
    (C) A description of the technical modifications or change in 
specifications which will be evaluated and the expected results;
    (D) If such further study is being required due to equipment or 
mechanical failure, the applicant must include information regarding the 
reason for the failure or breakdown and also include what procedures or 
equipment improvements have been made to protect against further 
breakdowns; and
    (E) Such other information that the Regional Administrator considers 
necessary.
    (f) Samples Undergoing Treatability Studies at Laboratories and 
Testing Facilities. Samples undergoing treatability studies and the 
laboratory or testing facility conducting such treatability studies (to 
the extent such facilities are not otherwise subject to RCRA 
requirements) are not subject to any requirement of this part, part 124, 
parts 262-266, 268, and 270, or to the notification requirements of 
Section 3010 of RCRA provided that the conditions of paragraphs (f) (1) 
through (11) of this section are met. A mobile treatment unit (MTU) may 
qualify as a testing facility subject to paragraphs (f) (1) through (11) 
of this section. Where a group of MTUs are located at the same site, the 
limitations specified in (f) (1) through (11) of this section apply to 
the entire group of MTUs collectively as if the group were one MTU.
    (1) No less than 45 days before conducting treatability studies, the 
facility notifies the Regional Administrator, or State Director (if 
located in an authorized State), in writing that it intends to conduct 
treatability studies under this paragraph.
    (2) The laboratory or testing facility conducting the treatability 
study has an EPA identification number.
    (3) No more than a total of 10,000 kg of ``as received'' media 
contaminated with non-acute hazardous waste, 2500 kg of media 
contaminated with acute hazardous waste or 250 kg of other ``as 
received'' hazardous waste is subject to initiation of treatment in all 
treatability studies in any single day. ``As received'' waste refers to 
the waste as received in the shipment from the generator or sample 
collector.
    (4) The quantity of ``as received'' hazardous waste stored at the 
facility for

[[Page 47]]

the purpose of evaluation in treatability studies does not exceed 10,000 
kg, the total of which can include 10,000 kg of media contaminated with 
non-acute hazardous waste, 2500 kg of media contaminated with acute 
hazardous waste, 1000 kg of non-acute hazardous wastes other than 
contaminated media, and 1 kg of acute hazardous waste. This quantity 
limitation does not include treatment materials (including nonhazardous 
solid waste) added to ``as received'' hazardous waste.
    (5) No more than 90 days have elapsed since the treatability study 
for the sample was completed, or no more than one year (two years for 
treatability studies involving bioremediation) have elapsed since the 
generator or sample collector shipped the sample to the laboratory or 
testing facility, whichever date first occurs. Up to 500 kg of treated 
material from a particular waste stream from treatability studies may be 
archived for future evaluation up to five years from the date of initial 
receipt. Quantities of materials archived are counted against the total 
storage limit for the facility.
    (6) The treatability study does not involve the placement of 
hazardous waste on the land or open burning of hazardous waste.
    (7) The facility maintains records for 3 years following completion 
of each study that show compliance with the treatment rate limits and 
the storage time and quantity limits. The following specific information 
must be included for each treatability study conducted:
    (i) The name, address, and EPA identification number of the 
generator or sample collector of each waste sample;
    (ii) The date the shipment was received;
    (iii) The quantity of waste accepted;
    (iv) The quantity of ``as received'' waste in storage each day;
    (v) The date the treatment study was initiated and the amount of 
``as received'' waste introduced to treatment each day;
    (vi) The date the treatability study was concluded;
    (vii) The date any unused sample or residues generated from the 
treatability study were returned to the generator or sample collector 
or, if sent to a designated facility, the name of the facility and the 
EPA identification number.
    (8) The facility keeps, on-site, a copy of the treatability study 
contract and all shipping papers associated with the transport of 
treatability study samples to and from the facility for a period ending 
3 years from the completion date of each treatability study.
    (9) The facility prepares and submits a report to the Regional 
Administrator, or State Director (if located in an authorized State), by 
March 15 of each year that estimates the number of studies and the 
amount of waste expected to be used in treatability studies during the 
current year, and includes the following information for the previous 
calendar year:
    (i) The name, address, and EPA identification number of the facility 
conducting the treatability studies;
    (ii) The types (by process) of treatability studies conducted;
    (iii) The names and addresses of persons for whom studies have been 
conducted (including their EPA identification numbers);
    (iv) The total quantity of waste in storage each day;
    (v) The quantity and types of waste subjected to treatability 
studies;
    (vi) When each treatability study was conducted;
    (vii) The final disposition of residues and unused sample from each 
treatability study.
    (10) The facility determines whether any unused sample or residues 
generated by the treatability study are hazardous waste under Sec. 261.3 
and, if so, are subject to parts 261 through 268, and part 270 of this 
chapter, unless the residues and unused samples are returned to the 
sample originator under the Sec. 261.4(e) exemption.
    (11) The facility notifies the Regional Administrator, or State 
Director (if located in an authorized State), by letter when the 
facility is no longer planning to conduct any treatability studies at 
the site.
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 261.4, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.

[[Page 48]]


    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 28637, May 26, 1998, Sec. 261.4 was 
amended by adding paragraphs (a)(9)(iii) and (a)(16) and by revising 
paragraph (b)(7), effective Aug. 24, 1998. For the convenience of the 
user, the superseded text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 261.4  Exclusions.

                                * * * * *

    (b) * * *
    (7) Solid waste from the extraction, beneficiation, and processing 
of ores and minerals (including coal, phosphate rock and overburden from 
the mining of uranium ore), except as provided by Sec. 266.112 of this 
chapter for facilities that burn or process hazardous waste. For 
purposes of Sec. 261.4(b)(7), beneficiation of ores and minerals is 
restricted to the following activities: Crushing; grinding; washing; 
dissolution; crystallization; filtration; sorting; sizing; drying; 
sintering; pelletizing; briquetting; calcining to remove water and/or 
carbon dioxide; roasting, autoclaving, and/or chlorination in 
preparation for leaching (except where the roasting (and/or autoclaving 
and/or chlorination)/leaching sequence produces a final or intermediate 
product that does not undergo further beneficiation or processing); 
gravity concentration; magnetic separation; electrostatic separation; 
flotation; ion exchange; solvent extraction; electrowinning; 
precipitation; amalgamation; and heap, dump, vat, tank, and in situ 
leaching. For the purpose of Sec. 261.4(b)(7), solid waste from the 
processing of ores and minerals includes only the following wastes:
    (i) Slag from primary copper processing;
    (ii) Slag from primary lead processing;
    (iii) Red and brown muds from bauxite refining;
    (iv) Phosphogypsum from phosphoric acid production;
    (v) Slag from elemental phosphorus production;
    (vi) Gasifier ash from coal gasification;
    (vii) Process wastewater from coal gasification;
    (viii) Calcium sulfate wastewater treatment plant sludge from 
primary copper processing;
    (ix) Slag tailings from primary copper processing;
    (x) Fluorogypsum from hydrofluoric acid production;
    (xi) Process wastewater from hydrofluoric acid production;
    (xii) Air pollution control dust/sludge from iron blast furnaces;
    (xiii) Iron blast furnace slag;
    (xiv) Treated residue from roasting/leaching of chrome ore;
    (xv) Process wastewater from primary magnesium processing by the 
anhydrous process;
    (xvi) Process wastewater from phosphoric acid production;
    (xvii) Basic oxygen furnace and open hearth furnace air pollution 
control dust/sludge from carbon steel production;
    (xviii) Basic oxygen furnace and open hearth furnace slag from 
carbon steel production;
    (xix) Chloride process waste solids from titanium tetrachloride 
production;
    (xx) Slag from primary zinc processing.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 261.5  Special requirements for hazardous waste generated by conditionally exempt small quantity generators.

    (a) A generator is a conditionally exempt small quantity generator 
in a calendar month if he generates no more than 100 kilograms of 
hazardous waste in that month.
    (b) Except for those wastes identified in paragraphs (e), (f), (g), 
and (j) of this section, a conditionally exempt small quantity 
generator's hazardous wastes are not subject to regulation under parts 
262 through 266, 268, and parts 270 and 124 of this chapter, and the 
notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA, provided the 
generator complies with the requirements of paragraphs (f), (g), and (j) 
of this section.
    (c) When making the quantity determinations of this part and 40 CFR 
part 262, the generator must include all hazardous waste that it 
generates, except hazardous waste that:
    (1) Is exempt from regulation under 40 CFR 261.4(c) through (f), 
261.6(a)(3), 261.7(a)(1), or 261.8; or
    (2) Is managed immediately upon generation only in on-site 
elementary neutralization units, wastewater treatment units, or totally 
enclosed treatment facilities as defined in 40 CFR 260.10; or
    (3) Is recycled, without prior storage or accumulation, only in an 
on-site process subject to regulation under 40 CFR 261.6(c)(2); or
    (4) Is used oil managed under the requirements of 40 CFR 261.6(a)(4) 
and 40 CFR part 279; or
    (5) Is spent lead-acid batteries managed under the requirements of 
40 CFR part 266, subpart G; or
    (6) Is universal waste managed under 40 CFR 261.9 and 40 CFR part 
273.

[[Page 49]]

    (d) In determining the quantity of hazardous waste generated, a 
generator need not include:
    (1) Hazardous waste when it is removed from on-site storage; or
    (2) Hazardous waste produced by on-site treatment (including 
reclamation) of his hazardous waste, so long as the hazardous waste that 
is treated was counted once; or
    (3) Spent materials that are generated, reclaimed, and subsequently 
reused on-site, so long as such spent materials have been counted once.
    (e) If a generator generates acute hazardous waste in a calendar 
month in quantities greater than set forth below, all quantities of that 
acute hazardous waste are subject to full regulation under parts 262 
through 266, 268, and parts 270 and 124 of this chapter, and the 
notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA:
    (1) A total of one kilogram of acute hazardous wastes listed in 
Secs. 261.31, 261.32, or 261.33(e).
    (2) A total of 100 kilograms of any residue or contaminated soil, 
waste, or other debris resulting from the clean-up of a spill, into or 
on any land or water, of any acute hazardous wastes listed in 
Secs. 261.31, 261.32, or 261.33(e).
    [Comment: ``Full regulation'' means those regulations applicable to 
generators of greater than 1,000 kg of non-acutely hazardous waste in a 
calendar month.]
    (f) In order for acute hazardous wastes generated by a generator of 
acute hazardous wastes in quantities equal to or less than those set 
forth in paragraph (e)(1) or (2) of this section to be excluded from 
full regulation under this section, the generator must comply with the 
following requirements:
    (1) Section 262.11 of this chapter;
    (2) The generator may accumulate acute hazardous waste on-site. If 
he accumulates at any time acute hazardous wastes in quantities greater 
than those set forth in paragraph (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section, all 
of those accumulated wastes are subject to regulation under parts 262 
through 266, 268, and parts 270 and 124 of this chapter, and the 
applicable notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA. The time 
period of Sec. 262.34(a) of this chapter, for accumulation of wastes on-
site, begins when the accumulated wastes exceed the applicable exclusion 
limit;
    (3) A conditionally exempt small quantity generator may either treat 
or dispose of his acute hazardous waste in an on-site facility or ensure 
delivery to an off-site treatment, storage, or disposal facility, either 
of which, if located in the U.S., is:
    (i) Permitted under part 270 of this chapter;
    (ii) In interim status under parts 270 and 265 of this chapter;
    (iii) Authorized to manage hazardous waste by a State with a 
hazardous waste management program approved under part 271 of this 
chapter;
    (iv) Permitted, licensed, or registered by a State to manage 
municipal solid waste and, if managed in a municipal solid waste 
landfill is subject to Part 258 of this chapter;
    (v) Permitted, licensed, or registered by a State to manage non-
municipal non-hazardous waste and, if managed in a non-municipal non-
hazardous waste disposal unit after January 1, 1998, is subject to the 
requirements in Secs. 257.5 through 257.30 of this chapter; or
    (vi) A facility which:
    (A) Beneficially uses or reuses, or legitimately recycles or 
reclaims its waste; or
    (B) Treats its waste prior to beneficial use or reuse, or legitimate 
recycling or reclamation; or
    (vii) For universal waste managed under part 273 of this chapter, a 
universal waste handler or destination facility subject to the 
requirements of part 273 of this chapter.
    (g) In order for hazardous waste generated by a conditionally exempt 
small quantity generator in quantities of less than 100 kilograms of 
hazardous waste during a calendar month to be excluded from full 
regulation under this section, the generator must comply with the 
following requirements:
    (1) Section 262.11 of this chapter;
    (2) The conditionally exempt small quantity generator may accumulate 
hazardous waste on-site. If he accumulates at any time more than a total 
of 1000 kilograms of his hazardous wastes, all of those accumulated 
wastes are subject to regulation under the special provisions of part 
262 applicable to generators of between 100 kg and 1000 kg of hazardous 
waste in a calendar month as well as the requirements of parts 263

[[Page 50]]

through 266, 268, and parts 270 and 124 of this chapter, and the 
applicable notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA. The time 
period of Sec. 262.34(d) for accumulation of wastes on-site begins for a 
conditionally exempt small quantity generator when the accumulated 
wastes exceed 1000 kilograms;
    (3) A conditionally exempt small quantity generator may either treat 
or dispose of his hazardous waste in an on-site facility or ensure 
delivery to an off-site treatment, storage or disposal facility, either 
of which, if located in the U.S., is:
    (i) Permitted under part 270 of this chapter;
    (ii) In interim status under parts 270 and 265 of this chapter;
    (iii) Authorized to manage hazardous waste by a State with a 
hazardous waste management program approved under part 271 of this 
chapter;
    (iv) Permitted, licensed, or registered by a State to manage 
municipal solid waste and, if managed in a municipal solid waste 
landfill is subject to Part 258 of this chapter;
    (v) Permitted, licensed, or registered by a State to manage non-
municipal non-hazardous waste and, if managed in a non-municipal non-
hazardous waste disposal unit after January 1, 1998, is subject to the 
requirements in Secs. 257.5 through 257.30 of this chapter; or
    (vi) A facility which:
    (A) Beneficially uses or reuses, or legitimately recycles or 
reclaims its waste; or
    (B) Treats its waste prior to beneficial use or reuse, or legitimate 
recycling or reclamation; or
    (vii) For universal waste managed under part 273 of this chapter, a 
universal waste handler or destination facility subject to the 
requirements of part 273 of this chapter.
    (h) Hazardous waste subject to the reduced requirements of this 
section may be mixed with non-hazardous waste and remain subject to 
these reduced requirements even though the resultant mixture exceeds the 
quantity limitations identified in this section, unless the mixture 
meets any of the characteristics of hazardous waste identified in 
subpart C.
    (i) If any person mixes a solid waste with a hazardous waste that 
exceeds a quantity exclusion level of this section, the mixture is 
subject to full regulation.
    (j) If a conditionally exempt small quantity generator's wastes are 
mixed with used oil, the mixture is subject to part 279 of this chapter. 
Any material produced from such a mixture by processing, blending, or 
other treatment is also so regulated.
[51 FR 10174, Mar. 24, 1986, as amended at 51 FR 28682, Aug. 8, 1986; 51 
FR 40637, Nov. 7, 1986; 53 FR 27163, July 19, 1988; 58 FR 26424, May 3, 
1993; 60 FR 25541, May 11, 1995; 61 FR 34278, July 1, 1996; 63 FR 24968, 
May 6, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 24968, May 6, 1998, in Sec. 261.5, 
paragraph (j) was amended by removing the phrase ``if it is destined to 
be burned for energy recovery'' from the end of the first and second 
sentences, effective July 6, 1998.


<R05>
Sec. 261.6  Requirements for recyclable materials.

    (a)(1) Hazardous wastes that are recycled are subject to the 
requirements for generators, transporters, and storage facilities of 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, except for the materials listed 
in paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section. Hazardous wastes that 
are recycled will be known as ``recyclable materials.''
    (2) The following recyclable materials are not subject to the 
requirements of this section but are regulated under subparts C through 
H of part 266 of this chapter and all applicable provisions in parts 270 
and 124 of this chapter:
    (i) Recyclable materials used in a manner constituting disposal 
(subpart C);
    (ii) Hazardous wastes burned for energy recovery in boilers and 
industrial furnaces that are not regulated under subpart O of part 264 
or 265 of this chapter (subpart H);
    (iii) Recyclable materials from which precious metals are reclaimed 
(subpart F);
    (iv) Spent lead-acid batteries that are being reclaimed (subpart G).
    (3) The following recyclable materials are not subject to regulation 
under parts 262 through parts 266 or parts 268, 270 or 124 of this 
chapter, and are not subject to the notification requirements of section 
3010 of RCRA:

[[Page 51]]

    (i) Industrial ethyl alcohol that is reclaimed except that, unless 
provided otherwise in an international agreement as specified in 
Sec. 262.58:
    (A) A person initiating a shipment for reclamation in a foreign 
country, and any intermediary arranging for the shipment, must comply 
with the requirements applicable to a primary exporter in Secs. 262.53, 
262.56 (a)(1)-(4), (6), and (b), and 262.57, export such materials only 
upon consent of the receiving country and in conformance with the EPA 
Acknowledgment of Consent as defined in subpart E of part 262, and 
provide a copy of the EPA Acknowledgment of Consent to the shipment to 
the transporter transporting the shipment for export;
    (B) Transporters transporting a shipment for export may not accept a 
shipment if he knows the shipment does not conform to the EPA 
Acknowledgment of Consent, must ensure that a copy of the EPA 
Acknowledgment of Consent accompanies the shipment and must ensure that 
it is delivered to the facility designated by the person initiating the 
shipment.
    (ii) Scrap metal that is not excluded under Sec. 261.4(a)(13);
    (iii) Fuels produced from the refining of oil-bearing hazardous 
waste along with normal process streams at a petroleum refining facility 
if such wastes result from normal petroleum refining, production, and 
transportation practices (this exemption does not apply to fuels 
produced from oil recovered from oil-bearing hazardous waste, where such 
recovered oil is already excluded under Sec. 261.4(a)(12);
    (iv)(A) Hazardous waste fuel produced from oil-bearing hazardous 
wastes from petroleum refining, production, or transportation practices, 
or produced from oil reclaimed from such hazardous wastes, where such 
hazardous wastes are reintroduced into a process that does not use 
distillation or does not produce products from crude oil so long as the 
resulting fuel meets the used oil specification under Sec. 279.11 of 
this chapter and so long as no other hazardous wastes are used to 
produce the hazardous waste fuel;
    (B) Hazardous waste fuel produced from oil-bearing hazardous waste 
from petroleum refining production, and transportation practices, where 
such hazardous wastes are reintroduced into a refining process after a 
point at which contaminants are removed, so long as the fuel meets the 
used oil fuel specification under Sec. 279.11 of this chapter; and
    (C) Oil reclaimed from oil-bearing hazardous wastes from petroleum 
refining, production, and transportation practices, which reclaimed oil 
is burned as a fuel without reintroduction to a refining process, so 
long as the reclaimed oil meets the used oil fuel specification under 
Sec. 279.11 of this chapter; and
    (v) Petroleum coke produced from petroleum refinery hazardous wastes 
containing oil by the same person who generated the waste, unless the 
resulting coke product exceeds one or more of the characteristics of 
hazardous waste in part 261, subpart C.
    (4) Used oil that is recycled and is also a hazardous waste solely 
because it exhibits a hazardous characteristic is not subject to the 
requirements of parts 260 through 268 of this chapter, but is regulated 
under part 279 of this chapter. Used oil that is recycled includes any 
used oil which is reused, following its original use, for any purpose 
(including the purpose for which the oil was originally used). Such term 
includes, but is not limited to, oil which is re-refined, reclaimed, 
burned for energy recovery, or reprocessed.
    (5) Hazardous waste that is exported to or imported from designated 
member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) (as defined in Sec. 262.58(a)(1)) for purpose of 
recovery is subject to the requirements of 40 CFR part 262, subpart H, 
if it is subject to either the Federal manifesting requirements of 40 
CFR Part 262, to the universal waste management standards of 40 CFR Part 
273, or to State requirements analogous to 40 CFR Part 273.
    (b) Generators and transporters of recyclable materials are subject 
to the applicable requirements of parts 262 and 263 of this chapter and 
the notification requirements under section 3010 of RCRA, except as 
provided in paragraph (a) of this section.

[[Page 52]]

    (c)(1) Owners and operators of facilities that store recyclable 
materials before they are recycled are regulated under all applicable 
provisions of subparts A though L, AA, BB, and CC of parts 264 and 265, 
and under parts 124, 266, 268, and 270 of this chapter and the 
notification requirements under section 3010 of RCRA, except as provided 
in paragraph (a) of this section. (The recycling process itself is 
exempt from regulation except as provided in Sec. 261.6(d).)
    (2) Owners or operators of facilities that recycle recyclable 
materials without storing them before they are rcycled are subject to 
the following requirements, except as provided in paragraph (a) of this 
section:
    (i) Notification requirements under section 3010 of RCRA;
    (ii) Sections 265.71 and 265.72 (dealing with the use of the 
manifest and manifest discrepancies) of this chapter.
    (iii) Section 261.6(d) of this chapter.
    (d) Owners or operators of facilities subject to RCRA permitting 
requirements with hazardous waste management units that recycle 
hazardous wastes are subject to the requirements of subparts AA and BB 
of part 264 or 265 of this chapter.
[50 FR 49203, Nov. 29, 1985, as amended at 51 FR 28682, Aug. 8, 1986; 51 
FR 40637, Nov. 7, 1986; 52 FR 11821, Apr. 13, 1987; 55 FR 25493, June 
21, 1990; 56 FR 7207, Feb. 21, 1991; 56 FR 32692, July 17, 1991; 57 FR 
41612, Sept. 10, 1992; 59 FR 38545, July 28, 1994; 60 FR 25541, May 11, 
1995; 61 FR 16309, Apr. 12, 1996; 61 FR 59950, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 
26019, May 12, 1997; 63 FR 24968, May 6, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 24968, May 6, 1998, in Sec. 261.6, 
paragraphs (a)(3)(iv)(A)-(C) were amended by revising the reference 
``266.40(e)'' to read ``279.11'', effective July 6, 1998.


<R05>
Sec. 261.7  Residues of hazardous waste in empty containers.

    (a)(1) Any hazardous waste remaining in either (i) an empty 
container or (ii) an inner liner removed from an empty container, as 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section, is not subject to regulation 
under parts 261 through 265, or part 268, 270 or 124 of this chapter or 
to the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA.
    (2) Any hazardous waste in either (i) a container that is not empty 
or (ii) an inner liner removed from a container that is not empty, as 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section, is subject to regulation under 
parts 261 through 265, and parts 268, 270 and 124 of this chapter and to 
the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA.
    (b)(1) A container or an inner liner removed from a container that 
has held any hazardous waste, except a waste that is a compressed gas or 
that is identified as an acute hazardous waste listed in Secs. 261.31, 
261.32, or 261.33(e) of this chapter is empty if:
    (i) All wastes have been removed that can be removed using the 
practices commonly employed to remove materials from that type of 
container, e.g., pouring, pumping, and aspirating, and
    (ii) No more than 2.5 centimeters (one inch) of residue remain on 
the bottom of the container or inner liner, or
    (iii)(A) No more than 3 percent by weight of the total capacity of 
the container remains in the container or inner liner if the container 
is less than or equal to 110 gallons in size, or
    (B) No more than 0.3 percent by weight of the total capacity of the 
container remains in the container or inner liner if the container is 
greater than 110 gallons in size.
    (2) A container that has held a hazardous waste that is a compressed 
gas is empty when the pressure in the container approaches atmospheric.
    (3) A container or an inner liner removed from a container that has 
held an acute hazardous waste listed in Secs. 261.31, 261.32, or 
261.33(e) is empty if:
    (i) The container or inner liner has been triple rinsed using a 
solvent capable of removing the commercial chemical product or 
manufacturing chemical intermediate;
    (ii) The container or inner liner has been cleaned by another method 
that has been shown in the scientific literature, or by tests conducted 
by the generator, to achieve equivalent removal; or
    (iii) In the case of a container, the inner liner that prevented 
contact of the commercial chemical product or

[[Page 53]]

manufacturing chemical intermediate with the container, has been 
removed.
[45 FR 78529, Nov. 25, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 36097, Aug. 18, 1982; 
48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 FR 1999, Jan. 14, 1985; 51 FR 40637, Nov. 
7, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 261.8  PCB wastes regulated under Toxic Substance Control Act.

    The disposal of PCB-containing dielectric fluid and electric 
equipment containing such fluid authorized for use and regulated under 
part 761 of this chapter and that are hazardous only because they fail 
the test for the Toxicity Characteristic (Hazardous Waste Codes D018 
through D043 only) are exempt from regulation under parts 261 through 
265, and parts 268, 270, and 124 of this chapter, and the notification 
requirements of section 3010 of RCRA.
[55 FR 11862, Mar. 29, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 261.9  Requirements for Universal Waste.

    The wastes listed in this section are exempt from regulation under 
parts 262 through 270 of this chapter except as specified in part 273 of 
this chapter and, therefore are not fully regulated as hazardous waste. 
The wastes listed in this section are subject to regulation under 40 CFR 
part 273:
    (a) Batteries as described in 40 CFR 273.2;
    (b) Pesticides as described in 40 CFR 273.3; and
    (c) Thermostats as described in 40 CFR 273.4.
[60 FR 25541, May 11, 1995]


<R04>
  Subpart B--Criteria for Identifying the Characteristics of Hazardous 
                  Waste and for Listing Hazardous Waste


<R05>
Sec. 261.10  Criteria for identifying the characteristics of hazardous waste.

    (a) The Administrator shall identify and define a characteristic of 
hazardous waste in subpart C only upon determining that:
    (1) A solid waste that exhibits the characteristic may:
    (i) Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality 
or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, 
illness; or
    (ii) Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health 
or the environment when it is improperly treated, stored, transported, 
disposed of or otherwise managed; and
    (2) The characteristic can be:
    (i) Measured by an available standardized test method which is 
reasonably within the capability of generators of solid waste or private 
sector laboratories that are available to serve generators of solid 
waste; or
    (ii) Reasonably detected by generators of solid waste through their 
knowledge of their waste.
    (b) [Reserved].


<R05>
Sec. 261.11  Criteria for listing hazardous waste.

    (a) The Administrator shall list a solid waste as a hazardous waste 
only upon determining that the solid waste meets one of the following 
criteria:
    (1) It exhibits any of the characteristics of hazardous waste 
identified in subpart C.
    (2) It has been found to be fatal to humans in low doses or, in the 
absence of data on human toxicity, it has been shown in studies to have 
an oral LD 50 toxicity (rat) of less than 50 milligrams per kilogram, an 
inhalation LC 50 toxicity (rat) of less than 2 milligrams per liter, or 
a dermal LD 50 toxicity (rabbit) of less than 200 milligrams per 
kilogram or is otherwise capable of causing or significantly 
contributing to an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating 
reversible, illness. (Waste listed in accordance with these criteria 
will be designated Acute Hazardous Waste.)
    (3) It contains any of the toxic constituents listed in appendix 
VIII and, after considering the following factors, the Administrator 
concludes that the waste is capable of posing a substantial present or 
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly 
treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed:
    (i) The nature of the toxicity presented by the constituent.
    (ii) The concentration of the constituent in the waste.
    (iii) The potential of the constituent or any toxic degradation 
product of the constituent to migrate from the waste into the 
environment under the types

[[Page 54]]

of improper management considered in paragraph (a)(3)(vii) of this 
section.
    (iv) The persistence of the constituent or any toxic degradation 
product of the constituent.
    (v) The potential for the constituent or any toxic degradation 
product of the constituent to degrade into non-harmful constituents and 
the rate of degradation.
    (vi) The degree to which the constituent or any degradation product 
of the constituent bioaccumulates in ecosystems.
    (vii) The plausible types of improper management to which the waste 
could be subjected.
    (viii) The quantities of the waste generated at individual 
generation sites or on a regional or national basis.
    (ix) The nature and severity of the human health and environmental 
damage that has occurred as a result of the improper management of 
wastes containing the constituent.
    (x) Action taken by other governmental agencies or regulatory 
programs based on the health or environmental hazard posed by the waste 
or waste constituent.
    (xi) Such other factors as may be appropriate.

Substances will be listed on appendix VIII only if they have been shown 
in scientific studies to have toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic or 
teratogenic effects on humans or other life forms.
    (Wastes listed in accordance with these criteria will be designated 
Toxic wastes.)
    (b) The Administrator may list classes or types of solid waste as 
hazardous waste if he has reason to believe that individual wastes, 
within the class or type of waste, typically or frequently are hazardous 
under the definition of hazardous waste found in section 1004(5) of the 
Act.
    (c) The Administrator will use the criteria for listing specified in 
this section to establish the exclusion limits referred to in 
Sec. 261.5(c).
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, as amended at 55 FR 18726, May 4, 1990; 57 
FR 14, Jan. 2, 1992]


<R04>
              Subpart C--Characteristics of Hazardous Waste


<R05>
Sec. 261.20  General.

    (a) A solid waste, as defined in Sec. 261.2, which is not excluded 
from regulation as a hazardous waste under Sec. 261.4(b), is a hazardous 
waste if it exhibits any of the characteristics identified in this 
subpart.
[Comment: Sec. 262.11 of this chapter sets forth the generator's 
responsibility to determine whether his waste exhibits one or more of 
the characteristics identified in this subpart]
    (b) A hazardous waste which is identified by a characteristic in 
this subpart is assigned every EPA Hazardous Waste Number that is 
applicable as set forth in this subpart. This number must be used in 
complying with the notification requirements of section 3010 of the Act 
and all applicable recordkeeping and reporting requirements under parts 
262 through 265, 268, and 270 of this chapter.
    (c) For purposes of this subpart, the Administrator will consider a 
sample obtained using any of the applicable sampling methods specified 
in appendix I to be a representative sample within the meaning of part 
260 of this chapter.
[Comment: Since the appendix I sampling methods are not being formally 
adopted by the Administrator, a person who desires to employ an 
alternative sampling method is not required to demonstrate the 
equivalency of his method under the procedures set forth in Secs. 260.20 
and 260.21.]
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, as amended at 51 FR 40636, Nov. 7, 1986; 55 
FR 22684, June 1, 1990; 56 FR 3876, Jan. 31, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 261.21  Characteristic of ignitability.

    (a) A solid waste exhibits the characteristic of ignitability if a 
representative sample of the waste has any of the following properties:
    (1) It is a liquid, other than an aqueous solution containing less 
than 24 percent alcohol by volume and has flash point less than 60 deg.C 
(140 deg.F), as determined by a Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester, using 
the test method specified in ASTM Standard D-93-79 or D-93-80 
(incorporated by reference, see Sec. 260.11), or a Setaflash Closed Cup 
Tester, using the test method specified

[[Page 55]]

in ASTM Standard D-3278-78 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 260.11), 
or as determined by an equivalent test method approved by the 
Administrator under procedures set forth in Secs. 260.20 and 260.21.
    (2) It is not a liquid and is capable, under standard temperature 
and pressure, of causing fire through friction, absorption of moisture 
or spontaneous chemical changes and, when ignited, burns so vigorously 
and persistently that it creates a hazard.
    (3) It is an ignitable compressed gas as defined in 49 CFR 173.300 
and as determined by the test methods described in that regulation or 
equivalent test methods approved by the Administrator under Secs. 260.20 
and 260.21.
    (4) It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
    (b) A solid waste that exhibits the characteristic of ignitability 
has the EPA Hazardous Waste Number of D001.
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 35247, July 7, 1981; 55 
FR 22684, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 261.22  Characteristic of corrosivity.

    (a) A solid waste exhibits the characteristic of corrosivity if a 
representative sample of the waste has either of the following 
properties:
    (1) It is aqueous and has a pH less than or equal to 2 or greater 
than or equal to 12.5, as determined by a pH meter using Method 9040 in 
``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' 
EPA Publication SW-846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of 
this chapter.
    (2) It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE 1020) at a rate greater 
than 6.35 mm (0.250 inch) per year at a test temperature of 55 deg.C 
(130 deg.F) as determined by the test method specified in NACE (National 
Association of Corrosion Engineers) Standard TM-01-69 as standardized in 
``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' 
EPA Publication SW-846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of 
this chapter.
    (b) A solid waste that exhibits the characteristic of corrosivity 
has the EPA Hazardous Waste Number of D002.
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 35247, July 7, 1981; 55 
FR 22684, June 1, 1990; 58 FR 46049, Aug. 31, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 261.23  Characteristic of reactivity.

    (a) A solid waste exhibits the characteristic of reactivity if a 
representative sample of the waste has any of the following properties:
    (1) It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change 
without detonating.
    (2) It reacts violently with water.
    (3) It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
    (4) When mixed with water, it generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes 
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the 
environment.
    (5) It is a cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which, when exposed to 
pH conditions between 2 and 12.5, can generate toxic gases, vapors or 
fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or 
the environment.
    (6) It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is 
subjected to a strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
    (7) It is readily capable of detonation or explosive decomposition 
or reaction at standard temperature and pressure.
    (8) It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.51, or a 
Class A explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53 or a Class B explosive as 
defined in 49 CFR 173.88.
    (b) A solid waste that exhibits the characteristic of reactivity has 
the EPA Hazardous Waste Number of D003.
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, as amended at 55 FR 22684, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 261.24  Toxicity characteristic.

    (a) A solid waste exhibits the characteristic of toxicity if, using 
the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure, test Method 1311 in 
``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' 
EPA Publication SW-846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of 
this chapter, the extract from a representative sample of the waste 
contains any of the contaminants listed in table 1 at the concentration 
equal to or greater than the respective value given in that table. Where 
the waste contains less than 0.5 percent filterable solids, the waste 
itself, after filtering using the methodology outlined in Method 1311, 
is

[[Page 56]]

considered to be the extract for the purpose of this section.
    (b) A solid waste that exhibits the characteristic of toxicity has 
the EPA Hazardous Waste Number specified in Table I which corresponds to 
the toxic contaminant causing it to be hazardous.

     Table 1--Maximum Concentration of Contaminants for the Toxicity
                             Characteristic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Regulatory
   EPA HW No.\1\             Contaminant          CAS No.\2\  Level (mg/
                                                                  L)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
D004                 Arsenic...................    7440-38-2        5.0
D005                 Barium....................    7440-39-3      100.0
D018                 Benzene...................      71-43-2        0.5
D006                 Cadmium...................    7440-43-9        1.0
D019                 Carbon tetrachloride......      56-23-5        0.5
D020                 Chlordane.................      57-74-9       0.03
D021                 Chlorobenzene.............     108-90-7      100.0
D022                 Chloroform................      67-66-3        6.0
D007                 Chromium..................    7440-47-3        5.0
D023                 o-Cresol..................      95-48-7  \4\ 200.0
D024                 m-Cresol..................     108-39-4  \4\ 200.0
D025                 p-Cresol..................     106-44-5  \4\ 200.0
D026                 Cresol....................  ...........  \4\ 200.0
D016                 2,4-D.....................      94-75-7       10.0
D027                 1,4-Dichlorobenzene.......     106-46-7        7.5
D028                 1,2-Dichloroethane........     107-06-2        0.5
D029                 1,1-Dichloroethylene......      75-35-4        0.7
D030                 2,4-Dinitrotoluene........     121-14-2   \3\ 0.13
D012                 Endrin....................      72-20-8       0.02
D031                 Heptachlor (and its             76-44-8      0.008
                      epoxide).
D032                 Hexachlorobenzene.........     118-74-1   \3\ 0.13
D033                 Hexachlorobutadiene.......      87-68-3        0.5
D034                 Hexachloroethane..........      67-72-1        3.0
D008                 Lead......................    7439-92-1        5.0
D013                 Lindane...................      58-89-9        0.4
D009                 Mercury...................    7439-97-6        0.2
D014                 Methoxychlor..............      72-43-5       10.0
D035                  Methyl ethyl ketone......      78-93-3      200.0
D036                 Nitrobenzene..............      98-95-3        2.0
D037                 Pentrachlorophenol........      87-86-5      100.0
D038                 Pyridine..................     110-86-1    \3\ 5.0
D010                 Selenium..................    7782-49-2        1.0
D011                 Silver....................    7440-22-4        5.0
D039                 Tetrachloroethylene.......     127-18-4        0.7
D015                 Toxaphene.................    8001-35-2        0.5
D040                 Trichloroethylene.........      79-01-6        0.5
D041                 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol.....      95-95-4      400.0
D042                 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol.....      88-06-2        2.0
D017                 2,4,5-TP (Silvex).........      93-72-1        1.0
D043                 Vinyl chloride............      75-01-4        0.2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Hazardous waste number.
\2\ Chemical abstracts service number.
\3\ Quantitation limit is greater than the calculated regulatory level.
  The quantitation limit therefore becomes the regulatory level.
\4\ If o-, m-, and p-Cresol concentrations cannot be differentiated, the
  total cresol (D026) concentration is used. The regulatory level of
  total cresol is 200 mg/l.

[55 FR 11862, Mar. 29, 1990, as amended at 55 FR 22684, June 1, 1990; 55 
FR 26987, June 29, 1990; 58 FR 46049, Aug. 31, 1993]


<R04>
                  Subpart D--Lists of Hazardous Wastes


<R05>
Sec. 261.30  General.

    (a) A solid waste is a hazardous waste if it is listed in this 
subpart, unless it has been excluded from this list under Secs. 260.20 
and 260.22.
    (b) The Administrator will indicate his basis for listing the 
classes or types of wastes listed in this subpart by employing one or 
more of the following Hazard Codes:

Ignitable Waste...............................  (I)
Corrosive Waste...............................  (C)
Reactive Waste................................  (R)
Toxicity Characteristic Waste.................  (E)
Acute Hazardous Waste.........................  (H)
Toxic Waste...................................  (T)


Appendix VII identifies the constituent which caused the Administrator 
to list the waste as a Toxicity Characteristic Waste (E) or Toxic Waste 
(T) in Secs. 261.31 and 261.32.
    (c) Each hazardous waste listed in this subpart is assigned an EPA 
Hazardous Waste Number which precedes the name of the waste. This number 
must be used in complying with the notification requirements of Section 
3010 of the Act and certain recordkeeping and reporting requirements 
under parts 262 through 265, 268, and part 270 of this chapter.
    (d) The following hazardous wastes listed in Sec. 261.31 or 
Sec. 261.32 are subject to the exclusion limits for acutely hazardous 
wastes established in Sec. 261.5: EPA Hazardous Wastes Nos. FO20, FO21, 
FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27.
[45 FR 33119, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 
FR 2000, Jan. 14, 1985; 51 FR 40636, Nov. 7, 1986; 55 FR 11863, Mar. 29, 
1990]

[[Page 57]]

Sec. 261.31    Hazardous wastes from non-specific sources.Secs. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Industry and EPA hazardous
           waste No.                  Hazardous waste        Hazard code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Generic:
  F001.........................  The following spent        (T)
                                  halogenated solvents
                                  used in degreasing:
                                  Tetrachloroethylene,
                                  trichloroethylene,
                                  methylene chloride,
                                  1,1,1-trichloroethane,
                                  carbon tetrachloride,
                                  and chlorinated
                                  fluorocarbons; all spent
                                  solvent mixtures/blends
                                  used in degreasing
                                  containing, before use,
                                  a total of ten percent
                                  or more (by volume) of
                                  one or more of the above
                                  halogenated solvents or
                                  those solvents listed in
                                  F002, F004, and F005;
                                  and still bottoms from
                                  the recovery of these
                                  spent solvents and spent
                                  solvent mixtures.
  F002.........................  The following spent
                                  halogenated solvents:
                                  Tetrachloroethylene,
                                  methylene chloride,
                                  trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-
                                  trichloroethane,
                                  chlorobenzene, 1,1,2-
                                  trichloro-1,2,2-
                                  trifluoroethane, ortho-
                                  dichlorobenzene,
                                  trichlorofluoromethane,
                                  and 1,1,2-
                                  trichloroethane; all
                                  spent solvent mixtures/
                                  blends containing,
                                  before use, a total of
                                  ten percent or more (by
                                  volume) of one or more
                                  of the above halogenated
                                  solvents or those listed
                                  in F001, F004, or F005;
                                  and still bottoms from
                                  the recovery of these
                                  spent solvents and spent
                                  solvent mixtures.
                                                            (T)
  F003.........................  The following spent non-   (I)*
                                  halogenated solvents:
                                  Xylene, acetone, ethyl
                                  acetate, ethyl benzene,
                                  ethyl ether, methyl
                                  isobutyl ketone, n-butyl
                                  alcohol, cyclohexanone,
                                  and methanol; all spent
                                  solvent mixtures/blends
                                  containing, before use,
                                  only the above spent non-
                                  halogenated solvents;
                                  and all spent solvent
                                  mixtures/blends
                                  containing, before use,
                                  one or more of the above
                                  non-halogenated
                                  solvents, and, a total
                                  of ten percent or more
                                  (by volume) of one or
                                  more of those solvents
                                  listed in F001, F002,
                                  F004, and F005; and
                                  still bottoms from the
                                  recovery of these spent
                                  solvents and spent
                                  solvent mixtures.
  F004.........................  The following spent non-   (T)
                                  halogenated solvents:
                                  Cresols and cresylic
                                  acid, and nitrobenzene;
                                  all spent solvent
                                  mixtures/blends
                                  containing, before use,
                                  a total of ten percent
                                  or more (by volume) of
                                  one or more of the above
                                  non-halogenated solvents
                                  or those solvents listed
                                  in F001, F002, and F005;
                                  and still bottoms from
                                  the recovery of these
                                  spent solvents and spent
                                  solvent mixtures.
  F005.........................  The following spent non-   (I,T)
                                  halogenated solvents:
                                  Toluene, methyl ethyl
                                  ketone, carbon
                                  disulfide, isobutanol,
                                  pyridine, benzene, 2-
                                  ethoxyethanol, and 2-
                                  nitropropane; all spent
                                  solvent mixtures/blends
                                  containing, before use,
                                  a total of ten percent
                                  or more (by volume) of
                                  one or more of the above
                                  non-halogenated solvents
                                  or those solvents listed
                                  in F001, F002, or F004;
                                  and still bottoms from
                                  the recovery of these
                                  spent solvents and spent
                                  solvent mixtures.
  F006.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludges from
                                  electroplating
                                  operations except from
                                  the following processes:
                                  (1) Sulfuric acid
                                  anodizing of aluminum;
                                  (2) tin plating on
                                  carbon steel; (3) zinc
                                  plating (segregated
                                  basis) on carbon steel;
                                  (4) aluminum or zinc-
                                  aluminum plating on
                                  carbon steel; (5)
                                  cleaning/stripping
                                  associated with tin,
                                  zinc and aluminum
                                  plating on carbon steel;
                                  and (6) chemical etching
                                  and milling of aluminum.
  F007.........................  Spent cyanide plating      (R, T)
                                  bath solutions from
                                  electroplating
                                  operations.
  F008.........................  Plating bath residues      (R, T)
                                  from the bottom of
                                  plating baths from
                                  electroplating
                                  operations where
                                  cyanides are used in the
                                  process.
  F009.........................  Spent stripping and        (R, T)
                                  cleaning bath solutions
                                  from electroplating
                                  operations where
                                  cyanides are used in the
                                  process.
  F010.........................  Quenching bath residues    (R, T)
                                  from oil baths from
                                  metal heat treating
                                  operations where
                                  cyanides are used in the
                                  process.
  F011.........................  Spent cyanide solutions    (R, T)
                                  from salt bath pot
                                  cleaning from metal heat
                                  treating operations.
  F012.........................  Quenching waste water      (T)
                                  treatment sludges from
                                  metal heat treating
                                  operations where
                                  cyanides are used in the
                                  process.
  F019.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludges from the
                                  chemical conversion
                                  coating of aluminum
                                  except from zirconium
                                  phosphating in aluminum
                                  can washing when such
                                  phosphating is an
                                  exclusive conversion
                                  coating process.
  F020.........................  Wastes (except wastewater  (H)
                                  and spent carbon from
                                  hydrogen chloride
                                  purification) from the
                                  production or
                                  manufacturing use (as a
                                  reactant, chemical
                                  intermediate, or
                                  component in a
                                  formulating process) of
                                  tri- or
                                  tetrachlorophenol, or of
                                  intermediates used to
                                  produce their pesticide
                                  derivatives. (This
                                  listing does not include
                                  wastes from the
                                  production of
                                  Hexachlorophene from
                                  highly purified 2,4,5-
                                  trichlorophenol.).
  F021.........................  Wastes (except wastewater  (H)
                                  and spent carbon from
                                  hydrogen chloride
                                  purification) from the
                                  production or
                                  manufacturing use (as a
                                  reactant, chemical
                                  intermediate, or
                                  component in a
                                  formulating process) of
                                  pentachlorophenol, or of
                                  intermediates used to
                                  produce its derivatives.
  F022.........................  Wastes (except wastewater  (H)
                                  and spent carbon from
                                  hydrogen chloride
                                  purification) from the
                                  manufacturing use (as a
                                  reactant, chemical
                                  intermediate, or
                                  component in a
                                  formulating process) of
                                  tetra-, penta-, or
                                  hexachlorobenzenes under
                                  alkaline conditions.

[[Page 58]]

  F023.........................  Wastes (except wastewater  (H)
                                  and spent carbon from
                                  hydrogen chloride
                                  purification) from the
                                  production of materials
                                  on equipment previously
                                  used for the production
                                  or manufacturing use (as
                                  a reactant, chemical
                                  intermediate, or
                                  component in a
                                  formulating process) of
                                  tri- and
                                  tetrachlorophenols.
                                  (This listing does not
                                  include wastes from
                                  equipment used only for
                                  the production or use of
                                  Hexachlorophene from
                                  highly purified 2,4,5-
                                  trichlorophenol.).
  F024.........................  Process wastes, including  (T)
                                  but not limited to,
                                  distillation residues,
                                  heavy ends, tars, and
                                  reactor clean-out
                                  wastes, from the
                                  production of certain
                                  chlorinated aliphatic
                                  hydrocarbons by free
                                  radical catalyzed
                                  processes. These
                                  chlorinated aliphatic
                                  hydrocarbons are those
                                  having carbon chain
                                  lengths ranging from one
                                  to and including five,
                                  with varying amounts and
                                  positions of chlorine
                                  substitution. (This
                                  listing does not include
                                  wastewaters, wastewater
                                  treatment sludges, spent
                                  catalysts, and wastes
                                  listed in Sec.  261.31
                                  or Sec.  261.32.).
  F025.........................  Condensed light ends,      (T)
                                  spent filters and filter
                                  aids, and spent
                                  desiccant wastes from
                                  the production of
                                  certain chlorinated
                                  aliphatic hydrocarbons,
                                  by free radical
                                  catalyzed processes.
                                  These chlorinated
                                  aliphatic hydrocarbons
                                  are those having carbon
                                  chain lengths ranging
                                  from one to and
                                  including five, with
                                  varying amounts and
                                  positions of chlorine
                                  substitution.
  F026.........................  Wastes (except wastewater  (H)
                                  and spent carbon from
                                  hydrogen chloride
                                  purification) from the
                                  production of materials
                                  on equipment previously
                                  used for the
                                  manufacturing use (as a
                                  reactant, chemical
                                  intermediate, or
                                  component in a
                                  formulating process) of
                                  tetra-, penta-, or
                                  hexachlorobenzene under
                                  alkaline conditions.
  F027.........................  Discarded unused           (H)
                                  formulations containing
                                  tri-, tetra-, or
                                  pentachlorophenol or
                                  discarded unused
                                  formulations containing
                                  compounds derived from
                                  these chlorophenols.
                                  (This listing does not
                                  include formulations
                                  containing
                                  Hexachlorophene
                                  sythesized from
                                  prepurified 2,4,5-
                                  trichlorophenol as the
                                  sole component.).
  F028.........................  Residues resulting from    (T)
                                  the incineration or
                                  thermal treatment of
                                  soil contaminated with
                                  EPA Hazardous Waste Nos.
                                  F020, F021, F022, F023,
                                  F026, and F027.
  F032.........................  Wastewaters (except those  (T)
                                  that have not come into
                                  contact with process
                                  contaminants), process
                                  residuals, preservative
                                  drippage, and spent
                                  formulations from wood
                                  preserving processes
                                  generated at plants that
                                  currently use or have
                                  previously used
                                  chlorophenolic
                                  formulations (except
                                  potentially cross-
                                  contaminated wastes that
                                  have had the F032 waste
                                  code deleted in
                                  accordance with Sec.
                                  261.35 of this chapter
                                  or potentially cross-
                                  contaminated wastes that
                                  are otherwise currently
                                  regulated as hazardous
                                  wastes (i.e., F034 or
                                  F035), and where the
                                  generator does not
                                  resume or initiate use
                                  of chlorophenolic
                                  formulations). This
                                  listing does not include
                                  K001 bottom sediment
                                  sludge from the
                                  treatment of wastewater
                                  from wood preserving
                                  processes that use
                                  creosote and/or
                                  pentachlorophenol.
  F034.........................  Wastewaters (except those  (T)
                                  that have not come into
                                  contact with process
                                  contaminants), process
                                  residuals, preservative
                                  drippage, and spent
                                  formulations from wood
                                  preserving processes
                                  generated at plants that
                                  use creosote
                                  formulations. This
                                  listing does not include
                                  K001 bottom sediment
                                  sludge from the
                                  treatment of wastewater
                                  from wood preserving
                                  processes that use
                                  creosote and/or
                                  pentachlorophenol.
  F035.........................  Wastewaters (except those  (T)
                                  that have not come into
                                  contact with process
                                  contaminants), process
                                  residuals, preservative
                                  drippage, and spent
                                  formulations from wood
                                  preserving processes
                                  generated at plants that
                                  use inorganic
                                  preservatives containing
                                  arsenic or chromium.
                                  This listing does not
                                  include K001 bottom
                                  sediment sludge from the
                                  treatment of wastewater
                                  from wood preserving
                                  processes that use
                                  creosote and/or
                                  pentachlorophenol.
  F037.........................  Petroleum refinery         (T)
                                  primary oil/water/solids
                                  separation sludge--Any
                                  sludge generated from
                                  the gravitational
                                  separation of oil/water/
                                  solids during the
                                  storage or treatment of
                                  process wastewaters and
                                  oily cooling wastewaters
                                  from petroleum
                                  refineries. Such sludges
                                  include, but are not
                                  limited to, those
                                  generated in: oil/water/
                                  solids separators; tanks
                                  and impoundments;
                                  ditches and other
                                  conveyances; sumps; and
                                  stormwater units
                                  receiving dry weather
                                  flow. Sludge generated
                                  in stormwater units that
                                  do not receive dry
                                  weather flow, sludges
                                  generated from non-
                                  contact once-through
                                  cooling waters
                                  segregated for treatment
                                  from other process or
                                  oily cooling waters,
                                  sludges generated in
                                  aggressive biological
                                  treatment units as
                                  defined in Sec.
                                  261.31(b)(2) (including
                                  sludges generated in one
                                  or more additional units
                                  after wastewaters have
                                  been treated in
                                  aggressive biological
                                  treatment units) and
                                  K051 wastes are not
                                  included in this listing.

[[Page 59]]

  F038.........................  Petroleum refinery         (T)
                                  secondary (emulsified)
                                  oil/water/solids
                                  separation sludge--Any
                                  sludge and/or float
                                  generated from the
                                  physical and/or chemical
                                  separation of oil/water/
                                  solids in process
                                  wastewaters and oily
                                  cooling wastewaters from
                                  petroleum refineries.
                                  Such wastes include, but
                                  are not limited to, all
                                  sludges and floats
                                  generated in: induced
                                  air flotation (IAF)
                                  units, tanks and
                                  impoundments, and all
                                  sludges generated in DAF
                                  units. Sludges generated
                                  in stormwater units that
                                  do not receive dry
                                  weather flow, sludges
                                  generated from non-
                                  contact once-through
                                  cooling waters
                                  segregated for treatment
                                  from other process or
                                  oily cooling waters,
                                  sludges and floats
                                  generated in aggressive
                                  biological treatment
                                  units as defined in Sec.
                                   261.31(b)(2) (including
                                  sludges and floats
                                  generated in one or more
                                  additional units after
                                  wastewaters have been
                                  treated in aggressive
                                  biological treatment
                                  units) and F037, K048,
                                  and K051 wastes are not
                                  included in this listing.
  F039.........................  Leachate (liquids that     (T)
                                  have percolated through
                                  land disposed wastes)
                                  resulting from the
                                  disposal of more than
                                  one restricted waste
                                  classified as hazardous
                                  under subpart D of this
                                  part. (Leachate
                                  resulting from the
                                  disposal of one or more
                                  of the following EPA
                                  Hazardous Wastes and no
                                  other Hazardous Wastes
                                  retains its EPA
                                  Hazardous Waste
                                  Number(s): F020, F021,
                                  F022, F026, F027, and/or
                                  F028.).
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[46 FR 4617, Jan. 16, 1981, as amended at 60 FR 33913, June 29, 1995]
    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 261.31, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


Sec. 261.32    Hazardous wastes from specific sources.Secs. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Industry and EPA hazardous
           waste No.                  Hazardous waste        Hazard code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wood preservation: K001........  Bottom sediment sludge     (T)
                                  from the treatment of
                                  wastewaters from wood
                                  preserving processes
                                  that use creosote and/or
                                  pentachlorophenol.

[[Page 60]]

Inorganic pigments:
  K002.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of chrome
                                  yellow and orange
                                  pigments.
  K003.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of molybdate
                                  orange pigments.
  K004.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of zinc
                                  yellow pigments.
  K005.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of chrome
                                  green pigments.
  K006.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of chrome
                                  oxide green pigments
                                  (anhydrous and hydrated).
  K007.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of iron blue
                                  pigments.
  K008.........................  Oven residue from the      (T)
                                  production of chrome
                                  oxide green pigments.
Organic chemicals:
  K009.........................  Distillation bottoms from  (T)
                                  the production of
                                  acetaldehyde from
                                  ethylene.
  K010.........................  Distillation side cuts     (T)
                                  from the production of
                                  acetaldehyde from
                                  ethylene.
  K011.........................  Bottom stream from the     (R, T)
                                  wastewater stripper in
                                  the production of
                                  acrylonitrile.
  K013.........................  Bottom stream from the     (R, T)
                                  acetonitrile column in
                                  the production of
                                  acrylonitrile.
  K014.........................  Bottoms from the           (T)
                                  acetonitrile
                                  purification column in
                                  the production of
                                  acrylonitrile.
  K015.........................  Still bottoms from the     (T)
                                  distillation of benzyl
                                  chloride.
  K016.........................  Heavy ends or              (T)
                                  distillation residues
                                  from the production of
                                  carbon tetrachloride.
  K017.........................  Heavy ends (still          (T)
                                  bottoms) from the
                                  purification column in
                                  the production of
                                  epichlorohydrin.
  K018.........................  Heavy ends from the        (T)
                                  fractionation column in
                                  ethyl chloride
                                  production.
  K019.........................  Heavy ends from the        (T)
                                  distillation of ethylene
                                  dichloride in ethylene
                                  dichloride production.
  K020.........................  Heavy ends from the        (T)
                                  distillation of vinyl
                                  chloride in vinyl
                                  chloride monomer
                                  production.
  K021.........................  Aqueous spent antimony     (T)
                                  catalyst waste from
                                  fluoromethanes
                                  production.
  K022.........................  Distillation bottom tars   (T)
                                  from the production of
                                  phenol/acetone from
                                  cumene.
  K023.........................  Distillation light ends    (T)
                                  from the production of
                                  phthalic anhydride from
                                  naphthalene.
  K024.........................  Distillation bottoms from  (T)
                                  the production of
                                  phthalic anhydride from
                                  naphthalene.
  K025.........................  Distillation bottoms from  (T)
                                  the production of
                                  nitrobenzene by the
                                  nitration of benzene.
  K026.........................  Stripping still tails      (T)
                                  from the production of
                                  methy ethyl pyridines.
  K027.........................  Centrifuge and             (R, T)
                                  distillation residues
                                  from toluene
                                  diisocyanate production.
  K028.........................  Spent catalyst from the    (T)
                                  hydrochlorinator reactor
                                  in the production of
                                  1,1,1-trichloroethane.
  K029.........................  Waste from the product     (T)
                                  steam stripper in the
                                  production of 1,1,1-
                                  trichloroethane.
  K030.........................  Column bottoms or heavy    (T)
                                  ends from the combined
                                  production of
                                  trichloroethylene and
                                  perchloroethylene.
  K083.........................  Distillation bottoms from  (T)
                                  aniline production.
  K085.........................  Distillation or            (T)
                                  fractionation column
                                  bottoms from the
                                  production of
                                  chlorobenzenes.
  K093.........................  Distillation light ends    (T)
                                  from the production of
                                  phthalic anhydride from
                                  ortho-xylene.
  K094.........................  Distillation bottoms from  (T)
                                  the production of
                                  phthalic anhydride from
                                  ortho-xylene.
  K095.........................  Distillation bottoms from  (T)
                                  the production of 1,1,1-
                                  trichloroethane.
  K096.........................  Heavy ends from the heavy  (T)
                                  ends column from the
                                  production of 1,1,1-
                                  trichloroethane.
  K103.........................  Process residues from      (T)
                                  aniline extraction from
                                  the production of
                                  aniline.
  K104.........................  Combined wastewater        (T)
                                  streams generated from
                                  nitrobenzene/aniline
                                  production.
  K105.........................  Separated aqueous stream   (T)
                                  from the reactor product
                                  washing step in the
                                  production of
                                  chlorobenzenes.
  K107.........................  Column bottoms from        (C,T)
                                  product separation from
                                  the production of 1,1-
                                  dimethyl-hydrazine
                                  (UDMH) from carboxylic
                                  acid hydrazines.
  K108.........................  Condensed column           (I,T)
                                  overheads from product
                                  separation and condensed
                                  reactor vent gases from
                                  the production of 1,1-
                                  dimethylhydrazine (UDMH)
                                  from carboxylic acid
                                  hydrazides.
  K109.........................  Spent filter cartridges    (T)
                                  from product
                                  purification from the
                                  production of 1,1-
                                  dimethylhydrazine (UDMH)
                                  from carboxylic acid
                                  hydrazides.
  K110.........................  Condensed column           (T)
                                  overheads from
                                  intermediate separation
                                  from the production of
                                  1,1-dimethylhydrazine
                                  (UDMH) from carboxylic
                                  acid hydrazides.
  K111.........................  Product washwaters from    (C,T)
                                  the production of
                                  dinitrotoluene via
                                  nitration of toluene.
  K112.........................  Reaction by-product water  (T)
                                  from the drying column
                                  in the production of
                                  toluenediamine via
                                  hydrogenation of
                                  dinitrotoluene.
  K113.........................  Condensed liquid light     (T)
                                  ends from the
                                  purification of
                                  toluenediamine in the
                                  production of
                                  toluenediamine via
                                  hydrogenation of
                                  dinitrotoluene.
  K114.........................  Vicinals from the          (T)
                                  purification of
                                  toluenediamine in the
                                  production of
                                  toluenediamine via
                                  hydrogenation of
                                  dinitrotoluene.
  K115.........................  Heavy ends from the        (T)
                                  purification of
                                  toluenediamine in the
                                  production of
                                  toluenediamine via
                                  hydrogenation of
                                  dinitrotoluene.
  K116.........................  Organic condensate from    (T)
                                  the solvent recovery
                                  column in the production
                                  of toluene diisocyanate
                                  via phosgenation of
                                  toluenediamine.
  K117.........................  Wastewater from the        (T)
                                  reactor vent gas
                                  scrubber in the
                                  production of ethylene
                                  dibromide via
                                  bromination of ethene.
  K118.........................  Spent adsorbent solids     (T)
                                  from purification of
                                  ethylene dibromide in
                                  the production of
                                  ethylene dibromide via
                                  bromination of ethene.
  K136.........................  Still bottoms from the     (T)
                                  purification of ethylene
                                  dibromide in the
                                  production of ethylene
                                  dibromide via
                                  bromination of ethene.
  K140.........................  Floor sweepings, off-      (T)
                                  specification product
                                  and spent filter media
                                  from the production of
                                  2,4,6-tribromophenol.

[[Page 61]]

  K149.........................  Distillation bottoms from  (T)
                                  the production of alpha-
                                  (or methyl-) chlorinated
                                  toluenes, ring-
                                  chlorinated toluenes,
                                  benzoyl chlorides, and
                                  compounds with mixtures
                                  of these functional
                                  groups, (This waste does
                                  not include still
                                  bottoms from the
                                  distillation of benzyl
                                  chloride.).
  K150.........................  Organic residuals,         (T)
                                  excluding spent carbon
                                  adsorbent, from the
                                  spent chlorine gas and
                                  hydrochloric acid
                                  recovery processes
                                  associated with the
                                  production of alpha- (or
                                  methyl-) chlorinated
                                  toluenes, ring-
                                  chlorinated toluenes,
                                  benzoyl chlorides, and
                                  compounds with mixtures
                                  of these functional
                                  groups.
  K151.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludges, excluding
                                  neutralization and
                                  biological sludges,
                                  generated during the
                                  treatment of wastewaters
                                  from the production of
                                  alpha- (or methyl-)
                                  chlorinated toluenes,
                                  ring-chlorinated
                                  toluenes, benzoyl
                                  chlorides, and compounds
                                  with mixtures of these
                                  functional groups.
  K156.........................  Organic waste (including   (T)
                                  heavy ends, still
                                  bottoms, light ends,
                                  spent solvents,
                                  filtrates, and
                                  decantates) from the
                                  production of carbamates
                                  and carbamoyl oximes.
                                  (This listing does not
                                  apply to wastes
                                  generated from the
                                  manufacture of 3-iodo-2-
                                  propynyl n-
                                  butylcarbamate.).
  K157.........................  Wastewaters (including     (T)
                                  scrubber waters,
                                  condenser waters,
                                  washwaters, and
                                  separation waters) from
                                  the production of
                                  carbamates and carbamoyl
                                  oximes. (This listing
                                  does not apply to wastes
                                  generated from the
                                  manufacture of 3-iodo-2-
                                  propynyl n-
                                  butylcarbamate.).
  K158.........................  Bag house dusts and        (T)
                                  filter/separation solids
                                  from the production of
                                  carbamates and carbamoyl
                                  oximes. (This listing
                                  does not apply to wastes
                                  generated from the
                                  manufacture of 3-iodo-2-
                                  propynyl n-
                                  butylcarbamate.).
  K159.........................  Organics from the          (T)
                                  treatment of
                                  thiocarbamate wastes.
  K161.........................  Purification solids        (R,T)
                                  (including filtration,
                                  evaporation, and
                                  centrifugation solids),
                                  bag house dust and floor
                                  sweepings from the
                                  production of
                                  dithiocarbamate acids
                                  and their salts. (This
                                  listing does not include
                                  K125 or K126.).
Inorganic chemicals:
  K071.........................  Brine purification muds    (T)
                                  from the mercury cell
                                  process in chlorine
                                  production, where
                                  separately prepurified
                                  brine is not used.
  K073.........................  Chlorinated hydrocarbon    (T)
                                  waste from the
                                  purification step of the
                                  diaphragm cell process
                                  using graphite anodes in
                                  chlorine production.
  K106.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the mercury
                                  cell process in chlorine
                                  production.
Pesticides:
  K031.........................  By-product salts           (T)
                                  generated in the
                                  production of MSMA and
                                  cacodylic acid.
  K032.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of chlordane.
  K033.........................  Wastewater and scrub       (T)
                                  water from the
                                  chlorination of
                                  cyclopentadiene in the
                                  production of chlordane.
  K034.........................  Filter solids from the     (T)
                                  filtration of
                                  hexachlorocyclopentadien
                                  e in the production of
                                  chlordane.
  K035.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludges generated in the
                                  production of creosote.
  K036.........................  Still bottoms from         (T)
                                  toluene reclamation
                                  distillation in the
                                  production of disulfoton.
  K037.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludges from the
                                  production of disulfoton.
  K038.........................  Wastewater from the        (T)
                                  washing and stripping of
                                  phorate production.
  K039.........................  Filter cake from the       (T)
                                  filtration of
                                  diethylphosphorodithioic
                                  acid in the production
                                  of phorate.
  K040.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of phorate.
  K041.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludge from the
                                  production of toxaphene.
  K042.........................  Heavy ends or              (T)
                                  distillation residues
                                  from the distillation of
                                  tetrachlorobenzene in
                                  the production of 2,4,5-
                                  T.
  K043.........................  2,6-Dichlorophenol waste   (T)
                                  from the production of
                                  2,4-D.
  K097.........................  Vacuum stripper discharge  (T)
                                  from the chlordane
                                  chlorinator in the
                                  production of chlordane.
  K098.........................  Untreated process          (T)
                                  wastewater from the
                                  production of toxaphene.
  K099.........................  Untreated wastewater from  (T)
                                  the production of 2,4-D.
  K123.........................  Process wastewater         (T)
                                  (including supernates,
                                  filtrates, and
                                  washwaters) from the
                                  production of
                                  ethylenebisdithiocarbami
                                  c acid and its salt.
  K124.........................  Reactor vent scrubber      (C, T)
                                  water from the
                                  production of
                                  ethylenebisdithiocarbami
                                  c acid and its salts.
  K125.........................  Filtration, evaporation,   (T)
                                  and centrifugation
                                  solids from the
                                  production of
                                  ethylenebisdithiocarbami
                                  c acid and its salts.
  K126.........................  Baghouse dust and floor    (T)
                                  sweepings in milling and
                                  packaging operations
                                  from the production or
                                  formulation of
                                  ethylenebisdithiocarbami
                                  c acid and its salts.
  K131.........................  Wastewater from the        (C, T)
                                  reactor and spent
                                  sulfuric acid from the
                                  acid dryer from the
                                  production of methyl
                                  bromide.
  K132.........................  Spent absorbent and        (T)
                                  wastewater separator
                                  solids from the
                                  production of methyl
                                  bromide.
Explosives:
  K044.........................  Wastewater treatment       (R)
                                  sludges from the
                                  manufacturing and
                                  processing of explosives.
  K045.........................  Spent carbon from the      (R)
                                  treatment of wastewater
                                  containing explosives.
  K046.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludges from the
                                  manufacturing,
                                  formulation and loading
                                  of lead-based initiating
                                  compounds.
  K047.........................  Pink/red water from TNT    (R)
                                  operations.

[[Page 62]]

Petroleum refining:
  K048.........................  Dissolved air flotation    (T)
                                  (DAF) float from the
                                  petroleum refining
                                  industry.
  K049.........................  Slop oil emulsion solids   (T)
                                  from the petroleum
                                  refining industry.
  K050.........................  Heat exchanger bundle      (T)
                                  cleaning sludge from the
                                  petroleum refining
                                  industry.
  K051.........................  API separator sludge from  (T)
                                  the petroleum refining
                                  industry.
  K052.........................  Tank bottoms (leaded)      (T)
                                  from the petroleum
                                  refining industry.
Iron and steel:
  K061.........................  Emission control dust/     (T)
                                  sludge from the primary
                                  production of steel in
                                  electric furnaces.
  K062.........................  Spent pickle liquor        (C,T)
                                  generated by steel
                                  finishing operations of
                                  facilities within the
                                  iron and steel industry
                                  (SIC Codes 331 and 332).
Primary copper:
  K064.........................  Acid plant blowdown        (T)
                                  slurry/sludge resulting
                                  from the thickening of
                                  blowdown slurry from
                                  primary copper
                                  production.
Primary lead:
  K065.........................  Surface impoundment        (T)
                                  solids contained in and
                                  dredged from surface
                                  impoundments at primary
                                  lead smelting facilities.
Primary zinc:
  K066.........................  Sludge from treatment of   (T)
                                  process wastewater and/
                                  or acid plant blowdown
                                  from primary zinc
                                  production.
Primary aluminum:
  K088.........................  Spent potliners from       (T)
                                  primary aluminum
                                  reduction.
Ferroalloys:
  K090.........................  Emission control dust or   (T)
                                  sludge from
                                  ferrochromiumsilicon
                                  production.
  K091.........................  Emission control dust or   (T)
                                  sludge from
                                  ferrochromium production.
Secondary lead:
  K069.........................  Emission control dust/     (T)
                                  sludge from secondary
                                  lead smelting. (Note:
                                  This listing is stayed
                                  administratively for
                                  sludge generated from
                                  secondary acid scrubber
                                  systems. The stay will
                                  remain in effect until
                                  further administrative
                                  action is taken. If EPA
                                  takes further action
                                  effecting this stay, EPA
                                  will publish a notice of
                                  the action in the
                                  Federal Register.
  K100.........................  Waste leaching solution    (T)
                                  from acid leaching of
                                  emission control dust/
                                  sludge from secondary
                                  lead smelting.
Veterinary pharmaceuticals:
  K084.........................  Wastewater treatment       (T)
                                  sludges generated during
                                  the production of
                                  veterinary
                                  pharmaceuticals from
                                  arsenic or organo-
                                  arsenic compounds.
  K101.........................  Distillation tar residues  (T)
                                  from the distillation of
                                  aniline-based compounds
                                  in the production of
                                  veterinary
                                  pharmaceuticals from
                                  arsenic or organo-
                                  arsenic compounds.
  K102.........................  Residue from the use of    (T)
                                  activated carbon for
                                  decolorization in the
                                  production of veterinary
                                  pharmaceuticals from
                                  arsenic or organo-
                                  arsenic compounds.
Ink formulation:
  K086.........................  Solvent washes and         (T)
                                  sludges, caustic washes
                                  and sludges, or water
                                  washes and sludges from
                                  cleaning tubs and
                                  equipment used in the
                                  formulation of ink from
                                  pigments, driers, soaps,
                                  and stabilizers
                                  containing chromium and
                                  lead.
Coking:
  K060.........................  Ammonia still lime sludge  (T)
                                  from coking operations.
  K087.........................  Decanter tank tar sludge   (T)
                                  from coking operations.
  K141.........................  Process residues from the  (T)
                                  recovery of coal tar,
                                  including, but not
                                  limited to, collecting
                                  sump residues from the
                                  production of coke from
                                  coal or the recovery of
                                  coke by-products
                                  produced from coal. This
                                  listing does not include
                                  K087 (decanter tank tar
                                  sludges from coking
                                  operations).
  K142.........................  Tar storage tank residues  (T)
                                  from the production of
                                  coke from coal or from
                                  the recovery of coke by-
                                  products produced from
                                  coal.
  K143.........................  Process residues from the  (T)
                                  recovery of light oil,
                                  including, but not
                                  limited to, those
                                  generated in stills,
                                  decanters, and wash oil
                                  recovery units from the
                                  recovery of coke by-
                                  products produced from
                                  coal.
  K144.........................  Wastewater sump residues   (T)
                                  from light oil refining,
                                  including, but not
                                  limited to, intercepting
                                  or contamination sump
                                  sludges from the
                                  recovery of coke by-
                                  products produced from
                                  coal.
  K145.........................  Residues from naphthalene  (T)
                                  collection and recovery
                                  operations from the
                                  recovery of coke by-
                                  products produced from
                                  coal.
  K147.........................  Tar storage tank residues  (T)
                                  from coal tar refining.
  K148.........................  Residues from coal tar     (T)
                                  distillation, including
                                  but not limited to,
                                  still bottoms.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[46 FR 4618, Jan. 16, 1981]
    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 261.32, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 24625, May 4, 1998, in Sec. 261.32, 
the table was amended by adding, in numerical order, the entry for waste 
stream K140 to the subgroup ``Organic chemicals'', effective Nov. 4, 
1998.

[[Page 63]]


<R05>
Sec. 261.33  Discarded commercial chemical products, off-specification species, container residues, and spill residues thereof.

    The following materials or items are hazardous wastes if and when 
they are discarded or intended to be discarded as described in 
Sec. 261.2(a)(2)(i), when they are mixed with waste oil or used oil or 
other material and applied to the land for dust suppression or road 
treatment, when they are otherwise applied to the land in lieu of their 
original intended use or when they are contained in products that are 
applied to the land in lieu of their original intended use, or when, in 
lieu of their original intended use, they are produced for use as (or as 
a component of) a fuel, distributed for use as a fuel, or burned as a 
fuel.
    (a) Any commercial chemical product, or manufacturing chemical 
intermediate having the generic name listed in paragraph (e) or (f) of 
this section.
    (b) Any off-specification commercial chemical product or 
manufacturing chemical intermediate which, if it met specifications, 
would have the generic name listed in paragraph (e) or (f) of this 
section.
    (c) Any residue remaining in a container or in an inner liner 
removed from a container that has held any commercial chemical product 
or manufacturing chemical intermediate having the generic name listed in 
paragraphs (e) or (f) of this section, unless the container is empty as 
defined in Sec. 261.7(b) of this chapter.

[Comment: Unless the residue is being beneficially used or reused, or 
legitimately recycled or reclaimed; or being accumulated, stored, 
transported or treated prior to such use, re-use, recycling or 
reclamation, EPA considers the residue to be intended for discard, and 
thus, a hazardous waste. An example of a legitimate re-use of the 
residue would be where the residue remains in the container and the 
container is used to hold the same commercial chemical product or 
manufacturing chemical intermediate it previously held. An example of 
the discard of the residue would be where the drum is sent to a drum 
reconditioner who reconditions the drum but discards the residue.]
    (d) Any residue or contaminated soil, water or other debris 
resulting from the cleanup of a spill into or on any land or water of 
any commercial chemical product or manufacturing chemical intermediate 
having the generic name listed in paragraph (e) or (f) of this section, 
or any residue or contaminated soil, water or other debris resulting 
from the cleanup of a spill, into or on any land or water, of any off-
specification chemical product and manufacturing chemical intermediate 
which, if it met specifications, would have the generic name listed in 
paragraph (e) or (f) of this section.
[Comment: The phrase ``commercial chemical product or manufacturing 
chemical intermediate having the generic name listed in .  .  .'' refers 
to a chemical substance which is manufactured or formulated for 
commercial or manufacturing use which consists of the commercially pure 
grade of the chemical, any technical grades of the chemical that are 
produced or marketed, and all formulations in which the chemical is the 
sole active ingredient. It does not refer to a material, such as a 
manufacturing process waste, that contains any of the substances listed 
in paragraph (e) or (f). Where a manufacturing process waste is deemed 
to be a hazardous waste because it contains a substance listed in 
paragraph (e) or (f), such waste will be listed in either Sec. 261.31 or 
Sec. 261.32 or will be identified as a hazardous waste by the 
characteristics set forth in subpart C of this part.]
    (e) The commercial chemical products, manufacturing chemical 
intermediates or off-specification commercial chemical products or 
manufacturing chemical intermediates referred to in paragraphs (a) 
through (d) of this section, are identified as acute hazardous wastes 
(H) and are subject to be the small quantity exclusion defined in 
Sec. 261.5(e).
[Comment: For the convenience of the regulated community the primary 
hazardous properties of these materials have been indicated by the 
letters T (Toxicity), and R (Reactivity). Absence of a letter indicates 
that the compound only is listed for acute toxicity.]
    These wastes and their corresponding EPA Hazardous Waste Numbers 
are:

[[Page 64]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Chemical
  Hazardous waste     abstracts                  Substance
        No.              No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
P023                    107-20-0  Acetaldehyde, chloro-
P002                    591-08-2  Acetamide, N-(aminothioxomethyl)-
P057                    640-19-7  Acetamide, 2-fluoro-
P058                     62-74-8  Acetic acid, fluoro-, sodium salt
P002                    591-08-2  1-Acetyl-2-thiourea
P003                    107-02-8  Acrolein
P070                    116-06-3  Aldicarb
P203                   1646-88-4  Aldicarb sulfone.
P004                    309-00-2  Aldrin
P005                    107-18-6  Allyl alcohol
P006                  20859-73-8  Aluminum phosphide (R,T)
P007                   2763-96-4  5-(Aminomethyl)-3-isoxazolol
P008                    504-24-5  4-Aminopyridine
P009                    131-74-8  Ammonium picrate (R)
P119                   7803-55-6  Ammonium vanadate
P099                    506-61-6  Argentate(1-), bis(cyano-C)-,
                                   potassium
P010                   7778-39-4  Arsenic acid H<INF>3 AsO<INF>4
P012                   1327-53-3  Arsenic oxide As<INF>2 O<INF>3
P011                   1303-28-2  Arsenic oxide As<INF>2 O<INF>5
P011                   1303-28-2  Arsenic pentoxide
P012                   1327-53-3  Arsenic trioxide
P038                    692-42-2  Arsine, diethyl-
P036                    696-28-6  Arsonous dichloride, phenyl-
P054                    151-56-4  Aziridine
P067                     75-55-8  Aziridine, 2-methyl-
P013                    542-62-1  Barium cyanide
P024                    106-47-8  Benzenamine, 4-chloro-
P077                    100-01-6  Benzenamine, 4-nitro-
P028                    100-44-7  Benzene, (chloromethyl)-
P042                     51-43-4  1,2-Benzenediol, 4-[1-hydroxy-2-
                                   (methylamino)ethyl]-, (R)-
P046                    122-09-8  Benzeneethanamine, alpha,alpha-
                                   dimethyl-
P014                    108-98-5  Benzenethiol
P127                   1563-66-2  7-Benzofuranol, 2,3-dihydro-2,2-
                                   dimethyl-, methylcarbamate.
P188                     57-64-7  Benzoic acid, 2-hydroxy-, compd. with
                                   (3aS-cis)-1,2,3,3a,8,8a-hexahydro-
                                   1,3a,8-trimethylpyrrolo[2,3-b]indol-5-
                                   yl methylcarbamate ester (1:1).
P001                 \1\ 81-81-2  2H-1-Benzopyran-2-one, 4-hydroxy-3-(3-
                                   oxo-1-phenylbutyl)-, & salts, when
                                   present at concentrations greater
                                   than 0.3%
P028                    100-44-7  Benzyl chloride
P015                   7440-41-7  Beryllium powder
P017                    598-31-2  Bromoacetone
P018                    357-57-3  Brucine
P045                  39196-18-4  2-Butanone, 3,3-dimethyl-1-
                                   (methylthio)-,
                                    O-[methylamino)carbonyl] oxime
P021                    592-01-8  Calcium cyanide
P021                    592-01-8  Calcium cyanide Ca(CN)<INF>2
P189                  55285-14-8  Carbamic acid, [(dibutylamino)-
                                   thio]methyl-, 2,3-dihydro-2,2-
                                   dimethyl- 7-benzofuranyl ester.
P191                    644-64-4  Carbamic acid, dimethyl-, 1-[(dimethyl-
                                   amino)carbonyl]- 5-methyl-1H- pyrazol-
                                   3-yl ester.
P192                    119-38-0  Carbamic acid, dimethyl-, 3-methyl-1-
                                   (1-methylethyl)-1H- pyrazol-5-yl
                                   ester.
P190                   1129-41-5  Carbamic acid, methyl-, 3-methylphenyl
                                   ester.
P127                   1563-66-2  Carbofuran.
P022                     75-15-0  Carbon disulfide
P095                     75-44-5  Carbonic dichloride
P189                  55285-14-8  Carbosulfan.
P023                    107-20-0  Chloroacetaldehyde
P024                    106-47-8  p-Chloroaniline
P026                   5344-82-1  1-(o-Chlorophenyl)thiourea
P027                    542-76-7  3-Chloropropionitrile
P029                    544-92-3  Copper cyanide
P029                    544-92-3  Copper cyanide Cu(CN)
P202                     64-00-6  m-Cumenyl methylcarbamate.
P030                ............  Cyanides (soluble cyanide salts), not
                                   otherwise specified
P031                    460-19-5  Cyanogen
P033                    506-77-4  Cyanogen chloride
P033                    506-77-4  Cyanogen chloride (CN)Cl
P034                    131-89-5  2-Cyclohexyl-4,6-dinitrophenol
P016                    542-88-1  Dichloromethyl ether
P036                    696-28-6  Dichlorophenylarsine
P037                     60-57-1  Dieldrin
P038                    692-42-2  Diethylarsine
P041                    311-45-5  Diethyl-p-nitrophenyl phosphate
P040                    297-97-2  O,O-Diethyl O-pyrazinyl
                                   phosphorothioate
P043                     55-91-4  Diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP)

[[Page 65]]

P004                    309-00-2  1,4,5,8-Dimethanonaphthalene,
                                   1,2,3,4,10,10-hexa- chloro-
                                   1,4,4a,5,8,8a,-hexahydro-,
                                   (1alpha,4alpha,4abeta,5alpha,8alpha,8
                                   abeta)-
P060                    465-73-6  1,4,5,8-Dimethanonaphthalene,
                                   1,2,3,4,10,10-hexa- chloro-
                                   1,4,4a,5,8,8a-hexahydro-,
                                   (1alpha,4alpha,4abeta,5beta,8beta,8ab
                                   eta)-
P037                     60-57-1  2,7:3,6-Dimethanonaphth[2,3-b]oxirene,
                                   3,4,5,6,9,9-hexachloro-
                                   1a,2,2a,3,6,6a,7,7a-octahydro-,
                                   (1aalpha,2beta,2aalpha,3beta,6beta,6a
                                   alpha,7beta, 7aalpha)-
P051                 \1\ 72-20-8  2,7:3,6-Dimethanonaphth [2,3-
                                   b]oxirene, 3,4,5,6,9,9-hexachloro-
                                   1a,2,2a,3,6,6a,7,7a-octahydro-,
                                   (1aalpha,2beta,2abeta,3alpha,6alpha,6
                                   abeta,7beta, 7aalpha)-, & metabolites
P044                     60-51-5  Dimethoate
P046                    122-09-8  alpha,alpha-Dimethylphenethylamine
P191                    644-64-4  Dimetilan.
P047                \1\ 534-52-1  4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol, & salts
P048                     51-28-5  2,4-Dinitrophenol
P020                     88-85-7  Dinoseb
P085                    152-16-9  Diphosphoramide, octamethyl-
P111                    107-49-3  Diphosphoric acid, tetraethyl ester
P039                    298-04-4  Disulfoton
P049                    541-53-7  Dithiobiuret
P185                  26419-73-8  1,3-Dithiolane-2-carboxaldehyde, 2,4-
                                   dimethyl-, O- [(methylamino)-
                                   carbonyl]oxime.
P050                    115-29-7  Endosulfan
P088                    145-73-3  Endothall
P051                     72-20-8  Endrin
P051                     72-20-8  Endrin, & metabolites
P042                     51-43-4  Epinephrine
P031                    460-19-5  Ethanedinitrile
P194                  23135-22-0  Ethanimidothioc acid, 2-
                                   (dimethylamino)-N-[[(methylamino)
                                   carbonyl]oxy]-2-oxo-, methyl ester.
P066                  16752-77-5  Ethanimidothioic acid,
                                    N-[[(methylamino)carbonyl]oxy]-,
                                   methyl ester
P101                    107-12-0  Ethyl cyanide
P054                    151-56-4  Ethyleneimine
P097                     52-85-7  Famphur
P056                   7782-41-4  Fluorine
P057                    640-19-7  Fluoroacetamide
P058                     62-74-8  Fluoroacetic acid, sodium salt
P198                  23422-53-9  Formetanate hydrochloride.
P197                  17702-57-7  Formparanate.
P065                    628-86-4  Fulminic acid, mercury(2+) salt (R,T)
P059                     76-44-8  Heptachlor
P062                    757-58-4  Hexaethyl tetraphosphate
P116                     79-19-6  Hydrazinecarbothioamide
P068                     60-34-4  Hydrazine, methyl-
P063                     74-90-8  Hydrocyanic acid
P063                     74-90-8  Hydrogen cyanide
P096                   7803-51-2  Hydrogen phosphide
P060                    465-73-6  Isodrin
P192                    119-38-0  Isolan.
P202                     64-00-6  3-Isopropylphenyl N-methylcarbamate.
P007                   2763-96-4  3(2H)-Isoxazolone, 5-(aminomethyl)-
P196                  15339-36-3  Manganese,
                                   bis(dimethylcarbamodithioato-S,S')-,
P196                  15339-36-3  Manganese dimethyldithiocarbamate.
P092                     62-38-4  Mercury, (acetato-O)phenyl-
P065                    628-86-4  Mercury fulminate (R,T)
P082                     62-75-9  Methanamine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-
P064                    624-83-9  Methane, isocyanato-
P016                    542-88-1  Methane, oxybis[chloro-
P112                    509-14-8  Methane, tetranitro- (R)
P118                     75-70-7  Methanethiol, trichloro-
P198                  23422-53-9  Methanimidamide, N,N-dimethyl-N'-[3-
                                   [[(methylamino)-carbonyl]oxy]phenyl]-
                                   , monohydrochloride.
P197                  17702-57-7  Methanimidamide, N,N-dimethyl-N'-[2-
                                   methyl-4-
                                   [[(methylamino)carbonyl]oxy]phenyl]-
P050                    115-29-7  6,9-Methano-2,4,3-benzodioxathiepin,
                                   6,7,8,9,10,10-
                                    hexachloro-1,5,5a,6,9,9a-hexahydro-,
                                   3-oxide
P059                     76-44-8  4,7-Methano-1H-indene, 1,4,5,6,7,8,8-
                                   heptachloro-
                                    3a,4,7,7a-tetrahydro-
P199                   2032-65-7  Methiocarb.
P066                  16752-77-5  Methomyl
P068                     60-34-4  Methyl hydrazine
P064                    624-83-9  Methyl isocyanate
P069                     75-86-5  2-Methyllactonitrile
P071                    298-00-0  Methyl parathion
P190                   1129-41-5  Metolcarb.

[[Page 66]]

P128                     315-8-4  Mexacarbate.
P072                     86-88-4  alpha-Naphthylthiourea
P073                  13463-39-3  Nickel carbonyl
P073                  13463-39-3  Nickel carbonyl Ni(CO)<INF>4, (T-4)-
P074                    557-19-7  Nickel cyanide
P074                    557-19-7  Nickel cynaide Ni(CN)<INF>2
P075                 \1\ 54-11-5  Nicotine, & salts
P076                  10102-43-9  Nitric oxide
P077                    100-01-6  p-Nitroaniline
P078                  10102-44-0  Nitrogen dioxide
P076                  10102-43-9  Nitrogen oxide NO
P078                  10102-44-0  Nitrogen oxide NO<INF>2
P081                     55-63-0  Nitroglycerine (R)
P082                     62-75-9  N-Nitrosodimethylamine
P084                   4549-40-0  N-Nitrosomethylvinylamine
P085                    152-16-9  Octamethylpyrophosphoramide
P087                  20816-12-0  Osmium oxide OsO<INF>4, (T-4)-
P087                  20816-12-0  Osmium tetroxide
P088                    145-73-3  7-Oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptane-2,3-
                                   dicarboxylic acid
P194                  23135-22-0  Oxamyl.
P089                     56-38-2  Parathion
P034                    131-89-5  Phenol, 2-cyclohexyl-4,6-dinitro-
P048                     51-28-5  Phenol, 2,4-dinitro-
P047                \1\ 534-52-1  Phenol, 2-methyl-4,6-dinitro-, & salts
P020                     88-85-7  Phenol, 2-(1-methylpropyl)-4,6-dinitro-
P009                    131-74-8  Phenol, 2,4,6-trinitro-, ammonium salt
                                   (R)
P128                    315-18-4  Phenol, 4-(dimethylamino)-3,5-dimethyl-
                                   , methylcarbamate (ester).
P199                   2032-65-7  Phenol, (3,5-dimethyl-4-(methylthio)-,
                                   methylcarbamate
P202                     64-00-6  Phenol, 3-(1-methylethyl)-, methyl
                                   carbamate.
P201                   2631-37-0  Phenol, 3-methyl-5-(1-methylethyl)-,
                                   methyl carbamate.
P092                     62-38-4  Phenylmercury acetate
P093                    103-85-5  Phenylthiourea
P094                    298-02-2  Phorate
P095                     75-44-5  Phosgene
P096                   7803-51-2  Phosphine
P041                    311-45-5  Phosphoric acid, diethyl 4-nitrophenyl
                                   ester
P039                    298-04-4  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-diethyl
                                    S-[2-(ethylthio)ethyl] ester
P094                    298-02-2  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-diethyl
                                    S-[(ethylthio)methyl] ester
P044                     60-51-5  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-dimethyl S-
                                   [2-(methylamino)-2-oxoethyl] ester
P043                     55-91-4  Phosphorofluoridic acid, bis(1-
                                   methylethyl) ester
P089                     56-38-2  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-diethyl O-(4-
                                   nitrophenyl) ester
P040                    297-97-2  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-diethyl O-
                                   pyrazinyl ester
P097                     52-85-7  Phosphorothioic acid,
                                    O-[4-
                                   [(dimethylamino)sulfonyl]phenyl] O,O-
                                   dimethyl ester
P071                    298-00-0  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O,-dimethyl O-
                                   (4-nitrophenyl) ester
P204                     57-47-6  Physostigmine.
P188                     57-64-7  Physostigmine salicylate.
P110                     78-00-2  Plumbane, tetraethyl-
P098                    151-50-8  Potassium cyanide
P098                    151-50-8  Potassium cyanide K(CN)
P099                    506-61-6  Potassium silver cyanide
P201                   2631-37-0  Promecarb
P070                    116-06-3  Propanal, 2-methyl-2-(methylthio)-,
                                    O-[(methylamino)carbonyl]oxime
P203                   1646-88-4  Propanal, 2-methyl-2-(methyl-sulfonyl)-
                                   , O-[(methylamino)carbonyl] oxime.
P101                    107-12-0  Propanenitrile
P027                    542-76-7  Propanenitrile, 3-chloro-
P069                     75-86-5  Propanenitrile, 2-hydroxy-2-methyl-
P081                     55-63-0  1,2,3-Propanetriol, trinitrate (R)
P017                    598-31-2  2-Propanone, 1-bromo-
P102                    107-19-7  Propargyl alcohol
P003                    107-02-8  2-Propenal
P005                    107-18-6  2-Propen-1-ol
P067                     75-55-8  1,2-Propylenimine
P102                    107-19-7  2-Propyn-1-ol
P008                    504-24-5  4-Pyridinamine
P075                 \1\ 54-11-5  Pyridine, 3-(1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinyl)-
                                   , (S)-, & salts
P204                     57-47-6  Pyrrolo[2,3-b]indol-5-ol,
                                   1,2,3,3a,8,8a-hexahydro-1,3a,8-
                                   trimethyl-,
                                    methylcarbamate (ester), (3aS-cis)-.
P114                  12039-52-0  Selenious acid, dithallium(1+) salt

[[Page 67]]

P103                    630-10-4  Selenourea
P104                    506-64-9  Silver cyanide
P104                    506-64-9  Silver cyanide Ag(CN)
P105                  26628-22-8  Sodium azide
P106                    143-33-9  Sodium cyanide
P106                    143-33-9  Sodium cyanide Na(CN)
P108                 \1\ 57-24-9  Strychnidin-10-one, & salts
P018                    357-57-3  Strychnidin-10-one, 2,3-dimethoxy-
P108                 \1\ 57-24-9  Strychnine, & salts
P115                   7446-18-6  Sulfuric acid, dithallium(1+) salt
P109                   3689-24-5  Tetraethyldithiopyrophosphate
P110                     78-00-2  Tetraethyl lead
P111                    107-49-3  Tetraethyl pyrophosphate
P112                    509-14-8  Tetranitromethane (R)
P062                    757-58-4  Tetraphosphoric acid, hexaethyl ester
P113                   1314-32-5  Thallic oxide
P113                   1314-32-5  Thallium oxide Tl<INF>2 O<INF>3
P114                  12039-52-0  Thallium(I) selenite
P115                   7446-18-6  Thallium(I) sulfate
P109                   3689-24-5  Thiodiphosphoric acid, tetraethyl
                                   ester
P045                  39196-18-4  Thiofanox
P049                    541-53-7  Thioimidodicarbonic diamide [(H<INF>2
                                   N)C(S)]<INF>2 NH
P014                    108-98-5  Thiophenol
P116                     79-19-6  Thiosemicarbazide
P026                   5344-82-1  Thiourea, (2-chlorophenyl)-
P072                     86-88-4  Thiourea, 1-naphthalenyl-
P093                    103-85-5  Thiourea, phenyl-
P185                  26419-73-8  Tirpate.
P123                   8001-35-2  Toxaphene
P118                     75-70-7  Trichloromethanethiol
P119                   7803-55-6  Vanadic acid, ammonium salt
P120                   1314-62-1  Vanadium oxide V<INF>2 O<INF>5
P120                   1314-62-1  Vanadium pentoxide
P084                   4549-40-0  Vinylamine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-
P001                 \1\ 81-81-2  Warfarin, & salts, when present at
                                   concentrations greater than 0.3%
P205                    137-30-4  Zinc, bis(dimethylcarbamodithioato-
                                   S,S')-,
P121                    557-21-1  Zinc cyanide
P121                    557-21-1  Zinc cyanide Zn(CN)<INF>2
P122                   1314-84-7  Zinc phosphide Zn<INF>3 P<INF>2, when present at
                                   concentrations greater than 10% (R,T)
P205                    137-30-4  Ziram.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CAS Number given for parent compound only.

    (f) The commercial chemical products, manfacturing chemical 
intermediates, or off-specification commercial chemical products 
referred to in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section, are 
identified as toxic wastes (T), unless otherwise designated and are 
subject to the small quantity generator exclusion defined in Sec. 261.5 
(a) and (g).
[Comment: For the convenience of the regulated community, the primary 
hazardous properties of these materials have been indicated by the 
letters T (Toxicity), R (Reactivity), I (Ignitability) and C 
(Corrosivity). Absence of a letter indicates that the compound is only 
listed for toxicity.]
    These wastes and their corresponding EPA Hazardous Waste Numbers 
are:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Chemical
  Hazardous waste     abstracts                  Substance
        No.              No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
U394                  30558-43-1  A2213.
U001                     75-07-0  Acetaldehyde (I)
U034                     75-87-6  Acetaldehyde, trichloro-
U187                     62-44-2  Acetamide, N-(4-ethoxyphenyl)-
U005                     53-96-3  Acetamide, N-9H-fluoren-2-yl-
U240                 \1\ 94-75-7  Acetic acid, (2,4-dichlorophenoxy)-,
                                   salts & esters
U112                    141-78-6  Acetic acid ethyl ester (I)
U144                    301-04-2  Acetic acid, lead(2+) salt
U214                    563-68-8  Acetic acid, thallium(1+) salt

[[Page 68]]

see F027                 93-76-5  Acetic acid, (2,4,5-trichlorophenoxy)-
U002                     67-64-1  Acetone (I)
U003                     75-05-8  Acetonitrile (I,T)
U004                     98-86-2  Acetophenone
U005                     53-96-3  2-Acetylaminofluorene
U006                     75-36-5  Acetyl chloride (C,R,T)
U007                     79-06-1  Acrylamide
U008                     79-10-7  Acrylic acid (I)
U009                    107-13-1  Acrylonitrile
U011                     61-82-5  Amitrole
U012                     62-53-3  Aniline (I,T)
U136                     75-60-5  Arsinic acid, dimethyl-
U014                    492-80-8  Auramine
U015                    115-02-6  Azaserine
U010                     50-07-7  Azirino[2,3<ls-thn-eq>3,4]pyrrolo[1,2-
                                   a]indole-4,7-dione, 6-amino-8-
                                   [[(aminocarbonyl)oxy]methyl]-
                                   1,1a,2,8,8a,8b-hexahydro-8a-methoxy-5-
                                   methyl-, [1aS-(1aalpha,
                                   8beta,8aalpha,8balpha)]-
U280                    101-27-9  Barban.
U278                  22781-23-3  Bendiocarb.
U364                  22961-82-6  Bendiocarb phenol.
U271                  17804-35-2  Benomyl.
U157                     56-49-5  Benz[j]aceanthrylene, 1,2-dihydro-3-
                                   methyl-
U016                    225-51-4  Benz[c]acridine
U017                     98-87-3  Benzal chloride
U192                  23950-58-5  Benzamide, 3,5-dichloro-N-(1,1-
                                   dimethyl-2-propynyl)-
U018                     56-55-3  Benz[a]anthracene
U094                     57-97-6  Benz[a]anthracene, 7,12-dimethyl-
U012                     62-53-3  Benzenamine (I,T)
U014                    492-80-8  Benzenamine, 4,4-carbonimidoylbis[N,N-
                                   dimethyl-
U049                   3165-93-3  Benzenamine, 4-chloro-2-methyl-,
                                   hydrochloride
U093                     60-11-7  Benzenamine, N,N-dimethyl-4-
                                   (phenylazo)-
U328                     95-53-4  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-
U353                    106-49-0  Benzenamine, 4-methyl-
U158                    101-14-4  Benzenamine, 4,4-methylenebis[2-chloro-
U222                    636-21-5  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-, hydrochloride
U181                     99-55-8  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-5-nitro-
U019                     71-43-2  Benzene (I,T)
U038                    510-15-6  Benzeneacetic acid, 4-chloro-alpha-(4-
                                   chlorophenyl)-alpha-hydroxy-, ethyl
                                   ester
U030                    101-55-3  Benzene, 1-bromo-4-phenoxy-
U035                    305-03-3  Benzenebutanoic acid, 4-[bis(2-
                                   chloroethyl)amino]-
U037                    108-90-7  Benzene, chloro-
U221                  25376-45-8  Benzenediamine, ar-methyl-
U028                    117-81-7  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, bis(2-
                                   ethylhexyl) ester
U069                     84-74-2  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, dibutyl
                                   ester
U088                     84-66-2  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, diethyl
                                   ester
U102                    131-11-3  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, dimethyl
                                   ester
U107                    117-84-0  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, dioctyl
                                   ester
U070                     95-50-1  Benzene, 1,2-dichloro-
U071                    541-73-1  Benzene, 1,3-dichloro-
U072                    106-46-7  Benzene, 1,4-dichloro-
U060                     72-54-8  Benzene, 1,1-(2,2-
                                   dichloroethylidene)bis[4-chloro-
U017                     98-87-3  Benzene, (dichloromethyl)-
U223                  26471-62-5  Benzene, 1,3-diisocyanatomethyl- (R,T)
U239                   1330-20-7  Benzene, dimethyl- (I,T)
U201                    108-46-3  1,3-Benzenediol
U127                    118-74-1  Benzene, hexachloro-
U056                    110-82-7  Benzene, hexahydro- (I)
U220                    108-88-3  Benzene, methyl-
U105                    121-14-2  Benzene, 1-methyl-2,4-dinitro-
U106                    606-20-2  Benzene, 2-methyl-1,3-dinitro-
U055                     98-82-8  Benzene, (1-methylethyl)- (I)
U169                     98-95-3  Benzene, nitro-
U183                    608-93-5  Benzene, pentachloro-
U185                     82-68-8  Benzene, pentachloronitro-
U020                     98-09-9  Benzenesulfonic acid chloride (C,R)
U020                     98-09-9  Benzenesulfonyl chloride (C,R)
U207                     95-94-3  Benzene, 1,2,4,5-tetrachloro-
U061                     50-29-3  Benzene, 1,1-(2,2,2-
                                   trichloroethylidene)bis[4-chloro-
U247                     72-43-5  Benzene, 1,1-(2,2,2-
                                   trichloroethylidene)bis[4- methoxy-
U023                     98-07-7  Benzene, (trichloromethyl)-
U234                     99-35-4  Benzene, 1,3,5-trinitro-
U021                     92-87-5  Benzidine

[[Page 69]]

U202                 \1\ 81-07-2  1,2-Benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one, 1,1-
                                   dioxide, & salts
U278                  22781-23-3  1,3-Benzodioxol-4-ol, 2,2-dimethyl-,
                                   methyl carbamate.
U364                  22961-82-6  1,3-Benzodioxol-4-ol, 2,2-dimethyl-,
U203                     94-59-7  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-(2-propenyl)-
U141                    120-58-1  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-(1-propenyl)-
U367                   1563-38-8  7-Benzofuranol, 2,3-dihydro-2,2-
                                   dimethyl-
U090                     94-58-6  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-propyl-
U064                    189-55-9  Benzo[rst]pentaphene
U248                  \1\81-81-2  2H-1-Benzopyran-2-one, 4-hydroxy-3-(3-
                                   oxo-1-phenyl-butyl)-, & salts, when
                                   present at concentrations of 0.3% or
                                   less
U022                     50-32-8  Benzo[a]pyrene
U197                    106-51-4  p-Benzoquinone
U023                     98-07-7  Benzotrichloride (C,R,T)
U085                   1464-53-5  2,2-Bioxirane
U021                     92-87-5  [1,1-Biphenyl]-4,4-diamine
U073                     91-94-1  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diamine, 3,3'-
                                   dichloro-
U091                    119-90-4  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diamine, 3,3'-
                                   dimethoxy-
U095                    119-93-7  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diamine, 3,3'-
                                   dimethyl-
U225                     75-25-2  Bromoform
U030                    101-55-3  4-Bromophenyl phenyl ether
U128                     87-68-3  1,3-Butadiene, 1,1,2,3,4,4-hexachloro-
U172                    924-16-3  1-Butanamine, N-butyl-N-nitroso-
U031                     71-36-3  1-Butanol (I)
U159                     78-93-3  2-Butanone (I,T)
U160                   1338-23-4  2-Butanone, peroxide (R,T)
U053                   4170-30-3  2-Butenal
U074                    764-41-0  2-Butene, 1,4-dichloro- (I,T)
U143                    303-34-4  2-Butenoic acid, 2-methyl-, 7-[[2,3-
                                   dihydroxy-
                                    2-(1-methoxyethyl)-3-methyl-1-
                                   oxobutoxy]methyl]-
                                    2,3,5,7a-tetrahydro-1H-pyrrolizin-1-
                                   yl ester,
                                    [1S-[1alpha(Z),7(2S*,3R*),7aalpha]]-
U031                     71-36-3  n-Butyl alcohol (I)
U136                     75-60-5  Cacodylic acid
U032                  13765-19-0  Calcium chromate
U372                  10605-21-7  Carbamic acid, 1H-benzimidazol-2-yl,
                                   methyl ester.
U271                  17804-35-2  Carbamic acid, [1-
                                   [(butylamino)carbonyl]-1H-
                                   benzimidazol-2-yl]-, methyl ester.
U280                    101-27-9  Carbamic acid, (3-chlorophenyl)-, 4-
                                   chloro-2-butynyl ester.
U238                     51-79-6  Carbamic acid, ethyl ester
U178                    615-53-2  Carbamic acid, methylnitroso-, ethyl
                                   ester
U373                    122-42-9  Carbamic acid, phenyl-, 1-methylethyl
                                   ester.
U409                  23564-05-8  Carbamic acid, [1,2-phenylenebis
                                   (iminocarbonothioyl)]bis-, dimethyl
                                   ester.
U097                     79-44-7  Carbamic chloride, dimethyl-
U389                   2303-17-5  Carbamothioic acid, bis(1-methylethyl)-
                                   , S-(2,3,3-trichloro-2-propenyl)
                                   ester.
U387                  52888-80-9  Carbamothioic acid, dipropyl-, S-
                                   (phenylmethyl) ester.
U114                \1\ 111-54-6  Carbamodithioic acid, 1,2-
                                   ethanediylbis-,
                                    salts & esters
U062                   2303-16-4  Carbamothioic acid, bis(1-methylethyl)-
                                   , S-(2,3-dichloro-2-propenyl) ester
U279                     63-25-2  Carbaryl.
U372                  10605-21-7  Carbendazim.
U367                   1563-38-8  Carbofuran phenol.
U215                   6533-73-9  Carbonic acid, dithallium(1+) salt
U033                    353-50-4  Carbonic difluoride
U156                     79-22-1  Carbonochloridic acid, methyl ester
                                   (I,T)
U033                    353-50-4  Carbon oxyfluoride (R,T)
U211                     56-23-5  Carbon tetrachloride
U034                     75-87-6  Chloral
U035                    305-03-3  Chlorambucil
U036                     57-74-9  Chlordane, alpha & gamma isomers
U026                    494-03-1  Chlornaphazin
U037                    108-90-7  Chlorobenzene
U038                    510-15-6  Chlorobenzilate
U039                     59-50-7  p-Chloro-m-cresol
U042                    110-75-8  2-Chloroethyl vinyl ether
U044                     67-66-3  Chloroform
U046                    107-30-2  Chloromethyl methyl ether
U047                     91-58-7  beta-Chloronaphthalene
U048                     95-57-8  o-Chlorophenol
U049                   3165-93-3  4-Chloro-o-toluidine, hydrochloride
U032                  13765-19-0  Chromic acid H<INF>2 CrO<INF>4, calcium salt
U050                    218-01-9  Chrysene
U051                ............  Creosote
U052                   1319-77-3  Cresol (Cresylic acid)

[[Page 70]]

U053                   4170-30-3  Crotonaldehyde
U055                     98-82-8  Cumene (I)
U246                    506-68-3  Cyanogen bromide (CN)Br
U197                    106-51-4  2,5-Cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione
U056                    110-82-7  Cyclohexane (I)
U129                     58-89-9  Cyclohexane, 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachloro-,
                                    (1alpha,2alpha,3beta,4alpha,5alpha,6
                                   beta)-
U057                    108-94-1  Cyclohexanone (I)
U130                     77-47-4  1,3-Cyclopentadiene, 1,2,3,4,5,5-
                                   hexachloro-
U058                     50-18-0  Cyclophosphamide
U240                 \1\ 94-75-7  2,4-D, salts & esters
U059                  20830-81-3  Daunomycin
U060                     72-54-8  DDD
U061                     50-29-3  DDT
U062                   2303-16-4  Diallate
U063                     53-70-3  Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
U064                    189-55-9  Dibenzo[a,i]pyrene
U066                     96-12-8  1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane
U069                     84-74-2  Dibutyl phthalate
U070                     95-50-1  o-Dichlorobenzene
U071                    541-73-1  m-Dichlorobenzene
U072                    106-46-7  p-Dichlorobenzene
U073                     91-94-1  3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine
U074                    764-41-0  1,4-Dichloro-2-butene (I,T)
U075                     75-71-8  Dichlorodifluoromethane
U078                     75-35-4  1,1-Dichloroethylene
U079                    156-60-5  1,2-Dichloroethylene
U025                    111-44-4  Dichloroethyl ether
U027                    108-60-1  Dichloroisopropyl ether
U024                    111-91-1  Dichloromethoxy ethane
U081                    120-83-2  2,4-Dichlorophenol
U082                     87-65-0  2,6-Dichlorophenol
U084                    542-75-6  1,3-Dichloropropene
U085                   1464-53-5  1,2:3,4-Diepoxybutane (I,T)
U108                    123-91-1  1,4-Diethyleneoxide
U028                    117-81-7  Diethylhexyl phthalate
U395                   5952-26-1  Diethylene glycol, dicarbamate.
U086                   1615-80-1  N,N'-Diethylhydrazine
U087                   3288-58-2  O,O-Diethyl S-methyl dithiophosphate
U088                     84-66-2  Diethyl phthalate
U089                     56-53-1  Diethylstilbesterol
U090                     94-58-6  Dihydrosafrole
U091                    119-90-4  3,3'-Dimethoxybenzidine
U092                    124-40-3  Dimethylamine (I)
U093                     60-11-7  p-Dimethylaminoazobenzene
U094                     57-97-6  7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene
U095                    119-93-7  3,3'-Dimethylbenzidine
U096                     80-15-9  alpha,alpha-
                                   Dimethylbenzylhydroperoxide (R)
U097                     79-44-7  Dimethylcarbamoyl chloride
U098                     57-14-7  1,1-Dimethylhydrazine
U099                    540-73-8  1,2-Dimethylhydrazine
U101                    105-67-9  2,4-Dimethylphenol
U102                    131-11-3  Dimethyl phthalate
U103                     77-78-1  Dimethyl sulfate
U105                    121-14-2  2,4-Dinitrotoluene
U106                    606-20-2  2,6-Dinitrotoluene
U107                    117-84-0  Di-n-octyl phthalate
U108                    123-91-1  1,4-Dioxane
U109                    122-66-7  1,2-Diphenylhydrazine
U110                    142-84-7  Dipropylamine (I)
U111                    621-64-7  Di-n-propylnitrosamine
U041                    106-89-8  Epichlorohydrin
U001                     75-07-0  Ethanal (I)
U404                    121-44-8  Ethanamine, N,N-diethyl-
U174                     55-18-5  Ethanamine, N-ethyl-N-nitroso-
U155                     91-80-5  1,2-Ethanediamine, N,N-dimethyl-N'-2-
                                   pyridinyl-N'-(2-thienylmethyl)-
U067                    106-93-4  Ethane, 1,2-dibromo-
U076                     75-34-3  Ethane, 1,1-dichloro-
U077                    107-06-2  Ethane, 1,2-dichloro-
U131                     67-72-1  Ethane, hexachloro-
U024                    111-91-1  Ethane, 1,1'-[methylenebis(oxy)]bis[2-
                                   chloro-
U117                     60-29-7  Ethane, 1,1'-oxybis-(I)

[[Page 71]]

U025                    111-44-4  Ethane, 1,1'-oxybis[2-chloro-
U184                     76-01-7  Ethane, pentachloro-
U208                    630-20-6  Ethane, 1,1,1,2-tetrachloro-
U209                     79-34-5  Ethane, 1,1,2,2-tetrachloro-
U218                     62-55-5  Ethanethioamide
U226                     71-55-6  Ethane, 1,1,1-trichloro-
U227                     79-00-5  Ethane, 1,1,2-trichloro-
U410                  59669-26-0  Ethanimidothioic acid, N,N'-
                                   [thiobis[(methylimino)carbonyloxy]]bi
                                   s-, dimethyl ester
U394                  30558-43-1  Ethanimidothioic acid, 2-
                                   (dimethylamino)-N-hydroxy-2-oxo-,
                                   methyl ester.
U359                    110-80-5  Ethanol, 2-ethoxy-
U173                   1116-54-7  Ethanol, 2,2'-(nitrosoimino)bis-
U395                   5952-26-1  Ethanol, 2,2'-oxybis-, dicarbamate.
U004                     98-86-2  Ethanone, 1-phenyl-
U043                     75-01-4  Ethene, chloro-
U042                    110-75-8  Ethene, (2-chloroethoxy)-
U078                     75-35-4  Ethene, 1,1-dichloro-
U079                    156-60-5  Ethene, 1,2-dichloro-, (E)-
U210                    127-18-4  Ethene, tetrachloro-
U228                     79-01-6  Ethene, trichloro-
U112                    141-78-6  Ethyl acetate (I)
U113                    140-88-5  Ethyl acrylate (I)
U238                     51-79-6  Ethyl carbamate (urethane)
U117                     60-29-7  Ethyl ether (I)
U114                \1\ 111-54-6  Ethylenebisdithiocarbamic acid, salts
                                   & esters
U067                    106-93-4  Ethylene dibromide
U077                    107-06-2  Ethylene dichloride
U359                    110-80-5  Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether
U115                     75-21-8  Ethylene oxide (I,T)
U116                     96-45-7  Ethylenethiourea
U076                     75-34-3  Ethylidene dichloride
U118                     97-63-2  Ethyl methacrylate
U119                     62-50-0  Ethyl methanesulfonate
U120                    206-44-0  Fluoranthene
U122                     50-00-0  Formaldehyde
U123                     64-18-6  Formic acid (C,T)
U124                    110-00-9  Furan (I)
U125                     98-01-1  2-Furancarboxaldehyde (I)
U147                    108-31-6  2,5-Furandione
U213                    109-99-9  Furan, tetrahydro-(I)
U125                     98-01-1  Furfural (I)
U124                    110-00-9  Furfuran (I)
U206                  18883-66-4  Glucopyranose, 2-deoxy-2-(3-methyl-3-
                                   nitrosoureido)-, D-
U206                  18883-66-4  D-Glucose, 2-deoxy-2-
                                   [[(methylnitrosoamino)-
                                    carbonyl]amino]-
U126                    765-34-4  Glycidylaldehyde
U163                     70-25-7  Guanidine, N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitroso-
U127                    118-74-1  Hexachlorobenzene
U128                     87-68-3  Hexachlorobutadiene
U130                     77-47-4  Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
U131                     67-72-1  Hexachloroethane
U132                     70-30-4  Hexachlorophene
U243                   1888-71-7  Hexachloropropene
U133                    302-01-2  Hydrazine (R,T)
U086                   1615-80-1  Hydrazine, 1,2-diethyl-
U098                     57-14-7  Hydrazine, 1,1-dimethyl-
U099                    540-73-8  Hydrazine, 1,2-dimethyl-
U109                    122-66-7  Hydrazine, 1,2-diphenyl-
U134                   7664-39-3  Hydrofluoric acid (C,T)
U134                   7664-39-3  Hydrogen fluoride (C,T)
U135                   7783-06-4  Hydrogen sulfide
U135                   7783-06-4  Hydrogen sulfide H<INF>2 S
U096                     80-15-9  Hydroperoxide, 1-methyl-1-phenylethyl-
                                   (R)
U116                     96-45-7  2-Imidazolidinethione
U137                    193-39-5  Indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene
U190                     85-44-9  1,3-Isobenzofurandione
U140                     78-83-1  Isobutyl alcohol (I,T)
U141                    120-58-1  Isosafrole
U142                    143-50-0  Kepone
U143                    303-34-4  Lasiocarpine
U144                    301-04-2  Lead acetate
U146                   1335-32-6  Lead, bis(acetato-O)tetrahydroxytri-
U145                   7446-27-7  Lead phosphate

[[Page 72]]

U146                   1335-32-6  Lead subacetate
U129                     58-89-9  Lindane
U163                     70-25-7  MNNG
U147                    108-31-6  Maleic anhydride
U148                    123-33-1  Maleic hydrazide
U149                    109-77-3  Malononitrile
U150                    148-82-3  Melphalan
U151                   7439-97-6  Mercury
U152                    126-98-7  Methacrylonitrile (I, T)
U092                    124-40-3  Methanamine, N-methyl- (I)
U029                     74-83-9  Methane, bromo-
U045                     74-87-3  Methane, chloro- (I, T)
U046                    107-30-2  Methane, chloromethoxy-
U068                     74-95-3  Methane, dibromo-
U080                     75-09-2  Methane, dichloro-
U075                     75-71-8  Methane, dichlorodifluoro-
U138                     74-88-4  Methane, iodo-
U119                     62-50-0  Methanesulfonic acid, ethyl ester
U211                     56-23-5  Methane, tetrachloro-
U153                     74-93-1  Methanethiol (I, T)
U225                     75-25-2  Methane, tribromo-
U044                     67-66-3  Methane, trichloro-
U121                     75-69-4  Methane, trichlorofluoro-
U036                     57-74-9  4,7-Methano-1H-indene, 1,2,4,5,6,7,8,8-
                                   octachloro-2,3,3a,4,7,7a-hexahydro-
U154                     67-56-1  Methanol (I)
U155                     91-80-5  Methapyrilene
U142                    143-50-0  1,3,4-Metheno-2H-cyclobuta[cd]pentalen-
                                   2-one, 1,1a,3,3a,4,5,5,5a,5b,6-
                                   decachlorooctahydro-
U247                     72-43-5  Methoxychlor
U154                     67-56-1  Methyl alcohol (I)
U029                     74-83-9  Methyl bromide
U186                    504-60-9  1-Methylbutadiene (I)
U045                     74-87-3  Methyl chloride (I,T)
U156                     79-22-1  Methyl chlorocarbonate (I,T)
U226                     71-55-6  Methyl chloroform
U157                     56-49-5  3-Methylcholanthrene
U158                    101-14-4  4,4'-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)
U068                     74-95-3  Methylene bromide
U080                     75-09-2  Methylene chloride
U159                     78-93-3  Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) (I,T)
U160                   1338-23-4  Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide (R,T)
U138                     74-88-4  Methyl iodide
U161                    108-10-1  Methyl isobutyl ketone (I)
U162                     80-62-6  Methyl methacrylate (I,T)
U161                    108-10-1  4-Methyl-2-pentanone (I)
U164                     56-04-2  Methylthiouracil
U010                     50-07-7  Mitomycin C
U059                  20830-81-3  5,12-Naphthacenedione, 8-acetyl-10-[(3-
                                   amino-2,3,6-trideoxy)-alpha-L-lyxo-
                                   hexopyranosyl)oxy]-7,8,9,10-
                                   tetrahydro-6,8,11-trihydroxy-1-
                                   methoxy-, (8S-cis)-
U167                    134-32-7  1-Naphthalenamine
U168                     91-59-8  2-Naphthalenamine
U026                    494-03-1  Naphthalenamine, N,N'-bis(2-
                                   chloroethyl)-
U165                     91-20-3  Naphthalene
U047                     91-58-7  Naphthalene, 2-chloro-
U166                    130-15-4  1,4-Naphthalenedione
U236                     72-57-1  2,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 3,3'-
                                   [(3,3'-
                                    dimethyl[1,1'-biphenyl]-4,4'-
                                   diyl)bis(azo)bis[5-amino-4-hydroxy]-,
                                   tetrasodium salt
U279                     63-25-2  1-Naphthalenol, methylcarbamate.
U166                    130-15-4  1,4-Naphthoquinone
U167                    134-32-7  alpha-Naphthylamine
U168                     91-59-8  beta-Naphthylamine
U217                  10102-45-1  Nitric acid, thallium(1+) salt
U169                     98-95-3  Nitrobenzene (I,T)
U170                    100-02-7  p-Nitrophenol
U171                     79-46-9  2-Nitropropane (I,T)
U172                    924-16-3  N-Nitrosodi-n-butylamine
U173                   1116-54-7  N-Nitrosodiethanolamine
U174                     55-18-5  N-Nitrosodiethylamine
U176                    759-73-9  N-Nitroso-N-ethylurea
U177                    684-93-5  N-Nitroso-N-methylurea
U178                    615-53-2  N-Nitroso-N-methylurethane
U179                    100-75-4  N-Nitrosopiperidine
U180                    930-55-2  N-Nitrosopyrrolidine

[[Page 73]]

U181                     99-55-8  5-Nitro-o-toluidine
U193                   1120-71-4  1,2-Oxathiolane, 2,2-dioxide
U058                     50-18-0  2H-1,3,2-Oxazaphosphorin-2-amine,
                                    N,N-bis(2-chloroethyl)tetrahydro-, 2-
                                   oxide
U115                     75-21-8  Oxirane (I,T)
U126                    765-34-4  Oxiranecarboxyaldehyde
U041                    106-89-8  Oxirane, (chloromethyl)-
              2         123-63-7  Paraldehyde
U183                    608-93-5  Pentachlorobenzene
U184                     76-01-7  Pentachloroethane
U185                     82-68-8  Pentachloronitrobenzene (PCNB)
See F027                 87-86-5  Pentachlorophenol
U161                    108-10-1  Pentanol, 4-methyl-
U186                    504-60-9  1,3-Pentadiene (I)
U187                     62-44-2  Phenacetin
U188                    108-95-2  Phenol
U048                     95-57-8  Phenol, 2-chloro-
U039                     59-50-7  Phenol, 4-chloro-3-methyl-
U081                    120-83-2  Phenol, 2,4-dichloro-
U082                     87-65-0  Phenol, 2,6-dichloro-
U089                     56-53-1  Phenol, 4,4'-(1,2-diethyl-1,2-
                                   ethenediyl)bis-, (E)-
U101                    105-67-9  Phenol, 2,4-dimethyl-
U052                   1319-77-3  Phenol, methyl-
U132                     70-30-4  Phenol, 2,2'-methylenebis[3,4,6-
                                   trichloro-
U411                    114-26-1  Phenol, 2-(1-methylethoxy)-,
                                   methylcarbamate.
U170                    100-02-7  Phenol, 4-nitro-
See F027                 87-86-5  Phenol, pentachloro-
See F027                 58-90-2  Phenol, 2,3,4,6-tetrachloro-
See F027                 95-95-4  Phenol, 2,4,5-trichloro-
See F027                 88-06-2  Phenol, 2,4,6-trichloro-
U150                    148-82-3  L-Phenylalanine, 4-[bis(2-
                                   chloroethyl)amino]-
U145                   7446-27-7  Phosphoric acid, lead(2+) salt (2:3)
U087                   3288-58-2  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-diethyl S-
                                   methyl ester
U189                   1314-80-3  Phosphorus sulfide (R)
U190                     85-44-9  Phthalic anhydride
U191                    109-06-8  2-Picoline
U179                    100-75-4  Piperidine, 1-nitroso-
U192                  23950-58-5  Pronamide
U194                    107-10-8  1-Propanamine (I,T)
U111                    621-64-7  1-Propanamine, N-nitroso-N-propyl-
U110                    142-84-7  1-Propanamine, N-propyl- (I)
U066                     96-12-8  Propane, 1,2-dibromo-3-chloro-
U083                     78-87-5  Propane, 1,2-dichloro-
U149                    109-77-3  Propanedinitrile
U171                     79-46-9  Propane, 2-nitro- (I,T)
U027                    108-60-1  Propane, 2,2'-oxybis[2-chloro-
U193                   1120-71-4  1,3-Propane sultone
See F027                 93-72-1  Propanoic acid, 2-(2,4,5-
                                   trichlorophenoxy)-
U235                    126-72-7  1-Propanol, 2,3-dibromo-, phosphate
                                   (3:1)
U140                     78-83-1  1-Propanol, 2-methyl- (I,T)
U002                     67-64-1  2-Propanone (I)
U007                     79-06-1  2-Propenamide
U084                    542-75-6  1-Propene, 1,3-dichloro-
U243                   1888-71-7  1-Propene, 1,1,2,3,3,3-hexachloro-
U009                    107-13-1  2-Propenenitrile
U152                    126-98-7  2-Propenenitrile, 2-methyl- (I,T)
U008                     79-10-7  2-Propenoic acid (I)
U113                    140-88-5  2-Propenoic acid, ethyl ester (I)
U118                     97-63-2  2-Propenoic acid, 2-methyl-, ethyl
                                   ester
U162                     80-62-6  2-Propenoic acid, 2-methyl-, methyl
                                   ester (I,T)
U373                    122-42-9  Propham.
U411                    114-26-1  Propoxur.
U387                  52888-80-9  Prosulfocarb.
U194                    107-10-8  n-Propylamine (I,T)
U083                     78-87-5  Propylene dichloride
U148                    123-33-1  3,6-Pyridazinedione, 1,2-dihydro-

[[Page 74]]

U196                    110-86-1  Pyridine
U191                    109-06-8  Pyridine, 2-methyl-
U237                     66-75-1  2,4-(1H,3H)-Pyrimidinedione, 5-[bis(2-
                                    chloroethyl)amino]-
U164                     56-04-2  4(1H)-Pyrimidinone, 2,3-dihydro-6-
                                   methyl-2-thioxo-
U180                    930-55-2  Pyrrolidine, 1-nitroso-
U200                     50-55-5  Reserpine
U201                    108-46-3  Resorcinol
U202                 \1\ 81-07-2  Saccharin, & salts
U203                     94-59-7  Safrole
U204                   7783-00-8  Selenious acid
U204                   7783-00-8  Selenium dioxide
U205                   7488-56-4  Selenium sulfide
U205                   7488-56-4  Selenium sulfide SeS<INF>2 (R,T)
U015                    115-02-6  L-Serine, diazoacetate (ester)
See F027                 93-72-1  Silvex (2,4,5-TP)
U206                  18883-66-4  Streptozotocin
U103                     77-78-1  Sulfuric acid, dimethyl ester
U189                   1314-80-3  Sulfur phosphide (R)
See F027                 93-76-5  2,4,5-T
U207                     95-94-3  1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene
U208                    630-20-6  1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane
U209                     79-34-5  1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
U210                    127-18-4  Tetrachloroethylene
See F027                 58-90-2  2,3,4,6-Tetrachlorophenol
U213                    109-99-9  Tetrahydrofuran (I)
U214                    563-68-8  Thallium(I) acetate
U215                   6533-73-9  Thallium(I) carbonate
U216                   7791-12-0  Thallium(I) chloride
U216                   7791-12-0  Thallium chloride Tlcl
U217                  10102-45-1  Thallium(I) nitrate
U218                     62-55-5  Thioacetamide
U410                  59669-26-0  Thiodicarb.
U153                     74-93-1  Thiomethanol (I,T)
U244                    137-26-8  Thioperoxydicarbonic diamide [(H<INF>2
                                   N)C(S)]<INF>2 S<INF>2, tetramethyl-
U409                  23564-05-8  Thiophanate-methyl.
U219                     62-56-6  Thiourea
U244                    137-26-8  Thiram
U220                    108-88-3  Toluene
U221                  25376-45-8  Toluenediamine
U223                  26471-62-5  Toluene diisocyanate (R,T)
U328                     95-53-4  o-Toluidine
U353                    106-49-0  p-Toluidine
U222                    636-21-5  o-Toluidine hydrochloride
U389                   2303-17-5  Triallate.
U011                     61-82-5  1H-1,2,4-Triazol-3-amine
U408                    118-79-6  2,4,6-Tribromophenol.
U227                     79-00-5  1,1,2-Trichloroethane
U228                     79-01-6  Trichloroethylene
U121                     75-69-4  Trichloromonofluoromethane
See F027                 95-95-4  2,4,5-Trichlorophenol
See F027                 88-06-2  2,4,6-Trichlorophenol
U404                    121-44-8  Triethylamine.
U234                     99-35-4  1,3,5-Trinitrobenzene (R,T)
U182                    123-63-7  1,3,5-Trioxane, 2,4,6-trimethyl-
U235                    126-72-7  Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate
U236                     72-57-1  Trypan blue
U237                     66-75-1  Uracil mustard
U176                    759-73-9  Urea, N-ethyl-N-nitroso-
U177                    684-93-5  Urea, N-methyl-N-nitroso-
U043                     75-01-4  Vinyl chloride
U248                 \1\ 81-81-2  Warfarin, & salts, when present at
                                   concentrations of 0.3% or less
U239                   1330-20-7  Xylene (I)
U200                     50-55-5  Yohimban-16-carboxylic acid, 11,17-
                                   dimethoxy-18-[(3,4,5-
                                   trimethoxybenzoyl)oxy]-, methyl
                                   ester,
                                   (3beta,16beta,17alpha,18beta,20alpha)-
U249                   1314-84-7  Zinc phosphide Zn<INF>3 P<INF>2, when present at
                                   concentrations of 10% or less
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CAS Number given for parent compound only.

[[Page 75]]


[45 FR 78529, 78541, Nov. 25, 1980]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 261.33, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 24625, May 4, 1998, in Sec. 261.33, 
paragraph (f), table was amended by adding, in alphanumeric order, the 
substance U408, effective Nov. 4, 1998.


<R05>
Sec. 261.35  Deletion of certain hazardous waste codes following equipment cleaning and replacement.

    (a) Wastes from wood preserving processes at plants that do not 
resume or initiate use of chlorophenolic preservatives will not meet the 
listing definition of F032 once the generator has met all of the 
requirements of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. These wastes 
may, however, continue to meet another hazardous waste listing 
description or may exhibit one or more of the hazardous waste 
characteristics.
    (b) Generators must either clean or replace all process equipment 
that may have come into contact with chlorophenolic formulations or 
constituents thereof, including, but not limited to, treatment 
cylinders, sumps, tanks, piping systems, drip pads, fork lifts, and 
trams, in a manner that minimizes or eliminates the escape of hazardous 
waste or constituents, leachate, contaminated drippage, or hazardous 
waste decomposition products to the ground water, surface water, or 
atmosphere.
    (1) Generators shall do one of the following:
    (i) Prepare and follow an equipment cleaning plan and clean 
equipment in accordance with this section;
    (ii) Prepare and follow an equipment replacement plan and replace 
equipment in accordance with this section; or
    (iii) Document cleaning and replacement in accordance with this 
section, carried out after termination of use of chlorophenolic 
preservations.
    (2) Cleaning Requirements.
    (i) Prepare and sign a written equipment cleaning plan that 
describes:
    (A) The equipment to be cleaned;
    (B) How the equipment will be cleaned;
    (C) The solvent to be used in cleaning;
    (D) How solvent rinses will be tested; and
    (E) How cleaning residues will be disposed.
    (ii) Equipment must be cleaned as follows:
    (A) Remove all visible residues from process equipment;
    (B) Rinse process equipment with an appropriate solvent until 
dioxins and dibenzofurans are not detected in the final solvent rinse.
    (iii) Analytical requirements.
    (A) Rinses must be tested in accordance with SW-846, Method 8290.
    (B) ``Not detected'' means at or below the lower method calibration 
limit (MCL) in Method 8290, Table 1.
    (iv) The generator must manage all residues from the cleaning 
process as F032 waste.
    (3) Replacement requirements.
    (i) Prepare and sign a written equipment replacement plan that 
describes:
    (A) The equipment to be replaced;
    (B) How the equipment will be replaced; and
    (C) How the equipment will be disposed.
    (ii) The generator must manage the discarded equipment as F032 
waste.
    (4) Documentation requirements.
    (i) Document that previous equipment cleaning and/or replacement was 
performed in accordance with this section and occurred after cessation 
of use of chlorophenolic preservatives.
    (c) The generator must maintain the following records documenting 
the cleaning and replacement as part of the facility's operating record:
    (1) The name and address of the facility;
    (2) Formulations previously used and the date on which their use 
ceased in each process at the plant;
    (3) Formulations currently used in each process at the plant;
    (4) The equipment cleaning or replacement plan;
    (5) The name and address of any persons who conducted the cleaning 
and replacement;
    (6) The dates on which cleaning and replacement were accomplished;
    (7) The dates of sampling and testing;
    (8) A description of the sample handling and preparation techniques, 
including techniques used for extraction,

[[Page 76]]

containerization, preservation, and chain-of-custody of the samples;
    (9) A description of the tests performed, the date the tests were 
performed, and the results of the tests;
    (10) The name and model numbers of the instrument(s) used in 
performing the tests;
    (11) QA/QC documentation; and
    (12) The following statement signed by the generator or his 
authorized representative:
    I certify under penalty of law that all process equipment required 
to be cleaned or replaced under 40 CFR 261.35 was cleaned or replaced as 
represented in the equipment cleaning and replacement plan and 
accompanying documentation. I am aware that there are significant 
penalties for providing false information, including the possibility of 
fine or imprisonment.
[55 FR 50482, Dec. 6, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 30195, July 1, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 261.38  Comparable/Syngas Fuel Exclusion.

    Wastes that meet the following comparable/syngas fuel requirements 
are not solid wastes:
    (a) Comparable fuel specifications.--(1) Physical specifications.--
(i) Heating value. The heating value must exceed 5,000 BTU/lbs. (11,500 
J/g).
    (ii) Viscosity. The viscosity must not exceed: 50 cs, as-fired.
    (2) Constituent specifications. For compounds listed in table 1 to 
this section the specification levels and, where non-detect is the 
specification, minimum required detection limits are: (see Table 1).
    (b) Synthesis gas fuel specification.--Synthesis gas fuel (i.e., 
syngas fuel) that is generated from hazardous waste must:
    (1) Have a minimum Btu value of 100 Btu/Scf;
    (2) Contain less than 1 ppmv of total halogen;
    (3) Contain less than 300 ppmv of total nitrogen other than diatomic 
nitrogen (N<INF>2</INF>);
    (4) Contain less than 200 ppmv of hydrogen sulfide; and
    (5) Contain less than 1 ppmv of each hazardous constituent in the 
target list of Appendix VIII constituents of this part.

         Table 1 to Sec.  261.38: Detection and Detection Limit Values for Comparable Fuel Specification
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                     Minimum
                                                                 Concentration limit (mg/kg at       required
                Chemical name                      CAS No.              10,000 BTU/lb)           detection limit
                                                                                                     (mg/kg)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Nitrogen as N..........................              na  4900............................  ...............
Total Halogens as Cl.........................              na  540.............................  ...............
Total Organic Halogens as Cl.................              na  25 or individual halogenated      ...............
                                                                organics listed below.
Polychlorinated biphenyls, total [Arocolors,        1336-36-3  Non-detect......................              1.4
 total] <SUP>a.
Cyanide, total...............................         57-12-5  Non-detect......................              1.0
Metals:
    Antimony, total..........................       7440-36-0  7.9.............................  ...............
    Arsenic, total...........................       7440-38-2  0.23............................  ...............
    Barium, total............................       7440-39-3  23..............................  ...............
    Beryllium, total.........................       7440-41-7  1.2.............................  ...............
    Cadmium, total...........................       7440-43-9  1.2.............................  ...............
    Chromium, total..........................       7440-47-3  2.3.............................  ...............
    Cobalt...................................       7440-48-4  4.6.............................  ...............
    Lead, total..............................       7439-92-1  31..............................  ...............
    Manganese................................       7439-96-5  1.2.............................  ...............
    Mercury, total...........................       7439-97-6  0.24............................  ...............
    Nickel, total............................       7440-02-0  58..............................  ...............
    Selenium, total..........................       7782-49-2  0.15............................  ...............
    Silver, total............................       7440-22-4  2.3.............................  ...............
    Thallium, total..........................       7440-28-0  23..............................  ...............
Hydrocarbons:
    Benzo[a]anthracene.......................         56-55-3  1100............................  ...............
    Benzene..................................         71-43-2  4100............................  ...............
    Benzo[b]fluoranthene.....................        205-99-2  960.............................  ...............
    Benzo[k]fluoranthene.....................        207-08-9  1900............................  ...............
    Benzo[a]pyrene...........................         50-32-8  960.............................  ...............
    Chrysene.................................        218-01-9  1400............................  ...............

[[Page 77]]

    Dibenzo[a,h]anthracene...................         53-70-3  960.............................  ...............
    7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene...........         57-97-6  1900............................  ...............
    Fluoranthene.............................        206-44-0  1900............................  ...............
    Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene...................        193-39-5  960.............................  ...............
    3-Methylcholanthrene.....................         56-49-5  1900............................  ...............
    Naphthalene..............................         91-20-3  3200............................  ...............
    Toluene..................................        108-88-3  36000...........................  ...............
Oxygetes:
    Acetophenone.............................         98-86-2  1900............................  ...............
    Acrolein.................................        107-02-8  37..............................  ...............
    Allyl alcohol............................        107-18-6  30..............................  ...............
    Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate [Di-2-                117-81-7  1900............................  ...............
     ethylhexyl phthalate].
    Butyl benzyl phthalate...................         85-68-7  1900............................  ...............
    o-Cresol [2-Methyl phenol]...............         95-48-7  220.............................  ...............
    m-Cresol [3-Methyl phenol]...............        108-39-4  220.............................  ...............
    p-Cresol [4-Methyl phenol]...............        106-44-5  220.............................  ...............
    Di-n-butyl phthalate.....................         84-74-2  1900............................  ...............
    Diethyl phthalate........................         84-66-2  1900............................  ...............
    2,4-Dimethylphenol.......................        105-67-9  1900............................  ...............
    Dimethyl phthalate.......................        131-11-3  1900............................  ...............
    Di-n-octyl phthalate.....................        117-84-0  960.............................  ...............
    Endothall................................        145-73-3  100.............................  ...............
    Ethyl methacrylate.......................         97-63-2  37..............................  ...............
    2-Ethoxyethanol [Ethylene glycol                 110-80-5  100.............................  ...............
     monoethyl ether].
    Isobutyl alcohol.........................         78-83-1  37..............................  ...............
    Isosafrole...............................        120-58-1  1900............................  ...............
    Methyl ethyl ketone [2-Butanone].........         78-93-3  37..............................
    Methyl methacrylate......................         80-62-6  37..............................
    1,4-Naphthoquinone.......................        130-15-4  1900............................
    Phenol...................................        108-95-2  1900............................
    Propargyl alcohol [2-Propyn-l-ol]........        107-19-7  30..............................
    Safrole..................................         94-59-7  1900............................
Sulfoted Organics:
    Carbon disulfide.........................         75-15-0  Non-detect......................             37
    Disulfoton...............................        298-04-4  Non-detect......................           1900
    Ethyl methanesulfonate...................         62-50-0  Non-detect......................           1900
    Methyl methanesulfonate..................         66-27-3  Non-detect......................           1900
    Phorate..................................        298-02-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    1,3-Propane sultone......................       1120-71-4  Non-detect......................            100
    Tetraethyldithiopyrophosphate [Sulfotepp]       3689-24-5  Non-detect......................           1900
    Thiophenol [Benzenethiol]................        108-98-5  Non-detect......................             30
    O,O,O-Triethyl phosphorothioate..........        126-68-1  Non-detect......................           1900
Nitrogenated Organics:
    Acetonitrile [Methyl cyanide]............         75-05-8  Non-detect......................             37
    2-Acetylaminofluorene [2-AAF]............         53-96-3  Non-detect......................           1900
    Acrylonitrile............................        107-13-1  Non-detect......................             37
    4-Aminobiphenyl..........................         92-67-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    4-Aminopyridine..........................        504-24-5  Non-detect......................            100
    Aniline..................................         62-53-3  Non-detect......................           1900
    Benzidine................................         92-87-5  Non-detect......................           1900
    Dibenz[a,j]acridine......................        224-42-0  Non-detect......................           1900
    O,O-Diethyl O-pyrazinyl phophoro-thioate         297-97-2  Non-detect......................           1900
     [Thionazin].
    Dimethoate...............................         60-51-5  Non-detect......................           1900
    p-(Dimethylamino)azobenzene [4-                   60-11-7  Non-detect......................           1900
     Dimethylaminoazobenzene].
    3,3'-Dimethylbenzidine...................        119-93-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    <greek-a>,<greek-a>-                             122-09-8  Non-detect......................           1900
     Dimethylphenethylamine.
    3,3'-Dimethoxybenzidine..................        119-90-4  Non-detect......................            100
    1,3-Dinitrobenzene [m-Dinitrobenzene]....         99-65-0  Non-detect......................           1900
    4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol.....................        534-52-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    2,4-Dinitrophenol........................         51-28-5  Non-detect......................           1900
    2,4-Dinitrotoluene.......................        121-14-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    2,6-Dinitrotoluene.......................        606-20-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    Dinoseb [2-sec-Butyl-4,6-dinitrophenol]..         88-85-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    Diphenylamine............................        122-39-4  Non-detect......................           1900
    Ethyl carbamate [Urethane]...............         51-79-6  Non-detect......................            100
    Ethylenethiourea (2-Imidazolidinethione).         96-45-7  Non-detect......................            110
    Famphur..................................         52-85-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    Methacrylonitrile........................        126-98-7  Non-detect......................             37

[[Page 78]]

    Methapyrilene............................         91-80-5  Non-detect......................           1900
    Methomyl.................................      16752-77-5  Non-detect......................             57
    2-Methyllactonitrile [Acetone                     75-86-5  Non-detect......................            100
     cyanohydrin].
    Methyl parathion.........................        298-00-0  Non-detect......................           1900
    MNNG (N-Metyl-N-nitroso-N'-                       70-25-7  Non-detect......................            110
     nitroguanidine).
    1-Naphthylamine, [<greek-a>-                     134-32-7  Non-detect......................           1900
     Naphthylamine].
    2-Naphthylamine, [<greek-b>-                      91-59-8  Non-detect......................           1900
     Naphthylamine].
    Nicotine.................................         54-11-5  Non-detect......................            100
    4-Nitroaniline, [p-Nitroaniline].........        100-01-6  Non-detect......................           1900
    Nitrobenzene.............................         98-95-3  Non-detect......................           1900
    p-Nitrophenol, [p-Nitrophenol]...........        100-02-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    5-Nitro-o-toluidine......................         99-55-8  Non-detect......................           1900
    N-Nitrosodi-n-butylamine.................        924-16-3  Non-detect......................           1900
    N-Nitrosodiethylamine....................         55-18-5  Non-detect......................           1900
    N-Nitrosodiphenylamine,                           86-30-6  Non-detect......................           1900
     [Diphenylnitrosamine].
    N-Nitroso-N-methylethylamine.............      10595-95-6  Non-detect......................           1900
    N-Nitrosomorpholine......................         59-89-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    N-Nitrosopiperidine......................        100-75-4  Non-detect......................           1900
    N-Nitrosopyrrolidine.....................        930-55-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    2-Nitropropane...........................         79-46-9  Non-detect......................             30
    Parathion................................         56-38-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    Phenacetin...............................         62-44-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    1,4-Phenylene diamine, [p-                       106-50-3  Non-detect......................           1900
     Phenylenediamine].
    N-Phenylthiourea.........................        103-85-5  Non-detect......................             57
    2-Picoline [alpha-Picoline]..............        109-06-8  Non-detect......................           1900
    Propythioracil [6-Propyl-2-thiouracil]...         51-52-5  Non-detect......................            100
    Pyridine.................................        110-86-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    Strychnine...............................         57-24-9  Non-detect......................            100
    Thioacetamide............................         62-55-5  Non-detect......................             57
    Thiofanox................................      39196-18-4  Non-detect......................            100
    Thiourea.................................         62-56-6  Non-detect......................             57
    Toluene-2,4-diamine [2,4-Diaminotoluene].         95-80-7  Non-detect......................             57
    Toluene-2,6-diamine [2,6-Diaminotoluene].        823-40-5  Non-detect......................             57
    o-Toluidine..............................         95-53-4  Non-detect......................           2200
    p-Toluidine..............................        106-49-0  Non-detect......................            100
    1,3,5-Trinitrobenzne, [sym-                       99-35-4  Non-detect......................           2000
     Trinitobenzene].
Halogenated Organics <SUP>b:
    Allyl chloride...........................        107-05-1  Non-detect......................             37
    Aramite..................................        104-57-8  Non-detect......................           1900
    Benzal chloride [Dichloromethyl benzene].         98-87-3  Non-detect......................            100
    Benzyl chloride..........................       100-44-77  Non-detect......................            100
    Bis(2-chloroethyl)ether [Dichloroethyl           111-44-4  Non-detect......................           1900
     ether].
    Bromoform [Tribromomethane]..............         75-25-2  Non-detect......................             37
    Bromomethane [Methyl bromide]............         74-83-9  Non-detect......................             37
    4-Bromophenyl phenyl ether [p-Bromo              101-55-3  Non-detect......................           1900
     diphenyl ether].
    Carbon tetrachloride.....................         56-23-5  Non-detect......................             37
    Chlordane................................         57-74-9  Non-detect......................             14
    p-Chloroaniline..........................        106-47-8  Non-detect......................           1900
    Chlorobenzene............................        108-90-7  Non-detect......................             37
    Chlorobenzilate..........................        510-15-6  Non-detect......................           1900
    p-Chloro-m-cresol........................         59-50-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    2-Chloroethyl vinyl ether................        110-75-8  Non-detect......................             37
    Chloroform...............................         67-66-3  Non-detect......................             37
    Chloromethane [Methyl chloride]..........         74-87-3  Non-detect......................             37
    2-Chlorophthalene [beta-Chlorophthalene].         91-58-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    2-Chlorophenol [o-Chlorophenol]..........         95-57-8  Non-detect......................           1900
    Chloroprene [2-Chloro-1,3-butadiene].....       1126-99-8  Non-detect......................             37
    2,4-D [2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid]...         94-75-7  Non-detect......................              7.0
    Diallate.................................       2303-16-4  Non-detect......................           1900
    1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane..............         96-12-8  Non-detect......................             37
    1,2-Dichlorobenzene [o-Dichlorobenzene]..         95-50-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    1,3-Dichlorobenzene [m-Dichlorobenzene]..        541-73-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    1,4-Dichlorobenzene [p-Dichlorobenzene]..        106-46-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine...................         91-94-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    Dichlorodifluoromethane [CFC-12].........         75-71-8  Non-detect......................             37
    1,2-Dichloroethane [Ethylene dichloride].        107-06-2  Non-detect......................             37
    1,1-Dichloroethylene [Vinylidene                  75-35-4  Non-detect......................             37
     chloride].
    Dichloromethoxy ethane [Bis(2-                   111-91-1  Non-detect......................           1900
     chloroethoxy)methane.

[[Page 79]]

    2,4-Dichlorophenol.......................        120-83-2  Non-detect......................           1900
    2,6-Dichlorophenol.......................         87-65-0  Non-detect......................           1900
    1,2-Dichloropropane [Propylene                    78-87-5  Non-detect......................             37
     dichloride].
    cis-1,3-Dichloropropylene................      10061-01-5  Non-detect......................             37
    trans-1,3-Dichloropropylene..............      10061-02-6  Non-detect......................             37
    1,3-Dichloro-2-propanol..................         96-23-1  Non-detect......................             30
    Endosulfan I.............................        959-98-8  Non-detect......................              1.4
    Endosulfan II............................      33213-65-9  Non-detect......................              1.4
    Endrin...................................         72-20-8  Non-detect......................              1.4
    Endrin aldehyde..........................       7421-93-4  Non-detect......................              1.4
    Endrin Ketone............................      53494-70-5  Non-detect......................              1.4
    Epichlorohydrin [1-Chloro-2,3-epoxy              106-89-8  Non-detect......................             30
     propane].
    Ethylidene dichloride [1,1-                       75-34-3  Non-detect......................             37
     Dichloroethane].
    2-Fluoroacetamide........................        640-19-7  Non-detect......................            100
    Heptachlor...............................         76-44-8  Non-detect......................              1.4
    Heptachlor epoxide.......................       1024-57-3  Non-detect......................              2.8
    Hexachlorobenzene........................        118-74-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene                          87-68-3  Non-detect......................           1900
     [Hexachlorobutadiene].
    Hexachlorocyclopentadiene................         77-47-4  Non-detect......................           1900
    Hexachloroethane.........................         67-72-1  Non-detect......................           1900
    Hexachlorophene..........................         70-30-4  Non-detect......................           1000
    Hexachloropropene [Hexachloropropylene]..       1888-71-7  Non-detect......................           1900
    Isodrin..................................        465-73-6  Non-detect......................           1900
    Kepone [Chlordecone].....................        143-50-0  Non-detect......................           3600
    Lindane [gamma-Hexachlorocyclohexane]             58-89-9  non-detect......................              1.4
     [gamma-BHC].
    Methylene chloride [Dichloromethane].....         75-09-2  non-detect......................             37
    4,4'-methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline)......        101-14-4  non-detect......................            100
    Methyl iodide [Iodomethane]..............         74-88-4  non-detect......................             37
    Pentachlorobenzene.......................        608-93-5  non-detect......................           1900
    Pentachloroethane........................         76-01-7  non-detect......................             37
    Pentachloronitrobenzene [PCNB]                    82-68-8  non-detect......................           1900
     [Quintobenzene] [Quintozene].
    Pentachlorophenol........................         87-86-5  non-detect......................           1900
    Pronamide................................      23950-58-5  non-detect......................           1900
    Silvex [2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxypropionic           93-72-1  non-detect......................              7.0
     acid].
    2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin             1746-01-6  non-detect......................             30
     [2,3,7,8-TCDD].
    1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene...............         95-94-3  non-detect......................           1900
    1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane................         79-34-5  non-detect......................             37
    Tetrachloroethylene [Perchloroethylene]..        127-18-4  non-detect......................             37
    2,3,4,6-Tetrachlorophenol................         58-90-2  non-detect......................           1900
    1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene...................        120-82-1  non-detect......................           1900
    1,1,1-Trichloroethane [Methyl chloroform]         71-55-6  non-detect......................             37
    1,1,2-Trichloroethane [Vinyl trichloride]         79-00-5  non-detect......................             37
    Trichloroethylene........................         79-01-6  non-detect......................             37
    Trichlorofluoromethane                            75-69-4  non-detect......................             37
     [Trichlormonofluoromethane].
    2,4,5-Trichlorophenol....................         95-95-4  non-detect......................           1900
    2,4,6-Trichlorophenol....................         88-06-2  non-detect......................           1900
    1,2,3-Trichloropropane...................         96-18-4  non-detect......................             37
    Vinyl Chloride...........................         75-01-4  non-detect......................             37
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
<SUP>a Absence of PCBs can also be demonstrated by using appropriate screening methods, e.g., immunoassay kit for PCB
  in oils (Method 4020) or colorimetric analysis for PCBs in oil (Method 9079).
<SUP>b Some minimum required detection limits are above the total halogen limit of 540 ppm. The detection limits
  reflect what was achieved during EPA testing and analysis and also analytical complexity associated with
  measuring all halogen compounds on Appendix VIII at low levels. EPA recognizes that in practice the presence
  of these compounds will be functionally limited by the molecular weight and the total halogen limit of 540
  ppm.

    (c) Implementation.--Waste that meets the comparable or syngas fuel 
specifications provided by paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section (these 
constituent levels must be achieved by the comparable fuel when 
generated, or as a result of treatment or blending, as provided in 
paragraphs (c)(3) or (4) of this section) is excluded from the 
definition of solid waste provided that the following requirements are 
met:
    (1) Notices--For purposes of this section, the person claiming and 
qualifying for the exclusion is called the comparable/syngas fuel 
generator and the person burning the comparable/syngas fuel is called 
the comparable/syngas burner. The person who generates the

[[Page 80]]

comparable fuel or syngas fuel must claim and certify to the exclusion.
    (i) State RCRA and CAA Directors in Authorized States or Regional 
RCRA and CAA Directors in Unauthorized States.--
    (A) The generator must submit a one-time notice to the Regional or 
State RCRA and CAA Directors, in whose jurisdiction the exclusion is 
being claimed and where the comparable/syngas fuel will be burned, 
certifying compliance with the conditions of the exclusion and providing 
documentation as required by paragraph (c)(1)(i)(C) of this section;
    (B) If the generator is a company that generates comparable/syngas 
fuel at more than one facility, the generator shall specify at which 
sites the comparable/syngas fuel will be generated;
    (C) A comparable/syngas fuel generator's notification to the 
Directors must contain the following items:
    (1) The name, address, and RCRA ID number of the person/facility 
claiming the exclusion;
    (2) The applicable EPA Hazardous Waste Codes for the hazardous 
waste;
    (3) Name and address of the units, meeting the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section, that will burn the comparable/syngas 
fuel; and
    (4) The following statement is signed and submitted by the person 
claiming the exclusion or his authorized representative:

    Under penalty of criminal and civil prosecution for making or 
submitting false statements, representations, or omissions, I certify 
that the requirements of 40 CFR 261.38 have been met for all waste 
identified in this notification. Copies of the records and information 
required at 40 CFR 261.28(c)(10) are available at the comparable/syngas 
fuel generator's facility. Based on my inquiry of the individuals 
immediately responsible for obtaining the information, the information 
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and 
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting 
false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment 
for knowing violations.

    (ii) Public notice.--Prior to burning an excluded comparable/syngas 
fuel, the burner must publish in a major newspaper of general 
circulation local to the site where the fuel will be burned, a notice 
entitled ``Notification of Burning a Comparable/Syngas Fuel Excluded 
Under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act'' containing the 
following information:
    (A) Name, address, and RCRA ID number of the generating facility;
    (B) Name and address of the unit(s) that will burn the comparable/
syngas fuel;
    (C) A brief, general description of the manufacturing, treatment, or 
other process generating the comparable/syngas fuel;
    (D) An estimate of the average and maximum monthly and annual 
quantity of the waste claimed to be excluded; and
    (E) Name and mailing address of the Regional or State Directors to 
whom the claim was submitted.
    (2) Burning.--The comparable/syngas fuel exclusion for fuels meeting 
the requirements of paragraphs (a) or (b) and (c)(1) of this section 
applies only if the fuel is burned in the following units that also 
shall be subject to Federal/State/local air emission requirements, 
including all applicable CAA MACT requirements:
    (i) Industrial furnaces as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter;
    (ii) Boilers, as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter, that are 
further defined as follows:
    (A) Industrial boilers located on the site of a facility engaged in 
a manufacturing process where substances are transformed into new 
products, including the component parts of products, by mechanical or 
chemical processes; or
    (B) Utility boilers used to produce electric power, steam, heated or 
cooled air, or other gases or fluids for sale;
    (iii) Hazardous waste incinerators subject to regulation under 
subpart O of parts 264 or 265 of this chapter or applicable CAA MACT 
standards.
    (3) Blending to meet the viscosity specification.--A hazardous waste 
blended to meet the viscosity specification shall:
    (i) As generated and prior to any blending, manipulation, or 
processing meet the constituent and heating value specifications of 
paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (a)(2) of this section;

[[Page 81]]

    (ii) Be blended at a facility that is subject to the applicable 
requirements of parts 264 and 265, or Sec. 262.34 of this chapter; and
    (iii) Not violate the dilution prohibition of paragraph (c)(6) of 
this chapter.
    (4) Treatment to meet the comparable fuel exclusion 
specifications.--(i) A hazardous waste may be treated to meet the 
exclusion specifications of paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section 
provided the treatment:
    (A) Destroys or removes the constituent listed in the specification 
or raises the heating value by removing or destroying hazardous 
constituents or materials;
    (B) Is performed at a facility that is subject to the applicable 
requirements of parts 264 and 265, or Sec. 262.34 of this Chapter; and
    (C) Does not violate the dilution prohibition of paragraph (c)(6) of 
this seciton.
    (ii) Residuals resulting from the treatment of a hazardous waste 
listed in subpart D of this part to generate a comparable fuel remain a 
hazardous waste.
    (5) Generation of a syngas fuel.--(i) A syngas fuel can be generated 
from the processing of hazardous wastes to meet the exclusion 
specifications of paragraph (b) of this section provided the processing:
    (A) Destroys or removes the constituent listed in the specification 
or raises the heating value by removing or destroying constituents or 
materials;
    (B) Is performed at a facility that is subject to the applicable 
requirements of parts 264 and 265, or Sec. 262.34 of this chapter or is 
an exempt recycling unit pursuant to Sec. 261.6(c) of this chapter; and
    (C) Does not violate the dilution prohibition of paragraph (c)(6) of 
this chapter.
    (ii) Residuals resulting from the treatment of a hazardous waste 
listed in subpart D of this part to generate a syngas fuel remain a 
hazardous waste.
    (6) Dilution prohibition for comparable and syngas fuels.--No 
generator, transporter, handler, or owner or operator of a treatment, 
storage, or disposal facility shall in any way dilute a hazardous waste 
to meet the exclusion specifications of paragraph (a)(1)(i), (a)(2) or 
(b) of this section.
    (7) Waste analysis plans. The generator of a comparable/syngas fuel 
shall develop and follow a written waste analysis plan which describes 
the procedures for sampling and analysis of the hazardous waste to be 
excluded. The waste analysis plan shall be developed in accordance with 
the applicable sections of the ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid 
Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods'' (SW-846). The plan shall be followed 
and retained at the facility excluding the waste.
    (i) At a minimum, the plan must specify:
    (A) The parameters for which each hazardous waste will be analyzed 
and the rationale for the selection of those parameters;
    (B) The test methods which will be used to test for these 
parameters;
    (C) The sampling method which will be used to obtain a 
representative sample of the waste to be analyzed;
    (D) The frequency with which the initial analysis of the waste will 
be reviewed or repeated to ensure that the analysis is accurate and up 
to date; and
    (E) If process knowledge is used in the waste determination, any 
information prepared by the generator in making such determination.
    (ii) The waste analysis plan shall also contain records of the 
following:
    (A) The dates and times waste samples were obtained, and the dates 
the samples were analyzed;
    (B) The names and qualifications of the person(s) who obtained the 
samples;
    (C) A description of the temporal and spatial locations of the 
samples;
    (D) The name and address of the laboratory facility at which 
analyses of the samples were performed;
    (E) A description of the analytical methods used, including any 
clean-up and sample preparation methods;
    (F) All quantitation limits achieved and all other quality control 
results for the analysis (including method blanks, duplicate analyses, 
matrix spikes, etc.), laboratory quality assurance data, and description 
of any deviations from analytical methods written in the plan or from 
any other activity written in the plan which occurred;

[[Page 82]]

    (G) All laboratory results demonstrating that the exclusion 
specifications have been met for the waste; and
    (H) All laboratory documentation that support the analytical 
results, unless a contract between the claimant and the laboratory 
provides for the documentation to be maintained by the laboratory for 
the period specified in paragraph (c)(11) of this section and also 
provides for the availability of the documentation to the claimant upon 
request.
    (iii) Syngas fuel generators shall submit for approval, prior to 
performing sampling, analysis, or any management of a syngas fuel as an 
excluded waste, a waste analysis plan containing the elements of 
paragraph (c)(7)(i) of this section to the appropriate regulatory 
authority. The approval of waste analysis plans must be stated in 
writing and received by the facility prior to sampling and analysis to 
demonstrate the exclusion of a syngas. The approval of the waste 
analysis plan may contain such provisions and conditions as the 
regulatory authority deems appropriate.
    (8) Comparable fuel sampling and analysis. (i) General. For each 
waste for which an exclusion is claimed, the generator of the hazardous 
waste must test for all the constituents on appendix VIII to this part, 
except those that the generator determines, based on testing or 
knowledge, should not be present in the waste. The generator is required 
to document the basis of each determination that a constituent should 
not be present. The generator may not determine that any of the 
following categories of constituents should not be present:
    (A) A constituent that triggered the toxicity characteristic for the 
waste constituents that were the basis of the listing of the waste 
stream, or constituents for which there is a treatment standard for the 
waste code in 40 CFR 268.40;
    (B) A constituent detected in previous analysis of the waste;
    (C) Constituents introduced into the process that generates the 
waste; or
    (D) Constituents that are byproducts or side reactions to the 
process that generates the waste.


    Note to paragraph (c)(8): ,Any claim under this section must be 
valid and accurate for all hazardous constituents; a determination not 
to test for a hazardous constituent will not shield a generator from 
liability should that constituent later be found in the waste above the 
exclusion specifications.


    (ii) For each waste for which the exclusion is claimed where the 
generator of the comparable/syngas fuel is not the original generator of 
the hazardous waste, the generator of the comparable/syngas fuel may not 
use process knowledge pursuant to paragraph (c)(8)(i) of this section 
and must test to determine that all of the constituent specifications of 
paragraphs (a)(2) and (b) of this section have been met.
    (iii) The comparable/syngas fuel generator may use any reliable 
analytical method to demonstrate that no constituent of concern is 
present at concentrations above the specification levels. It is the 
responsibility of the generator to ensure that the sampling and analysis 
are unbiased, precise, and representative of the waste. For the waste to 
be eligible for exclusion, a generator must demonstrate that:
    (A) Each constituent of concern is not present in the waste above 
the specification level at the 95% upper confidence limit around the 
mean; and
    (B) The analysis could have detected the presence of the constituent 
at or below the specification level at the 95% upper confidence limit 
around the mean.
    (iv) Nothing in this paragraph preempts, overrides or otherwise 
negates the provision in Sec. 262.11 of this chapter, which requires any 
person who generates a solid waste to determine if that waste is a 
hazardous waste.
    (v) In an enforcement action, the burden of proof to establish 
conformance with the exclusion specification shall be on the generator 
claiming the exclusion.
    (vi) The generator must conduct sampling and analysis in accordance 
with their waste analysis plan developed under paragraph (c)(7) of this 
section.
    (vii) Syngas fuel and comparable fuel that has not been blended in 
order to meet the kinematic viscosity specifications shall be analyzed 
as generated.

[[Page 83]]

    (viii) If a comparable fuel is blended in order to meet the 
kinematic viscosity specifications, the generator shall:
    (A) Analyze the fuel as generated to ensure that it meets the 
constituent and heating value specifications; and
    (B) After blending, analyze the fuel again to ensure that the 
blended fuel continues to meet all comparable/syngas fuel 
specifications.
    (ix) Excluded comparable/syngas fuel must be re-tested, at a 
minimum, annually and must be retested after a process change that could 
change the chemical or physical properties of the waste.
    (9) Speculative accumulation. Any persons handling a comparable/
syngas fuel are subject to the speculative accumulation test under 
Sec. 261.2(c)(4) of this chapter.
    (10) Records. The generator must maintain records of the following 
information on-site:
    (i) All information required to be submitted to the implementing 
authority as part of the notification of the claim:
    (A) The owner/operator name, address, and RCRA facility ID number of 
the person claiming the exclusion;
    (B) The applicable EPA Hazardous Waste Codes for each hazardous 
waste excluded as a fuel; and
    (C) The certification signed by the person claiming the exclusion or 
his authorized representative.
    (ii) A brief description of the process that generated the hazardous 
waste and process that generated the excluded fuel, if not the same;
    (iii) An estimate of the average and maximum monthly and annual 
quantities of each waste claimed to be excluded;
    (iv) Documentation for any claim that a constituent is not present 
in the hazardous waste as required under paragraph (c)(8)(i) of this 
section;
    (v) The results of all analyses and all detection limits achieved as 
required under paragraph (c)(8) of this section;
    (vi) If the excluded waste was generated through treatment or 
blending, documentation as required under paragraph (c)(3) or (4) of 
this section;
    (vii) If the waste is to be shipped off-site, a certification from 
the burner as required under paragraph (c)(12) of this section;
    (viii) A waste analysis plan and the results of the sampling and 
analysis that includes the following:
    (A) The dates and times waste samples were obtained, and the dates 
the samples were analyzed;
    (B) The names and qualifications of the person(s) who obtained the 
samples;
    (C) A description of the temporal and spatial locations of the 
samples;
    (D) The name and address of the laboratory facility at which 
analyses of the samples were performed;
    (E) A description of the analytical methods used, including any 
clean-up and sample preparation methods;
    (F) All quantitation limits achieved and all other quality control 
results for the analysis (including method blanks, duplicate analyses, 
matrix spikes, etc.), laboratory quality assurance data, and description 
of any deviations from analytical methods written in the plan or from 
any other activity written in the plan which occurred;
    (G) All laboratory analytical results demonstrating that the 
exclusion specifications have been met for the waste; and
    (H) All laboratory documentation that support the analytical 
results, unless a contract between the claimant and the laboratory 
provides for the documentation to be maintained by the laboratory for 
the period specified in paragraph (c)(11) of this section and also 
provides for the availability of the documentation to the claimant upon 
request; and
    (ix) If the generator ships comparable/syngas fuel off-site for 
burning, the generator must retain for each shipment the following 
information on-site:
    (A) The name and address of the facility receiving the comparable/
syngas fuel for burning;
    (B) The quantity of comparable/syngas fuel shipped and delivered;
    (C) The date of shipment or delivery;
    (D) A cross-reference to the record of comparable/syngas fuel 
analysis or other information used to make the determination that the 
comparable/syngas fuel meets the specifications as

[[Page 84]]

required under paragraph (c)(8) of this section; and
    (E) A one-time certification by the burner as required under 
paragraph (c)(12) of this section.
    (11) Records retention. Records must be maintained for the period of 
three years. A generator must maintain a current waste analysis plan 
during that three year period.
    (12) Burner certification. Prior to submitting a notification to the 
State and Regional Directors, a comparable/syngas fuel generator who 
intends to ship their fuel off-site for burning must obtain a one-time 
written, signed statement from the burner:
    (i) Certifying that the comparable/syngas fuel will only be burned 
in an industrial furnace or boiler, utility boiler, or hazardous waste 
incinerator, as required under paragraph (c)(2) of this section;
    (ii) Identifying the name and address of the units that will burn 
the comparable/syngas fuel; and
    (iii) Certifying that the state in which the burner is located is 
authorized to exclude wastes as comparable/syngas fuel under the 
provisions of this section.
    (13) Ineligible waste codes. Wastes that are listed because of 
presence of dioxins or furans, as set out in Appendix VII of this part, 
are not eligible for this exclusion, and any fuel produced from or 
otherwise containing these wastes remains a hazardous waste subject to 
full RCRA hazardous waste management requirements.
[63 FR 33823, June 19, 1998]

                         Appendices to Part 261

         Appendix I to Part 261--Representative Sampling Methods

    The methods and equipment used for sampling waste materials will 
vary with the form and consistency of the waste materials to be sampled. 
Samples collected using the sampling protocols listed below, for 
sampling waste with properties similar to the indicated materials, will 
be considered by the Agency to be representative of the waste.
Extremely viscous liquid--ASTM Standard D140-70 Crushed or powdered 
material--ASTM Standard D346-75 Soil or rock-like material--ASTM 
Standard D420-69 Soil-like material--ASTM Standard D1452-65
Fly Ash-like material--ASTM Standard D2234-76 [ASTM Standards are 
available from ASTM, 1916 Race St., Philadelphia, PA 19103]
Containerized liquid wastes--``COLIWASA'' described in ``Test Methods 
for the Evaluation of Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' <SUP>1a</SUP> 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste, Washington, 
DC 20460. [Copies may be obtained from Solid Waste Information, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, 26 W. St. Clair St., Cincinnati, Ohio 
45268]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


    <SUP>1a</SUP> These methods are also described in ``Samplers and 
Sampling Procedures for Hazardous Waste Streams,'' EPA 600/2-80-018, 
January 1980.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Liquid waste in pits, ponds, lagoons, and similar reservoirs.--``Pond 
Sampler'' described in ``Test Methods for the Evaluation of Solid Waste, 
Physical/Chemical Methods.'' <SUP>1a

    </SUP>This manual also contains additional information on 
application of these protocols.

 Appendix II to Part 261--Method 1311 Toxicity Characteristic Leaching 
                            Procedure (TCLP)

    Note: The TCLP (Method 1311) is published in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-
846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of this chapter.

[58 FR 46049, Aug. 31, 1993]

        Appendix III to Part 261--Chemical Analysis Test Methods

    Note: Appropriate analytical procedures to determine whether a 
sample contains a given toxic constituent are specified in Chapter Two, 
``Choosing the Correct Procedure'' found in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-
846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of this chapter. Prior 
to final sampling and analysis method selection, the individual should 
consult the specific section or method described in SW-846 for 
additional guidance on which of the approved methods should be employed 
for a specific sample analysis situation.

[58 FR 46049, Aug. 31, 1993]

[[Page 85]]

 Appendix IV to Part 261--[Reserved for Radioactive Waste Test Methods]

    Appendix V to Part 261--[Reserved for Infectious Waste Treatment 
                             Specifications]

        Appendix VI to Part 261--[Reserved for Etiologic Agents]

       Appendix VII to Part 261--Basis for Listing Hazardous Waste

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Hazardous constituents for which
     EPA hazardous waste No.                      listed
------------------------------------------------------------------------
F001............................  Tetrachloroethylene, methylene
                                   chloride trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-
                                   trichloroethane, carbon
                                   tetrachloride, chlorinated
                                   fluorocarbons.
F002............................  Tetrachloroethylene, methylene
                                   chloride, trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-
                                   trichloroethane, 1,1,2-
                                   trichloroethane, chlorobenzene, 1,1,2-
                                   trichloro-1,2,2-trichfluoroethane,
                                   ortho-dichlorobenzene,
                                   trichlorofluoromethane.
F003............................  N.A.
F004............................  Cresols and cresylic acid,
                                   nitrobenzene.
F005............................  Toluene, methyl ethyl ketone, carbon
                                   disulfide, isobutanol, pyridine, 2-
                                   ethoxyethanol, benzene, 2-
                                   nitropropane.
F006............................  Cadmium, hexavalent chromium, nickel,
                                   cyanide (complexed).
F007............................  Cyanide (salts).
F008............................  Cyanide (salts).
F009............................  Cyanide (salts).
F010............................  Cyanide (salts).
F011............................  Cyanide (salts).
F012............................  Cyanide (complexed).
F019............................  Hexavalent chromium, cyanide
                                   (complexed).
F020............................  Tetra- and pentachlorodibenzo-p-
                                   dioxins; tetra and pentachlorodi-
                                   benzofurans; tri- and
                                   tetrachlorophenols and their
                                   chlorophenoxy derivative acids,
                                   esters, ethers, amine and other
                                   salts.
F021............................  Penta- and hexachlorodibenzo-p-
                                   dioxins; penta- and
                                   hexachlorodibenzofurans;
                                   pentachlorophenol and its
                                   derivatives.
F022............................  Tetra-, penta-, and hexachlorodibenzo-
                                   p-dioxins; tetra-, penta-, and
                                   hexachlorodibenzofurans.
F023............................  Tetra-, and pentachlorodibenzo-p-
                                   dioxins; tetra- and
                                   pentachlorodibenzofurans; tri- and
                                   tetrachlorophenols and their
                                   chlorophenoxy derivative acids,
                                   esters, ethers, amine and other
                                   salts.
F024............................  Chloromethane, dichloromethane,
                                   trichloromethane, carbon
                                   tetrachloride, chloroethylene, 1,1-
                                   dichloroethane, 1,2-dichloroethane,
                                   trans-1-2-dichloroethylene, 1,1-
                                   dichloroethylene, 1,1,1-
                                   trichloroethane, 1,1,2-
                                   trichloroethane, trichloroethylene,
                                   1,1,1,2-tetra-chloroethane, 1,1,2,2-
                                   tetrachloroethane,
                                   tetrachloroethylene,
                                   pentachloroethane, hexachloroethane,
                                   allyl chloride (3-chloropropene),
                                   dichloropropane, dichloropropene, 2-
                                   chloro-1,3-butadiene, hexachloro-1,3-
                                   butadiene, hexachlorocyclopentadiene,
                                   hexachlorocyclohexane, benzene,
                                   chlorbenzene, dichlorobenzenes, 1,2,4-
                                   trichlorobenzene, tetrachlorobenzene,
                                   pentachlorobenzene,
                                   hexachlorobenzene, toluene,
                                   naphthalene.
F025............................  Chloromethane; Dichloromethane;
                                   Trichloromethane; Carbon
                                   tetrachloride; Chloroethylene; 1,1-
                                   Dichloroethane; 1,2-Dichloroethane;
                                   trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene; 1,1-
                                   Dichloroethylene; 1,1,1-
                                   Trichloroethane; 1,1,2-
                                   Trichloroethane; Trichloroethylene;
                                   1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane; 1,1,2,2-
                                   Tetrachloroethane;
                                   Tetrachloroethylene;
                                   Pentachloroethane; Hexachloroethane;
                                   Allyl chloride (3-Chloropropene);
                                   Dichloropropane; Dichloropropene; 2-
                                   Chloro-1,3-butadiene; Hexachloro-1,3-
                                   butadiene; Hexachlorocyclopentadiene;
                                   Benzene; Chlorobenzene;
                                   Dichlorobenzene; 1,2,4-
                                   Trichlorobenzene; Tetrachlorobenzene;
                                   Pentachlorobenzene;
                                   Hexachlorobenzene; Toluene;
                                   Naphthalene.
F026............................  Tetra-, penta-, and hexachlorodibenzo-
                                   p-dioxins; tetra-, penta-, and
                                   hexachlorodibenzofurans.
F027............................  Tetra-, penta-, and hexachlorodibenzo-
                                   p- dioxins; tetra-, penta-, and
                                   hexachlorodibenzofurans; tri-, tetra-
                                   , and pentachlorophenols and their
                                   chlorophenoxy derivative acids,
                                   esters, ethers, amine and other
                                   salts.
F028............................  Tetra-, penta-, and hexachlorodibenzo-
                                   p- dioxins; tetra-, penta-, and
                                   hexachlorodibenzofurans; tri-, tetra-
                                   , and pentachlorophenols and their
                                   chlorophenoxy derivative acids,
                                   esters, ethers, amine and other
                                   salts.
F032............................  Benz(a)anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)-anthracene, indeno(1,2,3-
                                   cd)pyrene, pentachlorophenol,
                                   arsenic, chromium, tetra-, penta-,
                                   hexa-, heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins,
                                   tetra-, penta-, hexa-,
                                   heptachlorodibenzofurans.
F034............................  Benz(a)anthracene,
                                   benzo(k)fluoranthene, benzo(a)pyrene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)anthracene, indeno(1,2,3-
                                   cd)pyrene, naphthalene, arsenic,
                                   chromium.
F035............................  Arsenic, chromium, lead.
F037............................  Benzene, benzo(a)pyrene, chrysene,
                                   lead, chromium.
F038............................  Benzene, benzo(a)pyrene chrysene,
                                   lead, chromium.
F039............................  All constituents for which treatment
                                   standards are specified for multi-
                                   source leachate (wastewaters and
                                   nonwastewaters) under 40 CFR
                                   268.43(a), Table CCW.
K001............................  Pentachlorophenol, phenol, 2-
                                   chlorophenol, p-chloro-m-cresol, 2,4-
                                   dimethylphenyl, 2,4-dinitrophenol,
                                   trichlorophenols, tetrachlorophenols,
                                   2,4-dinitrophenol, cresosote,
                                   chrysene, naphthalene, fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(a)pyrene,
                                   indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene,
                                   benz(a)anthracene,
                                   dibenz(a)anthracene, acenaphthalene.
K002............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead
K003............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead.
K004............................  Hexavalent chromium.
K005............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead.
K006............................  Hexavalent chromium.
K007............................  Cyanide (complexed), hexavalent
                                   chromium.
K008............................  Hexavalent chromium.
K009............................  Chloroform, formaldehyde, methylene
                                   chloride, methyl chloride,
                                   paraldehyde, formic acid.
K010............................  Chloroform, formaldehyde, methylene
                                   chloride, methyl chloride,
                                   paraldehyde, formic acid,
                                   chloroacetaldehyde.
K011............................  Acrylonitrile, acetonitrile,
                                   hydrocyanic acid.
K013............................  Hydrocyanic acid, acrylonitrile,
                                   acetonitrile.
K014............................  Acetonitrile, acrylamide.

[[Page 86]]

K015............................  Benzyl chloride, chlorobenzene,
                                   toluene, benzotrichloride.
K016............................  Hexachlorobenzene,
                                   hexachlorobutadiene, carbon
                                   tetrachloride, hexachloroethane,
                                   perchloroethylene.
K017............................  Epichlorohydrin, chloroethers
                                   [bis(chloromethyl) ether and bis (2-
                                   chloroethyl) ethers],
                                   trichloropropane, dichloropropanols.
K018............................  1,2-dichloroethane, trichloroethylene,
                                   hexachlorobutadiene,
                                   hexachlorobenzene.
K019............................  Ethylene dichloride, 1,1,1-
                                   trichloroethane, 1,1,2-
                                   trichloroethane, tetrachloroethanes
                                   (1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane and
                                   1,1,1,2-tetrachloroethane),
                                   trichloroethylene,
                                   tetrachloroethylene, carbon
                                   tetrachloride, chloroform, vinyl
                                   chloride, vinylidene chloride.
K020............................  Ethylene dichloride, 1,1,1-
                                   trichloroethane, 1,1,2-
                                   trichloroethane, tetrachloroethanes
                                   (1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane and
                                   1,1,1,2-tetrachloroethane),
                                   trichloroethylene,
                                   tetrachloroethylene, carbon
                                   tetrachloride, chloroform, vinyl
                                   chloride, vinylidene chloride.
K021............................  Antimony, carbon tetrachloride,
                                   chloroform.
K022............................  Phenol, tars (polycyclic aromatic
                                   hydrocarbons).
K023............................  Phthalic anhydride, maleic anhydride.
K024............................  Phthalic anhydride, 1,4-
                                   naphthoquinone.
K025............................  Meta-dinitrobenzene, 2,4-
                                   dinitrotoluene.
K026............................  Paraldehyde, pyridines, 2-picoline.
K027............................  Toluene diisocyanate, toluene-2, 4-
                                   diamine.
K028............................  1,1,1-trichloroethane, vinyl chloride.
K029............................  1,2-dichloroethane, 1,1,1-
                                   trichloroethane, vinyl chloride,
                                   vinylidene chloride, chloroform.
K030............................  Hexachlorobenzene,
                                   hexachlorobutadiene,
                                   hexachloroethane, 1,1,1,2-
                                   tetrachloroethane, 1,1,2,2-
                                   tetrachloroethane, ethylene
                                   dichloride.
K031............................  Arsenic.
K032............................  Hexachlorocyclopentadiene.
K033............................  Hexachlorocyclopentadiene.
K034............................  Hexachlorocyclopentadiene.
K035............................  Creosote, chrysene, naphthalene,
                                   fluoranthene benzo(b) fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(a)pyrene, indeno(1,2,3-cd)
                                   pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene,
                                   dibenzo(a)anthracene, acenaphthalene.
K036............................  Toluene, phosphorodithioic and
                                   phosphorothioic acid esters.
K037............................  Toluene, phosphorodithioic and
                                   phosphorothioic acid esters.
K038............................  Phorate, formaldehyde,
                                   phosphorodithioic and phosphorothioic
                                   acid esters.
K039............................  Phosphorodithioic and phosphorothioic
                                   acid esters.
K040............................  Phorate, formaldehyde,
                                   phosphorodithioic and phosphorothioic
                                   acid esters.
K041............................  Toxaphene.
K042............................  Hexachlorobenzene, ortho-
                                   dichlorobenzene.
K043............................  2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,6-
                                   dichlorophenol, 2,4,6-
                                   trichlorophenol.
K044............................  N.A.
K045............................  N.A.
K046............................  Lead.
K047............................  N.A.
K048............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead.
K049............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead.
K050............................  Hexavalent chromium.
K051............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead.
K052............................  Lead.
K060............................  Cyanide, napthalene, phenolic
                                   compounds, arsenic.
K061............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead, cadmium.
K062............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead.
K064............................  Lead, cadmium.
K065............................      Do.
K066............................      Do.
K069............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead, cadmium.
K071............................  Mercury.
K073............................  Chloroform, carbon tetrachloride,
                                   hexacholroethane, trichloroethane,
                                   tetrachloroethylene,
                                   dichloroethylene, 1,1,2,2-
                                   tetrachloroethane.
K083............................  Aniline, diphenylamine, nitrobenzene,
                                   phenylenediamine.
K084............................  Arsenic.
K085............................  Benzene, dichlorobenzenes,
                                   trichlorobenzenes,
                                   tetrachlorobenzenes,
                                   pentachlorobenzene,
                                   hexachlorobenzene, benzyl chloride.
K086............................  Lead, hexavalent chromium.
K087............................  Phenol, naphthalene.
K088............................  Cyanide (complexes).
K090............................  Chromium.
K091............................      Do.
K093............................  Phthalic anhydride, maleic anhydride.
K094............................  Phthalic anhydride.
K095............................  1,1,2-trichloroethane, 1,1,1,2-
                                   tetrachloroethane, 1,1,2,2-
                                   tetrachloroethane.
K096............................  1,2-dichloroethane, 1,1,1-
                                   trichloroethane, 1,1,2-
                                   trichloroethane.
K097............................  Chlordane, heptachlor.
K098............................  Toxaphene.
K099............................  2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4,6-
                                   trichlorophenol.
K100............................  Hexavalent chromium, lead, cadmium.
K101............................  Arsenic.
K102............................  Arsenic.
K103............................  Aniline, nitrobenzene,
                                   phenylenediamine.
K104............................  Aniline, benzene, diphenylamine,
                                   nitrobenzene, phenylenediamine.
K105............................  Benzene, monochlorobenzene,
                                   dichlorobenzenes, 2,4,6-
                                   trichlorophenol.
K106............................  Mercury.
K107............................  1,1-Dimethylhydrazine (UDMH).
K108............................  1,1-Dimethylhydrazine (UDMH).
K109............................  1,1-Dimethylhydrazine (UDMH).
K110............................  1,1-Dimethylhydrazine (UDMH).
K111............................  2,4-Dinitrotoluene.
K112............................  2,4-Toluenediamine, o-toluidine, p-
                                   toluidine, aniline.
K113............................  2,4-Toluenediamine, o-toluidine, p-
                                   toluidine, aniline.
K114............................  2,4-Toluenediamine, o-toluidine, p-
                                   toluidine.
K115............................  2,4-Toluenediamine.
K116............................  Carbon tetrachloride,
                                   tetrachloroethylene, chloroform,
                                   phosgene.
K117............................  Ethylene dibromide.
K118............................  Ethylene dibromide.
K123............................  Ethylene thiourea.
K124............................  Ethylene thiourea.
K125............................  Ethylene thiourea.
K126............................  Ethylene thiourea.
K131............................  Dimethyl sulfate, methyl bromide.
K132............................  Methyl bromide.
K136............................  Ethylene dibromide.
K140............................  2,4,6-Tribromophenol.
K141............................  Benzene, benz(a)anthracene,
                                   benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(k)fluoranthene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)anthracene, indeno(1,2,3-
                                   cd)pyrene.
K142............................  Benzene, benz(a)anthracene,
                                   benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(k)fluoranthene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)anthracene, indeno(1,2,3-
                                   cd)pyrene.
K143............................  Benzene, benz(a)anthracene,
                                   benzo(b)fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(k)fluoranthene.
K144............................  Benzene, benz(a)anthracene,
                                   benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(k)fluoranthene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)anthracene.

[[Page 87]]

K145............................  Benzene, benz(a)anthracene,
                                   benzo(a)pyrene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)anthracene, naphthalene.
K147............................  Benzene, benz(a)anthracene,
                                   benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(k)fluoranthene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)anthracene, indeno(1,2,3-
                                   cd)pyrene.
K148............................  Benz(a)anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene,
                                   benzo(b)fluoranthene,
                                   benzo(k)fluoranthene,
                                   dibenz(a,h)anthracene, indeno(1,2,3-
                                   cd)pyrene.
K149............................  Benzotrichloride, benzyl chloride,
                                   chloroform, chloromethane,
                                   chlorobenzene, 1,4-dichlorobenzene,
                                   hexachlorobenzene,
                                   pentachlorobenzene, 1,2,4,5-
                                   tetrachlorobenzene, toluene.
K150............................  Carbon tetrachloride, chloroform,
                                   chloromethane, 1,4-dichlorobenzene,
                                   hexachlorobenzene,
                                   pentachlorobenzene, 1,2,4,5-
                                   tetrachlorobenzene, 1,1,2,2-
                                   tetrachloroethane,
                                   tetrachloroethylene, 1,2,4-
                                   trichlorobenzene.
K151............................  Benzene, carbon tetrachloride,
                                   chloroform, hexachlorobenzene,
                                   pentachlorobenzene, toluene, 1,2,4,5-
                                   tetrachlorobenzene,
                                   tetrachloroethylene.
K156............................  Benomyl, carbaryl, carbendazim,
                                   carbofuran, carbosulfan,
                                   formaldehyde, methylene chloride,
                                   triethylamine.
K157............................  Carbon tetrachloride, formaldehyde,
                                   methyl chloride, methylene chloride,
                                   pyridine, triethylamine.
K158............................  Benomyl, carbendazim, carbofuran,
                                   carbosulfan, chloroform, methylene
                                   chloride.
K159............................  Benzene, butylate, eptc, molinate,
                                   pebulate, vernolate.
K161............................  Antimony, arsenic, metam-sodium,
                                   ziram.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
N.A.--Waste is hazardous because it fails the test for the
  characteristic of ignitability, corrosivity, or reactivity.

[46 FR 4619, Jan. 16, 1981]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Appendix 
VII, part 261, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 24625, May 4, 1998, appendix VII to 
part 261 was amended by adding the entry for waste stream K140 in 
alphanumeric order, effective Nov. 4, 1998.

            Appendix VIII to Part 261--Hazardous Constituents

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                       Chemical       Hazardous
                Common name                        Chemical abstracts name          abstracts No.     waste No.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A2213......................................  Ethanimidothioic acid, 2-                   30558-43-1         U394
                                              (dimethylamino) -N-hydroxy-2-oxo-,
                                              methyl ester.
Acetonitrile...............................  Same...............................            75-05-8         U003
Acetophenone...............................  Ethanone, 1-phenyl-................            98-86-2         U004
2-Acetylaminefluarone......................  Acetamide, N-9H-fluoren-2-yl-......            53-96-3         U005
Acetyl chloride............................  Same...............................            75-36-5         U006
1-Acetyl-2-thiourea........................  Acetamide, N-(aminothioxomethyl)-..           591-08-2         P002
Acrolein...................................  2-Propenal.........................           107-02-8         P003
Acrylamide.................................  2-Propenamide......................            79-06-1         U007
Acrylonitrile..............................  2-Propenenitrile...................           107-13-1         U009
Aflatoxins.................................  Same...............................          1402-68-2  ...........
Aldicarb...................................  Propanal, 2-methyl-2-(methylthio)-,           116-06-3         P070
                                              O-[(methylamino)carbonyl]oxime.
Aldicarb sulfone...........................  Propanal, 2-methyl-2-                        1646-88-4         P203
                                              (methylsulfonyl) -, O-
                                              [(methylamino) carbonyl] oxime.
Aldrin.....................................  1,4,5,8-Dimethanonaphthalene,                 309-00-2         P004
                                              1,2,3,4,10,10-10-hexachloro-
                                              1,4,4a,5,8,8a-hexahydro-,
                                              (1alpha,4alpha,4abeta,5alpha,8alph
                                              a, 8abeta)-.
Allyl alcohol..............................  2-Propen-1-ol......................           107-18-6         P005
Allyl chloride.............................  1-Propane, 3-chloro................           107-18-6  ...........
Aluminum phosphide.........................  Same...............................         20859-73-8         P006
4-Aminobiphenyl............................  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4-amine............            92-67-1  ...........
5-(Aminomethyl)-3-isoxazolol...............  3(2H)-Isoxazolone, 5-(aminomethyl)-          2763-96-4         P007
4-Aminopyridine............................  4-Pyridinamine.....................           504-24-5         P008
Amitrole...................................  1H-1,2,4-Triazol-3-amine...........            61-82-5         U011
Ammonium vanadate..........................  Vanadic acid, ammonium salt........          7803-55-6         P119
Aniline....................................  Benzenamine........................            62-53-3         U012
Antimony...................................  Same...............................          7440-36-0  ...........
Antimony compounds, N.O.S.\1\..............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Aramite....................................  Sulfurous acid, 2-chloroethyl 2-[4-           140-57-8  ...........
                                              (1,1-dimethylethyl)phenoxy]-1-
                                              methylethyl ester.
Arsenic....................................  Same...............................          7440-38-2  ...........
Arsenic compounds, N.O.S.\1\...............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Arsenic acid...............................  Arsenic acid H<INF>3 AsO<INF>4...............          7778-39-4         P010
Arsenic pentoxide..........................  Arsenic oxide As<INF>2 O<INF>5...............          1303-28-2         P011
Arsenic trioxide...........................  Arsenic oxide As<INF>2 O<INF>3...............          1327-53-3         P012
Auramine...................................  Benzenamine, 4,4'-                            492-80-8         U014
                                              carbonimidoylbis[N,N-dimethyl.

[[Page 88]]

Azaserine..................................  L-Serine, diazoacetate (ester).....           115-02-6         U015
Barban.....................................  Carbamic acid, (3-chlorophenyl) -,            101-27-9         U280
                                              4-chloro-2-butynyl ester.
Barium.....................................  Same...............................          7440-39-3  ...........
Barium compounds, N.O.S.\1\................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Barium cyanide.............................  Same...............................           542-62-1         P013
Bendiocarb.................................  1,3-Benzodioxol-4-ol, 2,2-dimethyl-         22781-23-3         U278
                                              , methyl carbamate.
Bendiocarb phenol..........................  1,3-Benzodioxol-4-ol, 2,2-dimethyl-         22961-82-6         U364
                                              ,.
Benomyl....................................  Carbamic acid, [1- [(butylamino)            17804-35-2         U271
                                              carbonyl]- 1H-benzimidazol-2-yl] -
                                              , methyl ester.
Benz[c]acridine............................  Same...............................           225-51-4         U016
Benz[a]anthracene..........................  Same...............................            56-55-3         U018
Benzal chloride............................  Benzene, (dichloromethyl)-.........            98-87-3         U017
Benzene....................................  Same...............................            71-43-2         U019
Benzenearsonic acid........................  Arsonic acid, phenyl-..............            98-05-5  ...........
Benzidine..................................  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4 \1\-diamine....            92-87-5         U021
Benzo[b]fluoranthene.......................  Benz[e]acephenanthrylene...........           205-99-2  ...........
Benzo[j]fluoranthene.......................  Same...............................           205-82-3  ...........
Benzo(k)fluoranthene.......................  Same...............................           207-08-9  ...........
Benzo[a]pyrene.............................  Same...............................            50-32-8         U022
p-Benzoquinone.............................  2,5-Cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione.......           106-51-4         U197
Benzotrichloride...........................  Benzene, (trichloromethyl)-........            98-07-7         U023
Benzyl chloride............................  Benzene, (chloromethyl)-...........           100-44-7         P028
Beryllium powder...........................  Same...............................          7440-41-7         P015
Beryllium compounds, N.O.S.\1\.............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Bis(pentamethylene)-thiuram tetrasulfide...  Piperidine, 1,1'-                             120-54-7  ...........
                                              (tetrathiodicarbonothioyl)-bis-.
Bromoacetone...............................  2-Propanone, 1-bromo-..............           598-31-2         P017
Bromoform..................................  Methane, tribromo-.................            75-25-2         U225
4-Bromophenyl phenyl ether.................  Benzene, 1-bromo-4-phenoxy-........           101-55-3         U030
Brucine....................................  Strychnidin-10-one, 2,3-dimethoxy-.           357-57-3         P018
Butyl benzyl phthalate.....................  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, butyl            85-68-7  ...........
                                              phenylmethyl ester.
Butylate...................................  Carbamothioic acid, bis(2-                   2008-41-5  ...........
                                              methylpropyl)-, S-ethyl ester.
Cacodylic acid.............................  Arsinic acid, dimethyl-............            75-60-5         U136
Cadmium....................................  Same...............................          7440-43-9  ...........
Cadmium compounds, N.O.S.\1\...............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Calcium chromate...........................  Chromic acid H<INF>2 CrO<INF>4, calcium salt.         13765-19-0         U032
Calcium cyanide............................  Calcium cyanide Ca(CN)<INF>2............           592-01-8         P021
Carbaryl...................................  1-Naphthalenol, methylcarbamate....            63-25-2         U279
Carbendazim................................  Carbamic acid, 1H-benzimidazol-2-           10605-21-7         U372
                                              yl, methyl ester.
Carbofuran.................................  7-Benzofuranol, 2,3-dihydro-2,2-             1563-66-2         P127
                                              dimethyl-, methylcarbamate.
Carbofuran phenol..........................  7-Benzofuranol, 2,3-dihydro-2,2-             1563-38-8         U367
                                              dimethyl-.
Carbon disulfide...........................  Same...............................            75-15-0         P022
Carbon oxyfluoride.........................  Carbonic difluoride................           353-50-4         U033
Carbon tetrachloride.......................  Methane, tetrachloro-..............            56-23-5         U211
Carbosulfan................................  Carbamic acid, [(dibutylamino)              55285-14-8         P189
                                              thio] methyl-, 2,3-dihydro-2,2-
                                              dimethyl-7-benzofuranyl ester.
Chloral....................................  Acetaldehyde, trichloro-...........            75-87-6         U034
Chlorambucil...............................  Benzenebutanoic acid, 4-[bis(2-               305-03-3         U035
                                              chloroethyl)amino]-.
Chlordane..................................  4,7-Methano-1H-indene,                         57-74-9         U036
                                              1,2,4,5,6,7,8,8-octachloro-
                                              2,3,3a,4,7,7a-hexahydro-.
Chlordane (alpha and gamma isomers)........  ...................................  .................         U036
Chlorinated benzenes, N.O.S.\1\............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Chlorinated ethane, N.O.S.\1\..............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Chlorinated fluorocarbons, N.O.S.\1\.......  ...................................  .................  ...........
Chlorinated naphthalene, N.O.S.\1\.........  ...................................  .................  ...........
Chlorinated phenol, N.O.S.\1\..............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Chlornaphazin..............................  Naphthalenamine, N,N'-bis(2-                  494-03-1         U026
                                              chloroethyl)-.
Chloroacetaldehyde.........................  Acetaldehyde, chloro-..............           107-20-0         P023
Chloroalkyl ethers, N.O.S.\1\..............  ...................................  .................  ...........
p-Chloroaniline............................  Benzenamine, 4-chloro-.............           106-47-8         P024
Chlorobenzene..............................  Benzene, chloro-...................           108-90-7         U037
Chlorobenzilate............................  Benzeneacetic acid, 4-chloro-alpha-           510-15-6         U038
                                              (4-chlorophenyl)-alpha-hydroxy-,
                                              ethyl ester.
p-Chloro-m-cresol..........................  Phenol, 4-chloro-3-methyl-.........            59-50-7         U039
2-Chloroethyl vinyl ether..................  Ethene, (2-chloroethoxy)-..........           110-75-8         U042
Chloroform.................................  Methane, trichloro-................            67-66-3         U044

[[Page 89]]

Chloromethyl methyl ether..................  Methane, chloromethoxy-............           107-30-2         U046
beta-Chloronaphthalene.....................  Naphthalene, 2-chloro-.............            91-58-7         U047
o-Chlorophenol.............................  Phenol, 2-chloro-..................            95-57-8         U048
1-(o-Chlorophenyl)thiourea.................  Thiourea, (2-chlorophenyl)-........          5344-82-1         P026
Chloroprene................................  1,3-Butadiene, 2-chloro-...........           126-99-8  ...........
3-Chloropropionitrile......................  Propanenitrile, 3-chloro-..........           542-76-7         P027
Chromium...................................  Same...............................          7440-47-3  ...........
Chromium compounds, N.O.S.\1\..............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Chrysene...................................  Same...............................           218-01-9         U050
Citrus red No. 2...........................  2-Naphthalenol, 1-[(2,5-                     6358-53-8  ...........
                                              dimethoxyphenyl)azo]-.
Coal tar creosote..........................  Same...............................          8007-45-2  ...........
Copper cyanide.............................  Copper cyanide CuCN................           544-92-3         P029
Copper dimethyldithiocarbamate.............  Copper,                                       137-29-1  ...........
                                              bis(dimethylcarbamodithioato-S,S')-
                                              ,.
Creosote...................................  Same...............................  .................         U051
Cresol (Cresylic acid).....................  Phenol, methyl-....................          1319-77-3         U052
Crotonaldehyde.............................  2-Butenal..........................          4170-30-3         U053
m-Cumenyl methylcarbamate..................  Phenol, 3-(methylethyl)-, methyl               64-00-6         P202
                                              carbamate.
Cyanides (soluble salts and complexes)       ...................................  .................         P030
 N.O.S.\1\.
Cyanogen...................................  Ethanedinitrile....................           460-19-5         P031
Cyanogen bromide...........................  Cyanogen bromide (CN)Br............           506-68-3         U246
Cyanogen chloride..........................  Cyanogen chloride (CN)Cl...........           506-77-4         P033
Cycasin....................................  beta-D-Glucopyranoside, (methyl-ONN-        14901-08-7  ...........
                                              azoxy)methyl.
Cycloate...................................  Carbamothioic acid, cyclohexylethyl-         1134-23-2  ...........
                                              , S-ethyl ester.
2-Cyclohexyl-4,6-dinitrophenol.............  Phenol, 2-cyclohexyl-4,6-dinitro-..           131-89-5         P034
Cyclophosphamide...........................  2H-1,3,2-Oxazaphosphorin-2-amine,              50-18-0         U058
                                              N,N-bis(2-chloroethyl)tetrahydro-,
                                              2-oxide.
2,4-D......................................  Acetic acid, (2,4-dichlorophenoxy)-            94-75-7         U240
2,4-D, salts, esters.......................  ...................................  .................         U240
Daunomycin.................................  5,12-Naphthacenedione, 8-acetyl-10-         20830-81-3         U059
                                              [(3-amino-2,3,6-trideoxy-alpha-L-
                                              lyxo- hexopyranosyl)oxy]-7,8,9,10-
                                              tetrahydro-6,8,11-trihydroxy-1-
                                              methoxy-, (8S-cis)-.
Dazomet....................................  2H-1,3,5-thiadiazine-2-thione,                533-74-4  ...........
                                              tetrahydro-3,5-dimethyl.
DDD........................................  Benzene, 1,1'-(2,2-                            72-54-8         U060
                                              dichloroethylidene)bis[4-chloro-.
DDE........................................  Benzene, 1,1'-                                 72-55-9  ...........
                                              (dichloroethenylidene)bis[4-chloro-
                                              .
DDT........................................  Benzene, 1,1'-(2,2,2-                          50-29-3         U061
                                              trichloroethylidene)bis[4-chloro-.
Diallate...................................  Carbamothioic acid, bis(1-                   2303-16-4         U062
                                              methylethyl)-, S-(2,3-dichloro-2-
                                              propenyl) ester.
Dibenz[a,h]acridine........................  Same...............................           226-36-8  ...........
Dibenz[a,j]acridine........................  Same...............................           224-42-0  ...........
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene......................  Same...............................            53-70-3         U063
7H-Dibenzo[c,g]carbazole...................  Same...............................           194-59-2  ...........
Dibenzo[a,e]pyrene.........................  Naphtho[1,2,3,4-def]chrysene.......           192-65-4  ...........
Dibenzo[a,h]pyrene.........................  Dibenzo[b,def]chrysene.............           189-64-0  ...........
Dibenzo[a,i]pyrene.........................  Benzo[rst]pentaphene...............           189-55-9         U064
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane................  Propane, 1,2-dibromo-3-chloro-.....            96-12-8         U066
Dibutyl phthalate..........................  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,                  84-74-2         U069
                                              dibutyl ester.
o-Dichlorobenzene..........................  Benzene, 1,2-dichloro-.............            95-50-1         U070
m-Dichlorobenzene..........................  Benzene, 1,3-dichloro-.............           541-73-1         U071
p-Dichlorobenzene..........................  Benzene, 1,4-dichloro-.............           106-46-7         U072
Dichlorobenzene, N.O.S.\1\.................  Benzene, dichloro-.................         25321-22-6  ...........
3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine.....................  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diamine, 3,3'-            91-94-1         U073
                                              dichloro-.
1,4-Dichloro-2-butene......................  2-Butene, 1,4-dichloro-............           764-41-0         U074
Dichlorodifluoromethane....................  Methane, dichlorodifluoro-.........            75-71-8         U075
Dichloroethylene, N.O.S.\1\................  Dichloroethylene...................         25323-30-2  ...........
1,1-Dichloroethylene.......................  Ethene, 1,1-dichloro-..............            75-35-4         U078
1,2-Dichloroethylene.......................  Ethene, 1,2-dichlrol-, (E)-........           156-60-5         U079
Dichloroethyl ether........................  Ethane, 1,1'oxybis[2-chloro-.......           111-44-4         U025
Dichloroisopropyl ether....................  Propane, 2,2'-oxybis[2-chloro-.....           108-60-1         U027
Dichloromethoxy ethane.....................  Ethane, 1,1'-                                 111-91-1         U024
                                              [methylenebis(oxy)]bis[2-chloro-.
Dichloromethyl ether.......................  Methane, oxybis[chloro-............           542-88-1         P016
2,4-Dichlorophenol.........................  Phenol, 2,4-dichloro-..............           120-83-2         U081
2,6-Dichlorophenol.........................  Phenol, 2,6-dichloro-..............            87-65-0         U082
Dichlorophenylarsine.......................  Arsonous dichloride, phenyl-.......           696-28-6         P036
Dichloropropane, N.O.S.\1\.................  Propane, dichloro-.................         26638-19-7  ...........

[[Page 90]]

Dichloropropanol, N.O.S.\1\................  Propanol, dichloro-................         26545-73-3  ...........
Dichloropropene, N.O.S.\1\.................  1-Propene, dichloro-...............         26952-23-8  ...........
1,3-Dichloropropene........................  1-Propene, 1,3-dichloro-...........           542-75-6         U084
Dieldrin...................................  2,7:3,6-Dimethanonaphth[2,3-                   60-57-1         P037
                                              b]oxirene, 3,4,5,6,9,9-hexachloro-
                                              1a,2,2a,3,6,6a,7,7a-octahydro-,
                                              (1aalpha,2beta,2aalpha,3beta,6beta
                                              , 6aalpha,7beta,7aalpha)-.
1,2:3,4-Diepoxybutane......................  2,2-Bioxirane......................          1464-53-5         U085
Diethylarsine..............................  Arsine, diethyl-...................           692-42-2         P038
Diethylene glycol, dicarbamate.............  Ethanol, 2,2'-oxybis-, dicarbamate.          5952-26-1         U395
1,4-Diethyleneoxide........................  1,4-Dioxane........................           123-91-1         U108
Diethylhexyl phthalate.....................  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, bis(2-          117-81-7         U028
                                              ethylhexyl) ester.
N,N'-Diethylhydrazine......................  Hydrazine, 1,2-diethyl-............          1615-80-1         U086
O,O-Diethyl S-methyl dithiophosphate.......  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-diethyl          3288-58-2         U087
                                              S-methyl ester.
Diethyl-p-nitrophenyl phosphate............  Phosphoric acid, diethyl 4-                   311-45-5         P041
                                              nitrophenyl ester.
Diethyl phthalate..........................  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,                  84-66-2         U088
                                              diethyl ester.
O,O-Diethyl O-pyrazinyl phosphoro- thioate.  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-diethyl O-          297-97-2         P040
                                              pyrazinyl ester.
Diethylstilbesterol........................  Phenol, 4,4'-(1,2-diethyl-1,2-                 56-53-1         U089
                                              ethenediyl)bis-, (E)-.
Dihydrosafrole.............................  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-propyl-........            94-58-6         U090
Diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP)...........  Phosphorofluoridic acid, bis(1-                55-91-4         P043
                                              methylethyl) ester.
Dimethoate.................................  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-                   60-51-5         P044
                                              dimethyl S-[2-(methylamino)-2-
                                              oxoethyl] ester.
3,3'-Dimethoxybenzidine....................  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diamine, 3,3'-           119-90-4         U091
                                              dimethoxy-.
p-Dimethylaminoazobenzene..................  Benzenamine, N,N-dimethyl-4-                   60-11-7         U093
                                              (phenylazo)-.
7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene.............  Benz[a]anthracene, 7,12-dimethyl-..            57-97-6         U094
3,3'-Dimethylbenzidine.....................  [1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diamine, 3,3'-           119-93-7         U095
                                              dimethyl-.
Dimethylcarbamoyl chloride.................  Carbamic chloride, dimethyl-.......            79-44-7         U097
1,1-Dimethylhydrazine......................  Hydrazine, 1,1-dimethyl-...........            57-14-7         U098
1,2-Dimethylhydrazine......................  Hydrazine, 1,2-dimethyl-...........           540-73-8         U099
alpha,alpha-Dimethylphenethylamine.........  Benzeneethanamine, alpha,alpha-               122-09-8         P046
                                              dimethyl-.
2,4-Dimethylphenol.........................  Phenol, 2,4-dimethyl-..............           105-67-9         U101
Dimethyl phthalate.........................  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,                 131-11-3         U102
                                              dimethyl ester.
Dimethyl sulfate...........................  Sulfuric acid, dimethyl ester......            77-78-1         U103
Dimetilan..................................  Carbamic acid, dimethyl-, 1-                  644-64-4         P191
                                              [(dimethylamino) carbonyl]-5-
                                              methyl-1H-pyrazol-3-yl ester.
Dinitrobenzene, N.O.S.\1\..................  Benzene, dinitro-..................         25154-54-5  ...........
4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol.......................  Phenol, 2-methyl-4,6-dinitro-......           534-52-1         P047
4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol salts.................  ...................................  .................         P047
2,4-Dinitrophenol..........................  Phenol, 2,4-dinitro-...............            51-28-5         P048
2,4-Dinitrotoluene.........................  Benzene, 1-methyl-2,4-dinitro-.....           121-14-2         U105
2,6-Dinitrotoluene.........................  Benzene, 2-methyl-1,3-dinitro-.....           606-20-2         U106
Dinoseb....................................  Phenol, 2-(1-methylpropyl)-4,6-                88-85-7         P020
                                              dinitro-.
Di-n-octyl phthalate.......................  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,                 117-84-0         U017
                                              dioctyl ester.
Diphenylamine..............................  Benzenamine, N-phenyl-.............           122-39-4  ...........
1,2-Diphenylhydrazine......................  Hydrazine, 1,2-diphenyl-...........           122-66-7         U109
Di-n-propylnitrosamine.....................  1-Propanamine, N-nitroso-N-propyl-.           621-64-7         U111
Disulfiram.................................  Thioperoxydicarbonic diamide,                  97-77-8  ...........
                                              tetraethyl.
Disulfoton.................................  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-diethyl           298-04-4         P039
                                              S-[2-(ethylthio)ethyl] ester.
Dithiobiuret...............................  Thioimidodicarbonic diamide [(H<INF>2              541-53-7         P049
                                              N)C(S)]<INF>2 NH.
Endosulfan.................................  6,9-Methano-2,4,3-                            115-29-7         P050
                                              benzodioxathiepin, 6,7,8,9,10,10-
                                              hexachloro-1,5,5a,6,9,9a-
                                              hexahydro-, 3-oxide.
Endothall..................................  7-Oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptane-2,3-               145-73-3         P088
                                              dicarboxylic acid.
Endrin.....................................  2,7:3,6-Dimethanonaphth[2,3-                   72-20-8         P051
                                              b]oxirene, 3,4,5,6,9,9-hexachloro-
                                              1a,2,2a,3,6,6a,7,7a-octa-hydro-,
                                              (1aalpha,2beta,2abeta,3alpha,6alph
                                              a, 6abeta,7beta,7aalpha)-.
Endrin metabolites.........................  ...................................  .................         P051
Epichlorohydrin............................  Oxirane, (chloromethyl)-...........           106-89-8         U041
Epinephrine................................  1,2-Benzenediol, 4-[1-hydroxy-2-               51-43-4         P042
                                              (methylamino)ethyl]-, (R)-.
EPTC.......................................  Carbamothioic acid, dipropyl-, S-             759-94-4  ...........
                                              ethyl ester.
Ethyl carbamate (urethane).................  Carbamic acid, ethyl ester.........            51-79-6         U238

[[Page 91]]

Ethyl cyanide..............................  Propanenitrile.....................           107-12-0         P101
Ethyl Ziram................................  Zinc, bis(diethylcarbamodithioato-          14324-55-1  ...........
                                              S,S')-.
Ethylenebisdithiocarbamic acid.............  Carbamodithioic acid, 1,2-                    111-54-6         U114
                                              ethanediylbis-.
Ethylenebisdithiocarbamic acid, salts and    ...................................  .................         U114
 esters.
Ethylene dibromide.........................  Ethane, 1,2-dibromo-...............           106-93-4         U067
Ethylene dichloride........................  Ethane, 1,2-dichloro-..............           107-06-2         U077
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether............  Ethanol, 2-ethoxy-.................           110-80-5         U359
Ethyleneimine..............................  Aziridine..........................           151-56-4         P054
Ethylene oxide.............................  Oxirane............................            75-21-8         U115
Ethylenethiourea...........................  2-Imidazolidinethione..............            96-45-7         U116
Ethylidene dichloride......................  Ethane, 1,1-dichloro-..............            75-34-3         U076
Ethyl methacrylate.........................  2-Propenoic acid, 2-methyl-, ethyl             97-63-2         U118
                                              ester.
Ethyl methanesulfonate.....................  Methanesulfonic acid, ethyl ester..            62-50-0         U119
Famphur....................................  Phosphorothioic acid, O-[4-                    52-85-7         P097
                                              [(dimethylamino)sulfonyl]phenyl]
                                              O,O-dimethyl ester.
Ferbam.....................................  Iron, tris(dimethylcarbamodithioato-        14484-64-1  ...........
                                              S,S')-,.
Fluoranthene...............................  Same...............................           206-44-0         U120
Fluorine...................................  Same...............................          7782-41-4         P056
Fluoroacetamide............................  Acetamide, 2-fluoro-...............           640-19-7         P057
Fluoroacetic acid, sodium salt.............  Acetic acid, fluoro-, sodium salt..            62-74-8         P058
Formaldehyde...............................  Same...............................            50-00-0         U122
Formetanate hydrochloride..................  Methanimidamide, N,N-dimethyl-N'-[3-        23422-53-9         P198
                                              [[(methylamino)
                                              carbonyl]oxy]phenyl]-,
                                              monohydrochloride.
Formic acid................................  Same...............................            64-18-6         U123
Formparanate...............................  Methanimidamide, N,N-dimethyl-N'-[2-        17702-57-7         P197
                                              methyl-4-[[(methylamino)
                                              carbonyl]oxy]phenyl]-.
Glycidylaldehyde...........................  Oxiranecarboxyaldehyde.............           765-34-4         U126
Halomethanes, N.O.S.\1\....................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Heptachlor.................................  4,7-Methano-1H-indene,                         76-44-8         P059
                                              1,4,5,6,7,8,8-heptachloro-
                                              3a,4,7,7a-tetrahydro-.
Heptachlor epoxide.........................  2,5-Methano-2H-indeno[1,2-                   1024-57-3  ...........
                                              b]oxirene,  2,3,4,5,6,7,7-
                                              heptachloro-1a,1b,5,5a,6,6a-hexa-
                                              hydro-,
                                              (1aalpha,1bbeta,2alpha,5alpha,
                                              5abeta,6beta,6aalpha)-.
Heptachlor epoxide (alpha, beta, and gamma   ...................................  .................  ...........
 isomers).
Heptachlorodibenzofurans...................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins...............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Hexachlorobenzene..........................  Benzene, hexachloro-...............           118-74-1         U127
Hexachlorobutadiene........................  1,3-Butadiene, 1,1,2,3,4,4-                    87-68-3         U128
                                              hexachloro-.
Hexachlorocyclopentadiene..................  1,3-Cyclopentadiene, 1,2,3,4,5,5-              77-47-4         U130
                                              hexachloro-.
Hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Hexachlorodibenzofurans....................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Hexachloroethane...........................  Ethane, hexachloro-................            67-72-1         U131
Hexachlorophene............................  Phenol, 2,2'-methylenebis[3,4,6-               70-30-4         U132
                                              trichloro-.
Hexachloropropene..........................  1-Propene, 1,1,2,3,3,3-hexachloro-.          1888-71-7         U243
Hexaethyl tetraphosphate...................  Tetraphosphoric acid, hexaethyl               757-58-4         P062
                                              ester.
Hydrazine..................................  Same...............................           302-01-2         U133
Hydrogen cyanide...........................  Hydrocyanic acid...................            74-90-8         P063
Hydrogen fluoride..........................  Hydrofluoric acid..................          7664-39-3         U134
Hydrogen sulfide...........................  Hydrogen sulfide H<INF>2 S..............          7783-06-4         U135
Indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene.....................  Same...............................           193-39-5         U137
3-Iodo-2-propynyl n-butylcarbamate.........  Carbamic acid, butyl-, 3-iodo-2-            55406-53-6  ...........
                                              propynyl ester.
Isobutyl alcohol...........................  1-Propanol, 2-methyl-..............            78-83-1         U140
Isodrin....................................  1,4,5,8-Dimethanonaphthalene,                 465-73-6         P060
                                              1,2,3,4,10,10-hexachloro-
                                              1,4,4a,5,8,8a-hexahydro-,
                                              (1alpha,4alpha,4abeta,5beta,
                                              8beta,8abeta)-.
Isolan.....................................  Carbamic acid, dimethyl-, 3-methyl-           119-38-0         P192
                                              1-(1-methylethyl)-1H-pyrazol-5-yl
                                              ester.
Isosafrole.................................  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-(1-propenyl)-..           120-58-1         U141
Kepone.....................................  1,3,4-Metheno-2H-                             143-50-0         U142
                                              cyclobuta[cd]pentalen-2-one,
                                              1,1a,3,3a,4,5,5,5a,5b,6-
                                              decachlorooctahydro-.

[[Page 92]]

Lasiocarpine...............................  2-Butenoic acid, 2-methyl-,7-[[2,3-           303-34-1         4143
                                              dihydroxy-2-(1-methoxyethyl)-3-
                                              methyl-1-
                                               oxobutoxy]methyl]-2,3,5,7a-
                                              tetrahydro-1H-pyrrolizin-1-yl
                                              ester,.
                                               [1S-
                                              [1alpha(Z),7(2S*,3R*),7aalpha]]-.
Lead.......................................  Same...............................          7439-92-1  ...........
Lead compounds, N.O.S.<SUP>1....................  ......................<SUP>.............  .................  ...........
Lead acetate...............................  Acetic acid, lead(2+) salt.........           301-04-2         U144
Lead phosphate.............................  Phosphoric acid, lead(2+) salt               7446-27-7         U145
                                              (2:3).
Lead subacetate............................  Lead, bis(acetato-O)tetrahydroxytri-         1335-32-6         U146
                                              .
Lindane....................................  Cyclohexane, 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachloro-           58-89-9         U129
                                              , (1alpha,2alpha,3beta,4alpha,
                                              5alpha,6beta)-.
Maleic anhydride...........................  2,5-Furandione.....................           108-31-6         U147
Maleic hydrazide...........................  3,6-Pyridazinedione, 1,2-dihydro-..           123-33-1         U148
Malononitrile..............................  Propanedinitrile...................           109-77-3         U149
Manganese dimethyldithiocarbamate..........  Manganese,                                  15339-36-3         P196
                                              bis(dimethylcarbamodithioato-S,S')-
                                              ,.
Melphalan..................................  L-Phenylalanine, 4-[bis(2-                    148-82-3         U150
                                              chloroethyl)aminol]-.
Mercury....................................  Same...............................          7439-97-6         U151
Mercury compounds, N.O.S.<SUP>1.................  .........................<SUP>..........  .................  ...........
Mercury fulminate..........................  Fulminic acid, mercury(2+) salt....           628-86-4         P065
Metam Sodium...............................  Carbamodithioic acid, methyl-,                137-42-8
                                              monosodium salt.
Methacrylonitrile..........................  2-Propenenitrile, 2-methyl-........           126-98-7         U152
Methapyrilene..............................  1,2-Ethanediamine, N,N-dimethyl-N'-            91-80-5         U155
                                              2-pyridinyl-N'-(2-thienylmethyl)-.
Methiocarb.................................  Phenol, (3,5-dimethyl-4-                     2032-65-7         P199
                                              (methylthio)-, methylcarbamate.
Methomyl...................................  Ethanimidothioic acid, N-                   16752-77-5         P066
                                              [[(methylamino)carbonyl]oxy]-,
                                              methyl ester.
Methoxychlor...............................  Benzene, 1,1'-(2,2,2-                          72-43-5         U247
                                              trichloroethylidene)bis[4-methoxy-.
Methyl bromide.............................  Methane, bromo-....................            74-83-9         U029
Methyl chloride............................  Methane, chloro-...................            74-87-3         U045
Methyl chlorocarbonate.....................  Carbonochloridic acid, methyl ester            79-22-1         U156
Methyl chloroform..........................  Ethane, 1,1,1-trichloro-...........            71-55-6         U226
3-Methylcholanthrene.......................  Benz[j]aceanthrylene, 1,2-dihydro-3-           56-49-5         U157
                                              methyl-.
4,4'-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline).........  Benzenamine, 4,4'-methylenebis[2-             101-14-4         U158
                                              chloro-.
Methylene bromide..........................  Methane, dibromo-..................            74-95-3         U068
Methylene chloride.........................  Methane, dichloro-.................            75-09-2         U080
Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK)..................  2-Butanone.........................            78-93-3         U159
Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide...............  2-Butanone, peroxide...............          1338-23-4         U160
Methyl hydrazine...........................  Hydrazine, methyl-.................            60-34-4         P068
Methyl iodide..............................  Methane, iodo-.....................            74-88-4         U138
Methyl isocyanate..........................  Methane, isocyanato-...............           624-83-9         P064
2-Methyllactonitrile.......................  Propanenitrile, 2-hydroxy-2-methyl-            75-86-5         P069
Methyl methacrylate........................  2-Propenoic acid, 2-methyl-, methyl            80-62-6         U162
                                              ester.
Methyl methanesulfonate....................  Methanesulfonic acid, methyl ester.            66-27-3  ...........
Methyl parathion...........................  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-dimethyl            298-00-0         P071
                                              O-(4-nitrophenyl) ester.
Methylthiouracil...........................  4(1H)-Pyrimidinone, 2,3-dihydro-6-             56-04-2         U164
                                              methyl-2-thioxo-.
Metolcarb..................................  Carbamic acid, methyl-, 3-                   1129-41-5         P190
                                              methylphenyl ester.
Mexacarbate................................  Phenol, 4-(dimethylamino)-3,5-                315-18-4         P128
                                              dimethyl-, methylcarbamate (ester).
Mitomycin C................................  Azirino[2',3':3,4]pyrrolo[1,2-                 50-07-7         U010
                                              a]indole-4,7-dione,
                                               6-amino-8-
                                              [[(aminocarbonyl)oxy]methyl]-
                                              1,1a,2,8,8a,8b-hexahydro-8a-
                                              methoxy-5- methyl-, [1aS-
                                              (1aalpha,8beta,8aalpha,8balpha)]-..
MNNG.......................................  Guanidine, N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-                70-25-7         U163
                                              nitroso-.
Molinate...................................  1H-Azepine-1-carbothioic acid,               2212-67-1  ...........
                                              hexahydro-, S-ethyl ester.
Mustard gas................................  Ethane, 1,1'-thiobis[2-chloro-.....           505-60-2  ...........
Naphthalene................................  Same...............................            91-20-3         U165
1,4-Naphthoquinone.........................  1,4-Naphthalenedione...............           130-15-4         U166
alpha-Naphthylamine........................  1-Naphthalenamine..................           134-32-7         U167
beta-Naphthylamine.........................  2-Naphthalenamine..................            91-59-8         U168
alpha-Naphthylthiourea.....................  Thiourea, 1-naphthalenyl-..........            86-88-4         P072
Nickel.....................................  Same...............................          7440-02-0  ...........
Nickel compounds, N.O.S.<SUP>1..................  ........................<SUP>...........  .................  ...........

[[Page 93]]

Nickel carbonyl............................  Nickel carbonyl Ni(CO)<INF>4, (T-4)-....         13463-39-3         P073
Nickel cyanide.............................  Nickel cyanide Ni(CN)<INF>2.............           557-19-7         P074
Nicotine...................................  Pyridine, 3-(1-methyl-2-                       54-11-5         P075
                                              pyrrolidinyl)-, (S)-.
Nicotine salts.............................  ...................................  .................         P075
Nitric oxide...............................  Nitrogen oxide NO..................         10102-43-9         P076
p-Nitroaniline.............................  Benzenamine, 4-nitro-..............           100-01-6         P077
Nitrobenzene...............................  Benzene, nitro-....................            98-95-3         U169
Nitrogen dioxide...........................  Nitrogen oxide NO<INF>2.................         10102-44-0         P078
Nitrogen mustard...........................  Ethanamine, 2-chloro-N-(2-                     51-75-2  ...........
                                              chloroethyl)-N-methyl-.
Nitrogen mustard, hydrochloride salt.......  ...................................  .................  ...........
Nitrogen mustard N-oxide...................  Ethanamine, 2-chloro-N-(2-                    126-85-2  ...........
                                              chloroethyl)-N-methyl-, N-oxide.
Nitrogen mustard, N-oxide, hydro- chloride   ...................................  .................  ...........
 salt.
Nitroglycerin..............................  1,2,3-Propanetriol, trinitrate.....            55-63-0         P081
p-Nitrophenol..............................  Phenol, 4-nitro-...................           100-02-7         U170
2-Nitropropane.............................  Propane, 2-nitro-..................            79-46-9         U171
Nitrosamines, N.O.S.\1\....................  ...................................        35576-91-1D  ...........
N-Nitrosodi-n-butylamine...................  1-Butanamine, N-butyl-N-nitroso-...           924-16-3         U172
N-Nitrosodiethanolamine....................  Ethanol, 2,2'-(nitrosoimino)bis-...          1116-54-7         U173
N-Nitrosodiethylamine......................  Ethanamine, N-ethyl-N-nitroso-.....            55-18-5         U174
N-Nitrosodimethylamine.....................  Methanamine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-...            62-75-9         P082
N-Nitroso-N-ethylurea......................  Urea, N-ethyl-N-nitroso-...........           759-73-9         U176
N-Nitrosomethylethylamine..................  Ethanamine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-....         10595-95-6  ...........
N-Nitroso-N-methylurea.....................  Urea, N-methyl-N-nitroso-..........           684-93-5         U177
N-Nitroso-N-methylurethane.................  Carbamic acid, methylnitroso-,                615-53-2         U178
                                              ethyl ester.
N-Nitrosomethylvinylamine..................  Vinylamine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-....          4549-40-0         P084
N-Nitrosomorpholine........................  Morpholine, 4-nitroso-.............            59-89-2  ...........
N-Nitrosonornicotine.......................  Pyridine, 3-(1-nitroso-2-                   16543-55-8  ...........
                                              pyrrolidinyl)-, (S)-.
N-Nitrosopiperidine........................  Piperidine, 1-nitroso-.............           100-75-4         U179
N-Nitrosopyrrolidine.......................  Pyrrolidine, 1-nitroso-............           930-55-2         U180
N-Nitrososarcosine.........................  Glycine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-.......         13256-22-9  ...........
5-Nitro-o-toluidine........................  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-5-nitro-.....            99-55-8         U181
Octamethylpyrophosphoramide................  Diphosphoramide, octamethyl-.......           152-16-9         P085
Osmium tetroxide...........................  Osmium oxide OsO<INF>4, (T-4)-..........         20816-12-0         P087
Oxamyl.....................................  Ethanimidothioc acid, 2-                    23135-22-0         P194
                                              (dimethylamino)-N-
                                              [[(methylamino)carbonyl]oxy]-2-oxo-
                                              , methyl ester.
Paraldehyde................................  1,3,5-Trioxane, 2,4,6-trimethyl-...           123-63-7         U182
Parathion..................................  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-diethyl O-           56-38-2         P089
                                              (4-nitrophenyl) ester.
Pebulate...................................  Carbamothioic acid, butylethyl-, S-          1114-71-2  ...........
                                              propyl ester.
Pentachlorobenzene.........................  Benzene, pentachloro-..............           608-93-5         U183
Pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins...............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Pentachlorodibenzofurans...................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Pentachloroethane..........................  Ethane, pentachloro-...............            76-01-7         U184
Pentachloronitrobenzene (PCNB).............  Benzene, pentachloronitro-.........            82-68-8         U185
Pentachlorophenol..........................  Phenol, pentachloro-...............            87-86-5     See F027
Phenacetin.................................  Acetamide, N-(4-ethoxyphenyl)-.....            62-44-2         U187
Phenol.....................................  Same...............................           108-95-2         U188
Phenylenediamine...........................  Benzenediamine.....................         25265-76-3  ...........
Phenylmercury acetate......................  Mercury, (acetato-O)phenyl-........            62-38-4         P092
Phenylthiourea.............................  Thiourea, phenyl-..................           103-85-5         P093
Phosgene...................................  Carbonic dichloride................            75-44-5         P095
Phosphine..................................  Same...............................          7803-51-2         P096
Phorate....................................  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-diethyl           298-02-2         P094
                                              S-[(ethylthio)methyl] ester.
Phthalic acid esters, N.O.S.\1\............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Phthalic anhydride.........................  1,3-Isobenzofurandione.............            85-44-9         U190
Physostigmine..............................  Pyrrolo[2,3-b]indol-5-01,                      57-47-6         P204
                                              1,2,3,3a,8,8a-hexahydro-1,3a,8-
                                              trimethyl-, methylcarbamate
                                              (ester), (3aS-cis)-.
Physostigmine salicylate...................  Benzoic acid, 2-hydroxy-, compd.               57-64-7         P188
                                              with (3aS-cis) -1,2,3,3a,8,8a-
                                              hexahydro-1,3a,8-trimethylpyrrolo
                                              [2,3-b]indol-5-yl methylcarbamate
                                              ester (1:1).
2-Picoline.................................  Pyridine, 2-methyl-................           109-06-8         U191
Polychlorinated biphenyls, N.O.S.\1\.......  ...................................  .................  ...........
Potassium cyanide..........................  Potassium cyanide K(CN)............           151-50-8         P098
Potassium dimethyldithiocarbamate..........  Carbamodithioic acid, dimethyl,               128-03-0  ...........
                                              potassium salt.

[[Page 94]]

Potassium n-hydroxymethyl-n-methyl-          Carbamodithioic acid,                       51026-28-9  ...........
 dithiocarbamate.                             (hydroxymethyl)methyl-,
                                              monopotassium salt.
Potassium n-methyldithiocarbamate..........  Carbamodithioic acid, methyl-                 137-41-7  ...........
                                              monopotassium salt.
Potassium pentachlorophenate...............  Pentachlorophenol, potassium salt..            7778736         None
Potassium silver cyanide...................  Argentate(1-), bis(cyano-C)-,                 506-61-6         P099
                                              potassium.
Promecarb..................................  Phenol, 3-methyl-5-(1-methylethyl)-          2631-37-0         P201
                                              , methyl carbamate.
Pronamide..................................  Benzamide, 3,5-dichloro-N-(1,1-             23950-58-5         U192
                                              dimethyl-2-propynyl)-.
1,3-Propane sultone........................  1,2-Oxathiolane, 2,2-dioxide.......          1120-71-4         U193
n-Propylamine..............................  1-Propanamine......................           107-10-8         U194
Propargyl alcohol..........................  2-Propyn-1-ol......................           107-19-7         P102
Propham....................................  Carbamic acid, phenyl-, 1-                    122-42-9         U373
                                              methylethyl ester.
Propoxur...................................  Phenol, 2-(1-methylethoxy)-,                  114-26-1         U411
                                              methylcarbamate.
Propylene dichloride.......................  Propane, 1,2-dichloro-.............            78-87-5         U083
1,2-Propylenimine..........................  Aziridine, 2-methyl-...............            75-55-8         P067
Propylthiouracil...........................  4(1H)-Pyrimidinone, 2,3-dihydro-6-             51-52-5  ...........
                                              propyl-2-thioxo-.
Prosulfocarb...............................  Carbamothioic acid, dipropyl-, S-           52888-80-9         U387
                                              (phenylmethyl) ester.
Pyridine...................................  Same...............................           110-86-1         U196
Reserpine..................................  Yohimban-16-carboxylic acid, 11,17-            50-55-5         U200
                                              dimethoxy-18-[(3,4,5-
                                              trimethoxybenzoyl)oxy]-smethyl
                                              ester,
                                              (3beta,16beta,17alpha,18beta,20alp
                                              ha)-.
Resorcinol.................................  1,3-Benzenediol....................           108-46-3         U201
Saccharin..................................  1,2-Benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one, 1,1-             81-07-2         U202
                                              dioxide.
Saccharin salts............................  ...................................  .................         U202
Safrole....................................  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-(2-propenyl)-..            94-59-7         U203
Selenium...................................  Same...............................          7782-49-2  ...........
Selenium compounds, N.O.S.\1\..............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Selenium dioxide...........................  Selenious acid.....................          7783-00-8         U204
Selenium sulfide...........................  Selenium sulfide SeS<INF>2..............          7488-56-4         U205
Selenium, tetrakis(dimethyl-                 Carbamodithioic acid, dimethyl-,              144-34-3  ...........
 dithiocarbamate).                            tetraanhydrosulfide with
                                              orthothioselenious acid.
Selenourea.................................  Same...............................           630-10-4         P103
Silver.....................................  Same...............................          7440-22-4  ...........
Silver compounds, N.O.S.\1\................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Silver cyanide.............................  Silver cyanide Ag(CN)..............           506-64-9         P104
Silvex (2,4,5-TP)..........................  Propanoic acid, 2-(2,4,5-                      93-72-1     See F027
                                              trichlorophenoxy)-.
Sodium cyanide.............................  Sodium cyanide Na(CN)..............           143-33-9         P106
Sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate..............  Carbamodithioic acid, dibutyl,                136-30-1  ...........
                                              sodium salt.
Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate..............  Carbamodithioic acid, diethyl-,               148-18-5
                                              sodium salt.
Sodium dimethyldithiocarbamate.............  Carbamodithioic acid, dimethyl-,              128-04-1  ...........
                                              sodium salt.
Sodium pentachlorophenate..................  Pentachlorophenol, sodium salt.....             131522         None
Streptozotocin.............................  D-Glucose, 2-deoxy-2-                       18883-66-4         U206
                                              [[(methylnitrosoamino)carbonyl]ami
                                              no]-.
Strychnine.................................  Strychnidin-10-one.................            57-24-9         P108
Strychnine salts...........................  ...................................  .................         P108
Sulfallate.................................  Carbamodithioic acid, diethyl-, 2-             95-06-7  ...........
                                              chloro-2-propenyl ester.
TCDD.......................................  Dibenzo[b,e][1,4]dioxin, 2,3,7,8-            1746-01-6  ...........
                                              tetrachloro-.
Tetrabutylthiuram disulfide................  Thioperoxydicarbonic diamide,                1634-02-2  ...........
                                              tetrabutyl.
1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene.................  Benzene, 1,2,4,5-tetrachloro-......            95-94-3         U207
Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins...............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Tetrachlorodibenzofurans...................  ...................................  .................  ...........
Tetrachloroethane, N.O.S.\1\...............  Ethane, tetrachloro-, N.O.S........         25322-20-7  ...........
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane..................  Ethane, 1,1,1,2-tetrachloro-.......           630-20-6         U208
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane..................  Ethane, 1,1,2,2-tetrachloro-.......            79-34-5         U209
Tetrachloroethylene........................  Ethene, tetrachloro-...............           127-18-4         U210
2,3,4,6-Tetrachlorophenol..................  Phenol, 2,3,4,6-tetrachloro-.......            58-90-2     See F027
2,3,4,6-tetrachlorophenol, potassium salt..  same...............................           53535276         None
2,3,4,6-tetrachlorophenol, sodium salt.....  same...............................           25567559         None
Tetraethyldithiopyrophosphate..............  Thiodiphosphoric acid, tetraethyl            3689-24-5         P109
                                              ester.
Tetraethyl lead............................  Plumbane, tetraethyl-..............            78-00-2         P110
Tetraethyl pyrophosphate...................  Diphosphoric acid, tetraethyl ester           107-49-3         P111
Tetramethylthiuram monosulfide.............  Bis(dimethylthiocarbamoyl) sulfide.            97-74-5  ...........
Tetranitromethane..........................  Methane, tetranitro-...............           509-14-8         P112
Thallium...................................  Same...............................          7440-28-0  ...........

[[Page 95]]

Thallium compounds, N.O.S.\1\..............  ...................................  .................  ...........
Thallic oxide..............................  Thallium oxide Tl<INF>2 O<INF>3..............          1314-32-5         P113
Thallium(I) acetate........................  Acetic acid, thallium(1+) salt.....           563-68-8         U214
Thallium(I) carbonate......................  Carbonic acid, dithallium(1+) salt.          6533-73-9         U215
Thallium(I) chloride.......................  Thallium chloride TlCl.............          7791-12-0         U216
Thallium(I) nitrate........................  Nitric acid, thallium(1+) salt.....         10102-45-1         U217
Thallium selenite..........................  Selenious acid, dithallium(1+) salt         12039-52-0         P114
Thallium(I) sulfate........................  Sulfuric acid, dithallium(1+) salt.          7446-18-6         P115
Thioacetamide..............................  Ethanethioamide....................            62-55-5         U218
Thiodicarb.................................  Ethanimidothioic acid, N,N'-                59669-26-0         U410
                                              [thiobis [(methylimino)
                                              carbonyloxy]] bis-, dimethyl ester.
Thiofanox..................................  2-Butanone, 3,3-dimethyl-1-                 39196-18-4         P045
                                              (methylthio)-, 0-
                                              [(methylamino)carbonyl] oxime.
Thiomethanol...............................  Methanethiol.......................            74-93-1         U153
Thiophanate-methyl.........................  Carbamic acid, [1,2-phyenylenebis           23564-05-8         U409
                                              (iminocarbonothioyl)] bis-,
                                              dimethyl ester.
Thiophenol.................................  Benzenethiol.......................           108-98-5         P014
Thiosemicarbazide..........................  Hydrazinecarbothioamide............            79-19-6         P116
Thiourea...................................  Same...............................            62-56-6         U219
Thiram.....................................  Thioperoxydicarbonic diamide [(H<INF>2             137-26-8         U244
                                              N)C(S)]<INF>2 S<INF>2, tetramethyl-.
Tirpate....................................  1,3-Dithiolane-2-carboxaldehyde,            26419-73-8         P185
                                              2,4-dimethyl-, O-[(methylamino)
                                              carbonyl] oxime.
Toluene....................................  Benzene, methyl-...................           108-88-3         U220
Toluenediamine.............................  Benzenediamine, ar-methyl-.........         25376-45-8         U221
Toluene-2,4-diamine........................  1,3-Benzenediamine, 4-methyl-......            95-80-7  ...........
Toluene-2,6-diamine........................  1,3-Benzenediamine, 2-methyl-......           823-40-5  ...........
Toluene-3,4-diamine........................  1,2-Benzenediamine, 4-methyl-......           496-72-0  ...........
Toluene diisocyanate.......................  Benzene, 1,3-diisocyanatomethyl-...         26471-62-5         U223
o-Toluidine................................  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-.............            95-53-4         U328
o-Toluidine hydrochloride..................  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-,                       636-21-5         U222
                                              hydrochloride.
p-Toluidine................................  Benzenamine, 4-methyl-.............           106-49-0         U353
Toxaphene..................................  Same...............................          8001-35-2         P123
Triallate..................................  Carbamothioic acid, bis(1-                   2303-17-5         U389
                                              methylethyl)-, S-(2,3,3-trichloro-
                                              2-propenyl) ester.
2,4,6-Tribromophenol.......................  Tribromophenol, 2,4,6-.............           118-79-6         U408
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene.....................  Benzene, 1,2,4-trichloro-..........           120-82-1  ...........
1,1,2-Trichloroethane......................  Ethane, 1,1,2-trichloro-...........            79-00-5         U227
Trichloroethylene..........................  Ethene, trichloro-.................            79-01-6         U228
Trichloromethanethiol......................  Methanethiol, trichloro-...........            75-70-7         P118
Trichloromonofluoromethane.................  Methane, trichlorofluoro-..........            75-69-4         U121
2,4,5-Trichlorophenol......................  Phenol, 2,4,5-trichloro-...........            95-95-4     See F027
2,4,6-Trichlorophenol......................  Phenol, 2,4,6-trichloro-...........            88-06-2     See F027
2,4,5-T....................................  Acetic acid, (2,4,5-                           93-76-5     See F027
                                              trichlorophenoxy)-.
Trichloropropane, N.O.S.\1\................  ...................................         25735-29-9  ...........
1,2,3-Trichloropropane.....................  Propane, 1,2,3-trichloro-..........            96-18-4  ...........
Triethylamine..............................  Ethanamine, N,N-diethyl-...........           121-44-8         U404
O,O,O-Triethyl phosphorothioate............  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O,O-                  126-68-1  ...........
                                              triethyl ester.
1,3,5-Trinitrobenzene......................  Benzene, 1,3,5-trinitro-...........            99-35-4         U234
Tris(1-aziridinyl)phosphine sulfide........  Aziridine, 1,1',1''-                           52-24-4  ...........
                                              phosphinothioylidynetris-.
Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate..........  1-Propanol, 2,3-dibromo-, phosphate           126-72-7         U235
                                              (3:1).
Trypan blue................................  2,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid,                72-57-1         U236
                                              3,3'-[(3,3'-dimethyl[1,1'-
                                              biphenyl]-4,4'-diyl)bis(azo)]-
                                               bis[5-amino-4-hydroxy-,
                                              tetrasodium salt..
Uracil mustard.............................  2,4-(1H,3H)-Pyrimidinedione, 5-                66-75-1         U237
                                              [bis(2-chloroethyl)amino]-.
Vanadium pentoxide.........................  Vanadium oxide V<INF>2 O<INF>5...............          1314-62-1         P120
Vernolate..................................  Carbamothioic acid, dipropyl-,S-             1929-77-7  ...........
                                              propyl ester.
Vinyl chloride.............................  Ethene, chloro-....................            75-01-4         U043
Warfarin...................................  2H-1-Benzopyran-2-one, 4-hydroxy-3-            81-81-2         U248
                                              (3-oxo-1-phenylbutyl)-, when
                                              present at concentrations less
                                              than 0.3%.
Warfarin...................................  2H-1-Benzopyran-2-one, 4-hydroxy-3-            81-81-2         P001
                                              (3-oxo-1-phenylbutyl)-, when
                                              present at concentrations greater
                                              than 0.3%.
Warfarin salts, when present at              ...................................  .................         U248
 concentrations less than 0.3%.
Warfarin salts, when present at              ...................................  .................         P001
 concentrations greater than 0.3%.
Zinc cyanide...............................  Zinc cyanide Zn(CN)<INF>2...............           557-21-1         P121
Zinc phosphide.............................  Zinc phosphide Zn<INF>3 P<INF>2, when present          1314-84-7         P122
                                              at concentrations greater than 10%.

[[Page 96]]

Zinc phosphide.............................  Zinc phosphide Zn<INF>3 P<INF>2, when present          1314-84-7         U249
                                              at concentrations of 10% or less.
Ziram......................................  ZInc, bis(dimethylcarbamodithioato-           137-30-4         P205
                                              S,S')-, (T-4)-.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The abbreviation N.O.S. (not otherwise specified) signifies those members of the general class not
  specifically listed by name in this appendix.

[53 FR 13388, Apr. 22, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 43881, Oct. 31, 1988; 
54 FR 50978, Dec. 11, 1989; 55 FR 50483, Dec. 6, 1990; 56 FR 7568, Feb. 
25, 1991; 59 FR 468, Jan. 4, 1994; 59 FR 31551, June 20, 1994; 60 FR 
7853, Feb. 9, 1995; 60 FR 19165, Apr. 17, 1995; 62 FR 32977, June 17, 
1997; 63 FR 24625, May 4, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 24625, May 4, 1998, appendix VIII to 
part 261 was amended by adding the entry for hazardous constituent 
2,4,6-Tribromophenol, in alphabetical order effective Nov. 4, 1998.

 Appendix IX to Part 261--Wastes Excluded Under Secs. 260.20 and 260.22

           Table 1--Wastes Excluded From Non-Specific Sources
------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Facility           Address                Waste description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alumnitec, Inc.    Jeffersonville,    Dewatered wastewater treatment
 (formerly          IN.                sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
 Profile                               F019) generated from the chemical
 Extrusion Co.,                        conversion of aluminum after
 formerly United                       April 29, 1986.
 Technologies
 Automotive,
 Inc.).
Ampex Recording    Opelika, Alabama.  Solvent recovery residues in the
 Media                                 powder or pellet form (EPA
 Corporation.                          Hazardous Waste Nos. F003 and
                                       F005) generated from the recovery
                                       of spent solvents from the
                                       manufacture of tape recording
                                       media (generated at a maximum
                                       annual rate of 1,000 cubic yards
                                       in the powder or pellet form)
                                       after August 9, 1993. In order to
                                       confirm that the characteristics
                                       of the wastes do not change
                                       significantly, the facility must,
                                       on an annual basis, analyze a
                                       representative composite sample
                                       of the waste (in its final form)
                                       for the constituents listed in 40
                                       CFR 261.24 using the method
                                       specified therein. The annual
                                       analytical results, including
                                       quality control information, must
                                       be compiled, certified according
                                       to 40 CFR 260.22(i)(12),
                                       maintained on-site for a minimum
                                       of five years, and made available
                                       for inspection upon request by
                                       any employee or representative of
                                       EPA or the State of Alabama.
                                       Failure to maintain the required
                                       records on-site will be
                                       considered by EPA, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA.
Aptus, Inc.......  Coffeyville,       Kiln residue and spray dryer/
                    Kansas.            baghouse residue (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. F027) generated during
                                       the treatment of cancelled
                                       pesticides containing 2,4,5-T and
                                       Silvex and related materials by
                                       Aptus' incinerator at
                                       Coffeyville, Kansas after
                                       December 27, 1991, so long as:
                                      (1) The incinerator is monitored
                                       continuously and is in compliance
                                       with operating permit conditions.
                                       Should the incinerator fail to
                                       comply with the permit conditions
                                       relevant to the mechanical
                                       operation of the incinerator,
                                       Aptus must test the residues
                                       generated during the run when the
                                       failure occurred according to the
                                       requirements of Conditions (2)
                                       through (4), regardless of
                                       whether or not the demonstration
                                       in Condition (5) has been made.
                                      (2) A minimum of four grab samples
                                       must be taken from each hopper
                                       (or other container) of kiln
                                       residue generated during each 24
                                       hour run; all grabs collected
                                       during a given 24 hour run must
                                       then be composited to form one
                                       composite sample. A minimum of
                                       four grab samples must also be
                                       taken from each hopper (or other
                                       container) of spray dryer/
                                       baghouse residue generated during
                                       each 24 hour run; all grabs
                                       collected during a given 24 hour
                                       run must then be composited to
                                       form one composite sample. Prior
                                       to the disposal of the residues
                                       from each 24 hour run, a TCLP
                                       leachate test must be performed
                                       on these composite samples and
                                       the leachate analyzed for the TC
                                       toxic metals, nickel, and
                                       cyanide. If arsenic, chromium,
                                       lead or silver TC leachate test
                                       results exceed 1.6 ppm, barium
                                       levels exceed 32 ppm, cadmium or
                                       selenium levels exceed 0.3 ppm,
                                       mercury levels exceed 0.07 ppm,
                                       nickel levels exceed 10 ppm, or
                                       cyanide levels exceed 6.5 ppm,
                                       the wastes must be retreated to
                                       achieve these levels or must be
                                       disposed in accordance with
                                       subtitle C of RCRA. Analyses must
                                       be performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies.
                                      (3) Aptus must generate, prior to
                                       the disposal of the residues,
                                       verification data from each 24
                                       hour run for each treatment
                                       residue (i.e., kiln residue,
                                       spray dryer/baghouse residue) to
                                       demonstrate that the maximum
                                       allowable treatment residue
                                       concentrations listed below are
                                       not exceeded. Samples must be
                                       collected as specified in
                                       Condition (2). Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. Any residues which
                                       exceed any of the levels listed
                                       below must be retreated or must
                                       be disposed of as hazardous.
                                      Kiln residue and spray dryer/
                                       baghouse residue must not exceed
                                       the following levels:
                                      Aldrin--0.015 ppm

[[Page 97]]

                                      Benzene--9.7 ppm
                                      Benzo(a)pyrene--0.43 ppm
                                      Benzo(b)fluoranthene--1.8 ppm
                                      Chlordane--0.37 ppm
                                      Chloroform--5.4 ppm
                                      Chrysene--170 ppm
                                      Dibenz(a,h)anthracene--0.083 ppm
                                      1,2-Dichloroethane--4.1 ppm
                                      Dichloromethane--2.4 ppm
                                      2,4-Dichlorophenol--480 ppm
                                      Dichlorvos--260 ppm
                                      Disulfaton--23 ppm
                                      Endosulfan I--310 ppm
                                      Fluorene--120 ppm
                                      Indeno(1,2,3,cd)-pyrene--330 ppm
                                      Methyl parathion--210 ppm
                                      Nitrosodiphenylamine--130 ppm
                                      Phenanthrene--150 ppm
                                      Polychlorinated biphenyls--0.31
                                       ppm
                                      Tetrachloroethylene--59 ppm
                                      2,4,5-TP (silvex)--110 ppm
                                      2,4,6-Trichlorophenol--3.9 ppm
                                      (4) Aptus must generate, prior to
                                       disposal of residues,
                                       verification data from each 24
                                       hour run for each treatment
                                       residue (i.e., kiln residue,
                                       spray dryer/baghouse residue) to
                                       demonstrate that the residues do
                                       not contain tetra-, penta-, or
                                       hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins or
                                       furans at levels of regulatory
                                       concern. Samples must be
                                       collected as specified in
                                       Condition (2). The TCDD
                                       equivalent levels for the solid
                                       residues must be less than 5 ppt.
                                       Any residues with detected
                                       dioxins or furans in excess of
                                       this level must be retreated or
                                       must be disposed of as acutely
                                       hazardous. SW-846 Method 8290, a
                                       high resolution gas
                                       chromatography and high
                                       resolution mass spectroscopy
                                       (HRGC/HRMS) analytical method
                                       must be used. For tetra- and
                                       penta-chlorinated dioxin and
                                       furan homologs, the maximum
                                       practical quantitation limit must
                                       not exceed 15 ppt for the solid
                                       residues. For hexachlorinated
                                       dioxin and furan homologs, the
                                       maximum practical quantitation
                                       limit must not exceed 37 ppt for
                                       the solid residues.
                                      (5) The test data from Conditions
                                       (1), (2), (3), and (4) must be
                                       kept on file by Aptus for
                                       inspection purposes and must be
                                       compiled, summarized, and
                                       submitted to the Director for the
                                       Characterization and Assessment
                                       Division, Office of Solid Waste,
                                       by certified mail on a monthly
                                       basis and when the treatment of
                                       the cancelled pesticides and
                                       related materials is concluded.
                                       The testing requirements for
                                       Conditions (2), (3), and (4) will
                                       continue until Aptus provides the
                                       Director with the results of four
                                       consecutive batch analyses for
                                       the petitioned wastes, none of
                                       which exceed the maximum
                                       allowable levels listed in these
                                       conditions and the director
                                       notifies Aptus that the
                                       conditions have been lifted. All
                                       data submitted will be placed in
                                       the RCRA public docket.
                                      (6) Aptus must provide a signed
                                       copy of the following
                                       certification statement when
                                       submitting data in response to
                                       the conditions listed above:
                                       ``Under civil and criminal
                                       penalty of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations, I
                                       certify that the information
                                       contained in or accompanying this
                                       document is true, accurate, and
                                       complete. As to the (those)
                                       identified section(s) of this
                                       document for which I cannot
                                       personally verify its (their)
                                       truth and accuracy, I certify as
                                       the company official having
                                       supervisory responsibility for
                                       the persons who, acting under my
                                       direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate,
                                       and complete.''
Arco Building      Sugarcreek, Ohio.  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Products.                             sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after August 15, 1986.
Arco Chemical Co.  Miami, FL........  Dewatered wastewater treatment
                                       sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       FO19) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after April 29, 1986.
Arkansas           Vertac Superfund   Kiln ash, cyclone ash, and calcium
 Department of      site,              chloride salts from incineration
 Pollution          Jacksonville,      of residues (EPA Hazardous Waste
 Control and        Arkansas.          No. F020 and F023) generated from
 Ecology.                              the primary production of 2,4,5-T
                                       and 2,4-D after August 24, 1990.
                                       This one-time exclusion applies
                                       only to the incineration of the
                                       waste materials described in the
                                       petition, and it is conditional
                                       upon the data obtained from
                                       ADPC&E's full-scale incineration
                                       facility. To ensure that
                                       hazardous constituents are not
                                       present in the waste at levels of
                                       regulatory concern once the full-
                                       scale treatment facility is in
                                       operation, ADPC&E must implement
                                       a testing program for the
                                       petitioned waste. This testing
                                       program must meet the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be valid:
                                         (1) Testing: Sample collection
                                          and analyses (including
                                          quality control (QC)
                                          procedures) must be performed
                                          according to SW-846
                                          methodologies.

[[Page 98]]

                                           (A) Initial testing:
                                            Representative grab samples
                                            must be taken from each drum
                                            and kiln ash and cyclone ash
                                            generated from each 24 hours
                                            of operation, and the grab
                                            samples composited to form
                                            one composite sample of ash
                                            for each 24-hour period.
                                            Representative grab samples
                                            must also be taken from each
                                            drum of calcium chloride
                                            salts generated from each 24
                                            hours of operation and
                                            composited to form one
                                            composite sample of calcium
                                            chloride salts for each 24-
                                            hour period. The initial
                                            testing requirements must be
                                            fullfilled for the following
                                            wastes: (i) Incineration by-
                                            products generated prior to
                                            and during the incinerator's
                                            trial burn; (ii)
                                            incineration by-products
                                            from the treatment of 2,4-D
                                            wastes for one week (or 7
                                            days if incineration is not
                                            on consecutive days) after
                                            completion of the trial
                                            burn; (iii) incineration by-
                                            products from the treatment
                                            of blended 2,4-D and 2,4, 5-
                                            T wastes for two weeks (or
                                            14 days if incineration is
                                            not on consecutive days)
                                            after completion of the
                                            trial burn; and (iv)
                                            incineration by-products
                                            from the treatment of
                                            blended 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T
                                            wastes for one week (or 7
                                            days if incineration is not
                                            on consecutive days) when
                                            the percentage of 2, 4, 5-T
                                            wastes exceeds the maximum
                                            percentage treated under
                                            Condition (1)(A)(iii). Prior
                                            to disposal of the residues
                                            from each 24-hour sampling
                                            period, the daily composite
                                            must be analyzed for all the
                                            constituents listed in
                                            Condition (3). ADPC&E must
                                            report the analytical test
                                            data, including quality
                                            control information,
                                            obtained during this initial
                                            period no later than 90 days
                                            after the start of the
                                            operation.
                                           (B) Subsequent testing:
                                            Representative grab samples
                                            of each drum of kiln and
                                            cyclone ash generated from
                                            each week of operation must
                                            be composited to form one
                                            composite sample of ash for
                                            each weekly period.
                                            Representative grab samples
                                            of each drum of calcium
                                            chloride salts generated
                                            from each week of operation
                                            must also be composited to
                                            form one composite sample of
                                            calcium chloride salts for
                                            each weekly period.
                                           Prior to disposal of the
                                            residues from each weekly
                                            sampling period, the weekly
                                            composites must be analyzed
                                            for all of the constituents
                                            listed in Condition (3). The
                                            analytical data, including
                                            quality control information,
                                            must be compiled and
                                            maintained on site for a
                                            minimum of three years.
                                            These data must be furnished
                                            upon request and made
                                            available for inspection by
                                            any employee or
                                            representative of EPA.
                                         (2) Waste holding: The
                                          incineration residues that are
                                          generated must be stored as
                                          hazardous until the initial
                                          verification analyses or
                                          subsequent analyses are
                                          completed.
                                         If the composite incineration
                                          residue samples (from either
                                          Condition (1)(A) or Condition
                                          (1)(B)) do not exceed any of
                                          the delisting levels set in
                                          Condition (3), the
                                          incineration residues
                                          corresponding to these samples
                                          may be managed and disposed of
                                          in accordance with all
                                          applicable solid waste
                                          regulations.
                                         If any composite incineration
                                          residue sample exceeds any of
                                          the delisting levels set in
                                          Condition (3), the
                                          incineration residues
                                          generated during the time
                                          period corresponding to this
                                          sample must be retreated until
                                          they meet these levels
                                          (analyses must be repeated) or
                                          managed and disposed of in
                                          accordance with subtitle C of
                                          RCRA. Incineration residues
                                          which are generated but for
                                          which analysis is not complete
                                          or valid must be managed and
                                          disposed of in accordance with
                                          subtitle C of RCRA, until
                                          valid analyses demonstrate
                                          that the wastes meet the
                                          delisting levels.
                                         (3) Delisting levels: If
                                          concentrations in one or more
                                          of the incineration residues
                                          for any of the hazardous
                                          constituents listed below
                                          exceed their respective
                                          maximum allowable
                                          concentrations also listed
                                          below, the batch of failing
                                          waste must either be re-
                                          treated until it meets these
                                          levels or managed and disposed
                                          of in accordance with subtitle
                                          C of RCRA.
                                           (A) Inorganics (Leachable):
                                            Arsenic, 0.32 ppm; Barium,
                                            6.3 ppm; Cadmium, 0.06 ppm;
                                            Chromium, 0.32 ppm; Cyanide,
                                            4.4 ppm; Lead, 0.32 ppm;
                                            Mercury, 0.01 ppm; Nickel,
                                            4.4 ppm; Selenium, 0.06 ppm;
                                            Silver, 0.32 ppm. Metal
                                            concentrations must be
                                            measured in the waste
                                            leachate as per 40 CFR
                                            261.24. Cyanide extractions
                                            must be conducted using
                                            distilled water.
                                           (B) Organics: Benzene, 0.87
                                            ppm; Benzo(a)anthracene,
                                            0.10 ppm; Benzo(a)pyrene,
                                            0.04 ppm; Benzo
                                            (b)fluoranthene, 0.16 ppm;
                                            Chlorobenzene, 152 ppm; o-
                                            Chlorophenol, 44 ppm;
                                            Chrysene, 15 ppm; 2, 4-D,
                                            107 ppm; DDE, 1.0 ppm;
                                            Dibenz(a,h)anthracene, 0.007
                                            ppm; 1, 4-Dichlorobenzene,
                                            265 ppm; 1, 1-
                                            Dichloroethylene, 1.3 ppm;
                                            trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene,
                                            37 ppm; Dichloromethane,
                                            0.23 ppm; 2,4-
                                            Dichlorophenol, 43 ppm;
                                            Hexachlorobenzene, 0.26 ppm;
                                            Indeno (1,2,3-cd) pyrene, 30
                                            ppm; Polychlorinated
                                            biphenyls, 12 ppm; 2,4,5-T,
                                            1  x  10 \6\ ppm; 1,2,4,5-
                                            Tetrachlorobenzene, 56 ppm;
                                            Tetrachloroethylene, 3.4
                                            ppm; Trichloroethylene, 1.1
                                            ppm; 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol,
                                            21,000 ppm; 2,4,6-
                                            Trichlorophenol, 0.35 ppm.
                                           (C) Chlorinated dioxins and
                                            furans: 2,3,7,8-
                                            Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
                                            equivalents, 4  x  10<SUP>-7ppm.

[[Page 99]]

                                           The petitioned by-product
                                            must be analyzed for the
                                            tetra-, penta-, hexa-, and
                                            heptachlorodibenzo-p-
                                            dioxins, and the tetra-,
                                            penta-, hexa-, and
                                            heptachlorodibenzofurans to
                                            determine the 2, 3, 7, 8-
                                            tetra- chlorodibenzo-p-
                                            dioxin equivalent
                                            concentration. The analysis
                                            must be conducted using
                                            Method 8290, a high
                                            resolution gas
                                            chromatography/high
                                            resolution mass spectrometry
                                            method, and must achieve
                                            practical quantitation
                                            limits of 15 parts per
                                            trillion (ppt) for the tetra-
                                             and penta- homologs, and 37
                                            ppt for the hexa- and hepta-
                                            homologs.
                                         (4) Termination of testing: Due
                                          to the possible variability of
                                          the incinerator feeds, the
                                          testing requirements of
                                          Condition (1)(B) will continue
                                          indefinitely.
                                         (5) Data submittals: Within one
                                          week of system start-up,
                                          ADPC&E must notify the Section
                                          Chief, Variances Section (see
                                          address below) when the full-
                                          scale incineration system is
                                          on-line and waste treatment
                                          has begun. The data obtained
                                          through Condition (1)(A) must
                                          be submitted to the Section
                                          Chief, Variances Section, PSPD/
                                          OSW (OS-343), U.S. EPA, 401 M
                                          Street SW., Washington, DC
                                          20460, within the time period
                                          specified. At the Section
                                          Chief's request, ADPC&E must
                                          submit analytical data
                                          obtained through Condition
                                          (1)(B) within the time period
                                          specified by the Section
                                          Chief. Failure to submit the
                                          required data obtained from
                                          Condition (1)(A) within the
                                          specified time period or to
                                          maintain the required records
                                          for the time specified in
                                          Condition (1)(B) (or to submit
                                          data within the time specified
                                          by the Section Chief) will be
                                          considered by the Agency, at
                                          its discretion, sufficient
                                          basis to revoke ADPC&E's
                                          exclusion to the extent
                                          directed by EPA. All data must
                                          be accompanied by the
                                          following certification
                                          statement:
                                         ``Under civil and criminal
                                          penalty of law for the making
                                          or submission of false or
                                          fraudulent statements or
                                          representations (pursuant to
                                          the applicable provisions of
                                          the Federal Code, which
                                          include, but may not be
                                          limited to, 18 U.S.C. 1001 and
                                          42 U.S.C. 6928), I certify
                                          that the information contained
                                          in or accompanying this
                                          document is true, accurate and
                                          complete. As to the (those)
                                          identified section(s) of this
                                          document for which I cannot
                                          personally verify its (their)
                                          truth and accuracy, I certify
                                          as the company official having
                                          supervisory responsibility for
                                          the persons who, acting under
                                          my direct instructions, made
                                          the verification that this
                                          information is true, accurate
                                          and complete. In the event
                                          that any of this information
                                          is determined by EPA in its
                                          sole discretion to be false,
                                          inaccurate or incomplete, and
                                          upon conveyance of this fact
                                          to the company, I recognize
                                          and agree that this exclusion
                                          of wastes will be void as if
                                          it never had effect or to the
                                          extent directed by EPA and
                                          that the company will be
                                          liable for any actions taken
                                          in contravention of the
                                          company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                          obligations premised upon the
                                          company's reliance on the void
                                          exclusion.''
BBC Brown Boveri,  Sanford, FL......  Dewatered Wastewater treatment
 Inc.                                  sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006) generated from
                                       electroplating operations after
                                       October 17, 1986.
Bethlehem Steel    Lackawanna, New    Ammonia still lime sludge (EPA
 Corporation.       York.              Hazardous Waste No. K060) and
                                       other solid waste generated from
                                       primary metal-making and coking
                                       operations. This is a one-time
                                       exclusion for 118,000 cubic yards
                                       of waste contained in the on-site
                                       landfill referred to as HWM-2.
                                       This exclusion was published on
                                       April 24, 1996.
Bethlehem Steel    Sparrows Point,    Stabilized filter cake (at a
 Corporation.       Maryland.          maximum annual rate of 1100 cubic
                                       yards) from the treatment of
                                       wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after [insert date of
                                       publication in Federal Register].
                                       Bethlehem Steel (BSC) must
                                       implement a testing program that
                                       meets the following conditions
                                       for the exclusion to be valid:
                                        (1) Testing: Sample collection
                                       and analyses (including quality
                                       control (QC) procedures) must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. If EPA judges the
                                       stabilization process to be
                                       effective under the conditions
                                       used during the initial
                                       verification testing, BSC may
                                       replace the testing required in
                                       Condition (1)(A) with the testing
                                       required in Condition (1)(B). BSC
                                       must continue to test as
                                       specified in Condition (1)(A)
                                       until and unless notified by EPA
                                       in writing that testing in
                                       Condition (1)(A) may be replaced
                                       by Condition (1)(B) (to the
                                       extent directed by EPA).
                                        (A) Initial Verification
                                       Testing: During at least the
                                       first eight weeks of operation of
                                       the full-scale treatment system,
                                       BSC must collect and analyze
                                       weekly composites representative
                                       of the stabilized waste. Weekly
                                       composites must be composed of
                                       representative grab samples
                                       collected from every batch during
                                       each week of stabilization. The
                                       composite samples must be
                                       collected and analyzed, prior to
                                       the disposal of the stabilized
                                       filter cake, for all constituents
                                       listed in Condition (3). BSC must
                                       report the analytical test data,
                                       including a record of the ratios
                                       of lime kiln dust and fly ash
                                       used and quality control
                                       information, obtained during this
                                       initial period no later than 60
                                       days after the collection of the
                                       last composite of stabilized
                                       filter cake.
                                        (B) Subsequent Verification
                                       Testing: Following written
                                       notification by EPA, BSC may
                                       substitute the testing condition
                                       in (1)(B) for (1)(A). BSC must
                                       collect and analyze at least one
                                       composite representative of the
                                       stabilized filter cake generated
                                       each month. Monthly composites
                                       must be comprised of
                                       representative samples collected
                                       from all batches that are
                                       stabilized in a one-month period.
                                       The monthly samples must be
                                       analyzed prior to the disposal of
                                       the stabilized filter cake for
                                       chromium, lead and nickel. BSC
                                       may, at its discretion, analyze
                                       composite samples more frequently
                                       to demonstrate that smaller
                                       batches of waste are non-
                                       hazardous.

[[Page 100]]

                                        (C) Annual Verification Testing:
                                       In order to confirm that the
                                       characteristics of the treated
                                       waste do not change
                                       significantly, BSC must, on an
                                       annual basis, analyze a
                                       representative composite sample
                                       of stabilized filter cake for all
                                       TC constituents listed in 40 CFR
                                       Sec.  261.24 using the method
                                       specified therein. This composite
                                       sample must represent the
                                       stabilized filter cake generated
                                       over one week.
                                        (2) Waste Holding and Handling:
                                       BSC must store, as hazardous, all
                                       stabilized filter cake generated
                                       until verification testing (as
                                       specified in Conditions (1)(A)
                                       and (1)(B)) is completed and
                                       valid analyses demonstrate that
                                       the delisting levels set forth in
                                       Condition (3) are met. If the
                                       levels of hazardous constituents
                                       measured in the samples of
                                       stabilized filter cake generated
                                       are below all the levels set
                                       forth in Condition (3), then the
                                       stabilized filter cake is non-
                                       hazardous and may be managed and
                                       disposed of in accordance with
                                       all applicable solid waste
                                       regulations. If hazardous
                                       constituent levels in any weekly
                                       or monthly composite sample equal
                                       or exceed any of the delisting
                                       levels set in Condition (3), the
                                       stabilized filter cake generated
                                       during the time period
                                       corresponding to this sample must
                                       be retreated until it is below
                                       these levels or managed and
                                       disposed of in accordance with
                                       Subtitle C of RCRA.
                                        (3) Delisting Levels: All
                                       concentrations must be measured
                                       in the waste leachate by the
                                       method specified in 40 CFR Sec.
                                       261.24. The leachable
                                       concentrations for the
                                       constituents must be below the
                                       following levels (ppm): arsenic--
                                       4.8; barium--100; cadmium--0.48;
                                       chromium--5.0; lead--1.4;
                                       mercury--0.19; nickel--9.6;
                                       selenium--1.0; silver--5.0.
                                        (4) Changes in Operating
                                       Conditions: After completing the
                                       initial verification test period
                                       in Condition (1)(A), if BSC
                                       decides to significantly change
                                       the stabilization process (e.g.,
                                       stabilization reagents) developed
                                       under Condition (1), then BSC
                                       must notify EPA in writing prior
                                       to instituting the change. After
                                       written approval by EPA, BSC may
                                       manage waste generated from the
                                       changed process as non-hazardous
                                       under this exclusion, provided
                                       the other conditions of this
                                       exclusion are fulfilled.
                                        (5) Data Submittals: Two weeks
                                       prior to system start-up, BSC
                                       must notify in writing the
                                       Section Chief, Delisting Section
                                       (see address below) when
                                       stabilization of the dewatered
                                       filter cake will begin. The data
                                       obtained through Condition (1)(A)
                                       must be submitted to the Section
                                       Chief, Delisting Section, OSW
                                       (5304), U.S. EPA, 401 M Street,
                                       SW, Washington, DC 20460 within
                                       the time period specified. The
                                       analytical data, including
                                       quality control information and
                                       records of ratios of lime kiln
                                       dust and fly ash used, must be
                                       compiled and maintained on site
                                       for a minimum of five years.
                                       These data must be furnished upon
                                       request and made available for
                                       inspection by EPA or the State of
                                       Maryland. Failure to submit the
                                       required data within the
                                       specified time period or maintain
                                       the required records on site for
                                       the specified time will be
                                       considered by the Agency, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by a signed
                                       copy of the following
                                       certification statement to attest
                                       to the truth and accuracy of the
                                       data submitted:
                                        ``Under civil and criminal
                                       penalty of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code,
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 U.S.C Sec.  1001
                                       and 42 U.S.C Sec.  6928), I
                                       certify that the information
                                       contained in or accompanying this
                                       document is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                          As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                          In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       waste will be void as if it never
                                       had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.''
Boeing Commercial  Auburn,            Residually contaminated soils in
 Airplane Co.       Washington.        an inactive sludge pile
                                       containment area on March 27,
                                       1990, previously used to store
                                       wastewater treatment sludges
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations (EPA Hazardous Waste
                                       No. F006).
Bommer Industries  Landrum, SC......  Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Inc.                                  Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from their
                                       electroplating operations and
                                       contained in evaporation ponds 1
                                       and 2 on August 12, 1987.
Capitol Products   Harrisburg, PA...  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Corp.                                 sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       FO19) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after September 12, 1986.
Capitol Products   Kentland, IN.....  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Corporation.                          sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after November 17, 1986.

[[Page 101]]

Care Free          Charlotte,         Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
 Aluminum           Michigan.          Hazardous Waste No. F019)
 Products, Inc.                        generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       (generated at a maximum annual
                                       rate of 100 cubic yards), after
                                       August 21, 1992. In order to
                                       confirm that the characteristics
                                       of the waste do not change
                                       significantly, the facility must,
                                       on an annual basis, analyze a
                                       representative composite sample
                                       for the constituents listed in
                                       Sec.  261.24 using the method
                                       specified therein. The annual
                                       analytical results, including
                                       quality control information, must
                                       be compiled, certified according
                                       to Sec.  260.22(i)(12),
                                       maintained on-site for a minimum
                                       of five years, and made available
                                       for inspection upon request by
                                       any employee or representative of
                                       EPA or the State of Michigan.
                                       Failure to maintain the required
                                       records on-site will be
                                       considered by EPA, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA.
Chamberlian-       Hot Springs, AR..  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Featherlite, Inc.                     sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after July 16, 1986.
Cincinnati         Cincinnati, OH...  Sluiced bottom ash (approximately
 Metropolitan                          25,000 cubic yards) contained in
 Sewer District.                       the South Lagoon, on September
                                       13, 1985 which contains EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste Nos. F001, F002,
                                       F003, F004, and F005.
Clay Equipment     Cedar Falls, Iowa  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Corporation.                          sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006) and spent cyanide bath
                                       solutions (EPA Hazardous Waste
                                       No. F009) generated from
                                       electroplating operations and
                                       disposed of in an on-site surface
                                       impoundment. This is a onetime
                                       exclusion. This exclusion was
                                       published on August 1, 1989.
Continental Can    Olympia, WA......  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Co.                                   sludges (DPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       FO19) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after September 12, 1986.
Dover Corp.,       Tulsa, OK........  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Norris Div.                           sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       FO06) generated from their
                                       electroplating operations after
                                       April 29, 1986.
Eli Lilly and      Clinton, Indiana.  Incinerator scrubber liquids,
 Company.                              entering and contained in their
                                       onsite surface impoundment, and
                                       solids settling from these
                                       liquids originating from the
                                       burning of spent solvents (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste Nos. F002, F003,
                                       and F005) contained in their
                                       onsite surface impoundment and
                                       solids retention area on August
                                       18, 1988 and any new incinerator
                                       scubber liquids and settled
                                       solids generated in the surface
                                       impoundment and and disposed of
                                       in the retention are after August
                                       12, 1988.
Envirite of        Harvey, Illinois.  See waste description under
 Illinois                              Envirite of Pennsylvania.
 (formerly
 Envirite
 Corporation).
Envirite of Ohio   Canton, Ohio.....  See waste description under
 (formerly                             Envirite of Pennsylvania.
 Envirite
 Corporation).
Envirite of         York,             Dewatered wastewater sludges (EPA
 Pennsylvania       Pennsylvania.      Hazardous Waste No .F006)
 (formerly                             generated from electroplating
 Envirite                              operations; spent cyanide plating
 Corporation).                         solutions (EPA Hazardous Waste
                                       No. F007) generated from
                                       electroplating operations;
                                       plating bath residues from the
                                       bottom of plating baths (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F008)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations where cyanides are
                                       used in the process; spent
                                       stripping and cleaning bath
                                       solutions (EPA Hazardous Waste
                                       No. F009) generated from
                                       electroplating operations where
                                       cyanides are used in the process;
                                       spent cyanide solutions from salt
                                       bath pot cleaning (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. F011) generated from
                                       metal heat treating operations;
                                       quenching wastewater treatment
                                       sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F012) generated from metal heat
                                       treating where cyanides are used
                                       in the process; wastewater
                                       treatment sludges (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. F019) generated from
                                       the chemical conversion coating
                                       of aluminum after November 14,
                                       1986. To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern, the facility must
                                       implement a contingency testing
                                       program for the petitioned waste.
                                       This testing program must meet
                                       the following conditions for the
                                       exclusions to be valid:
                                      (1) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be representatively
                                       sampled and tested using the EP
                                       Toxicity test for arsenic,
                                       barium, cadmium, chromium, lead,
                                       selenium, silver, mercury, and
                                       nickel. If the extract
                                       concentrations for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, and silver exceed
                                       0.315 ppm; barium levels exceed
                                       6.3 ppm; cadmium and selenium
                                       exceed 0.063 ppm; mercury exceeds
                                       0.0126 ppm; or nickel levels
                                       exceed 2.205 ppm; the waste must
                                       be re-treated or managed and
                                       disposed as a hazardous waste
                                       under 40 CFR Parts 262 to 265 and
                                       the permitting standards of 40
                                       CFR Part 270.
                                      (2) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be tested for
                                       reactive and leachable cyanide.
                                       If the reactive cyanide levels
                                       exceed 250 ppm or leachable
                                       cyanide levels (using the EP
                                       Toxicity test without acetic acid
                                       adjustment) exceed 1.26 ppm, the
                                       waste must be re-treated or
                                       managed and disposed as a
                                       hazardous waste under 40 CFR
                                       Parts 262 to 265 and the
                                       permitting standards of 40 CFR
                                       Part 270.

[[Page 102]]

                                      (3) Each batch of waste must be
                                       tested for the total content of
                                       specific organic toxicants. If
                                       the total content of anthracene
                                       exceeds 76.8 ppm, 1,2-diphenyl
                                       hydrazine exceeds 0.001 ppm,
                                       methylene chloride exceeds 8.18
                                       ppm, methyl ethyl ketone exceeds
                                       326 ppm, n-nitrosodiphenylamine
                                       exceeds 11.9 ppm, phenol exceeds
                                       1,566 ppm, tetrachloroethylene
                                       exceeds 0.188 ppm, or
                                       trichloroethylene exceeds 0.592
                                       ppm, the waste must be managed
                                       and disposed as a hazardous waste
                                       under 40 CFR Parts 262 to 265 and
                                       the permitting standards of 40
                                       CFR Part 270.
                                      (4) A grab sample must be
                                       collected from each batch to form
                                       one monthly composite sample
                                       which must be tested using GC/MS
                                       analysis for the compounds listed
                                       in #3, above, as well as the
                                       remaining organics on the
                                       priority pollutant list. (See 47
                                       FR 52309, November 19, 1982, for
                                       a list of the priority
                                       pollutants.)
                                      (5) The data from conditions 1-4
                                       must be kept on file at the
                                       facility for inspection purposes
                                       and must be compiled, summarized,
                                       and submitted to the
                                       Administrator by certified mail
                                       semi-annually. The Agency will
                                       review this information and if
                                       needed will propose to modify or
                                       withdraw the exclusion. The
                                       organics testing described in
                                       conditions 3 and 4, above, are
                                       not required until six months
                                       from the date of promulgation.
                                       The Agency's decision to
                                       conditionally exclude the
                                       treatment residue generated from
                                       the wastewater treatment systems
                                       at these facilities applies only
                                       to the wastewater and solids
                                       treatment systems as they
                                       presently exist as described in
                                       the delisting petition. The
                                       exclusion does not apply to the
                                       proposed process additions
                                       described in the petition as
                                       recovery including
                                       crystallization, electrolytic
                                       metals recovery, evaporative
                                       recovery, and ion exchange.
EPA's Mobile       Denney Farm Site;  Process wastewater, rotary kiln
 Incineration       McDowell, MO.      ash, CHEAF media, and other
 System.                               solids (except spent activated
                                       carbon) (EPA Hazardous Waste Nos.
                                       F020, F022, F023, F026, F027, and
                                       F028) generated during the field
                                       demonstration of EPA's Mobile
                                       Incinerator at the Denney Farm
                                       Site in McDowell, Missouri, after
                                       July 25, 1985, so long as: (1)
                                       The incinerator is functioning
                                       properly; (2) a grab sample is
                                       taken from each tank of
                                       wastewater generated and the EP
                                       leachate values do not exceed
                                       0.03 ppm for mercury, 0.14 ppm
                                       for selenium, and 0.68 ppm for
                                       chromium; and (3) a grab sample
                                       is taken from each drum of soil
                                       or ash generated and a core
                                       sample is collected from each
                                       CHEAF roll generated and the EP
                                       leachate values of daily
                                       composites do not exceed 0.044
                                       ppm in ash or CHEAF media for
                                       mercury or 0.22 ppm in ash or
                                       CHEAF media for selenium.
Falconer Glass     Falconer, NY.....  Wastewater treatment sludges from
 Indust., Inc.                         the filter press and magnetic
                                       drum separator (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. F006) generated from
                                       electroplating operations after
                                       July 16, 1986.
Florida            Daytona Beach,     This is a one-time exclusion.
 Production         Florida.           Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Engineering                           Hazardous Waste No. F006)
 Company.                              generated from electroplating
                                       operations and contained in four
                                       on-site trenches on January 23,
                                       1987.
General Electric   Shreveport         Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Company.           Louisiana.         Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations and contained in four
                                       on-site treatment ponds on August
                                       12, 1987.
General Motors     Elyria, OH.......  The residue generated from the use
 Corp., Fisher                         of the Chemfix<Register>
 Body Division.                        treatment process on sludge (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations and contained in three
                                       on-site surface impoundments on
                                       November 14, 1986. To assure that
                                       stabilization occurs, the
                                       following conditions apply to
                                       this exclusion:
                                      (1) Mixing ratios shall be
                                       monitored continuously to assure
                                       consistent treatment.
                                      (2) One grab sample of the treated
                                       waste shall be taken each hour as
                                       it is pumped to the holding area
                                       (cell) from each trailer unit. At
                                       the end of each production day,
                                       the grab samples from the
                                       individual trailer units will be
                                       composited and the EP toxicity
                                       test will be run on each
                                       composite sample. If lead or
                                       total chromium concentrations
                                       exceed 0.315 ppm or if nickel
                                       exceeds 2.17 ppm, in the EP
                                       extract, the waste will be
                                       removed and retreated or disposed
                                       of as a hazardous waste.
                                      (3) The treated waste shall be
                                       pumped into bermed cells which
                                       are constructed to assure that
                                       the treated waste is identifiable
                                       and retrievable (i.e., the
                                       material can be removed and
                                       either disposed of as a hazardous
                                       waste or retreated if conditions
                                       1 or 2 are not met).
                                      Failure to satisfy any of these
                                       conditions would render the
                                       exclusion void. This is a one-
                                       time exclusion, applicable only
                                       to the residue generated from the
                                       use of the Chemfix<Register>
                                       treatment process on the sludge
                                       currently contained in the three
                                       on-site surface impoundments.
General Motors     Lake Orion,        Wastewater treatment plant (WWTP)
 Corporation.       Michigan.          sludge from the chemical
                                       conversion coating (phosphate
                                       coating) of aluminum (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F019)
                                       generated at a maximum annual
                                       rate of 1,500 tons per year (or
                                       1,500 cubic yards per year),
                                       after October 24, 1997 and
                                       disposed of in a Subtitle D
                                       landfill.
                                      1. Verification Testing: GM must
                                       implement an annual testing
                                       program to demonstrate, based on
                                       the analysis of a minimum of four
                                       representative samples, that the
                                       constituent concentrations
                                       measured in the TCLP (or OWEP,
                                       where appropriate) extract of the
                                       waste are within specific levels.
                                       The constituent concentrations
                                       must not exceed the following
                                       levels (mg/l) which are back-
                                       calculated from the delisting
                                       health-based levels and a DAF of
                                       90: Arsenic--4.5; Cobalt--189;
                                       Copper-- 126; Nickel--63;
                                       Vanadium--18; Zinc--900; 1,2-
                                       Dichloroethane--0.45;
                                       Ethylbenzene--63; 4-Methylphenol--
                                       16.2; Naphthalene--90; Phenol--
                                       1800; and Xylene--900. The
                                       constituent concentrations must
                                       also be less than the following
                                       levels (mg/l) which are the
                                       toxicity characteristic levels:
                                       Barium--100.0; and Chromium
                                       (total)--5.0.

[[Page 103]]

                                      2. Changes in Operating
                                       Conditions: If GM significantly
                                       changes the manufacturing or
                                       treatment process or the
                                       chemicals used in the
                                       manufacturing or treatment
                                       process, GM may handle the WWTP
                                       filter press sludge generated
                                       from the new process under this
                                       exclusion after the facility has
                                       demonstrated that the waste meets
                                       the levels set forth in paragraph
                                       1 and that no new hazardous
                                       constituents listed in Appendix
                                       VIII of Part 261 have been
                                       introduced.
                                      3. Data Submittals: The data
                                       obtained through annual
                                       verification testing or paragraph
                                       2 must be submitted to U.S. EPA
                                       Region 5, 77 W. Jackson Blvd.,
                                       Chicago, IL 60604-3590, within 60
                                       days of sampling. Records of
                                       operating conditions and
                                       analytical data must be compiled,
                                       summarized, and maintained on
                                       site for a minimum of five years
                                       and must be made available for
                                       inspection. All data must be
                                       accompanied by a signed copy of
                                       the certification statement in
                                       260.22(I)(12).
Geological         Morrisville, PA..  Wastewater treatment sludge filter
 Reclamation                           cake from the treatment of EPA
 Operations and                        Hazardous Waste No. F039,
 Systems, Inc.                         generated at a maximum annual
                                       rate of 1,000 cubic yards. This
                                       exclusion was published on August
                                       20, 1991. This exclusion covers
                                       the filter cake resulting from
                                       the treatment of hazardous
                                       leachate derived from only
                                       ``old'' GROWS and non-hazardous
                                       leachate derived from only non-
                                       hazardous sources. This exclusion
                                       does not address the wastes
                                       disposed of in the ``old'' GROWS
                                       Landfill or the grit generated
                                       during the removal of heavy
                                       solids from the landfill
                                       leachate. To ensure that
                                       hazardous constituents are not
                                       present in the filter cake at
                                       levels of regulatory concern,
                                       GROWS must implement a testing
                                       program for the petitioned waste.
                                       This testing program must meet
                                       the conditions listed below in
                                       order for the exclusion to be
                                       valid:
                                      (1) Testing: Sample collection and
                                       analyses, including quality
                                       control (QC) procedures, must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies.
                                      (A) Sample Collection: Each batch
                                       of waste generated over a four-
                                       week period must be collected in
                                       containers with a maximum
                                       capacity of 20-cubic yards. At
                                       the end of the four-week period,
                                       each container must be divided
                                       into four quadrants and a single,
                                       full-depth core sample shall be
                                       collected from each quadrant. All
                                       of the full-depth core samples
                                       then must be composited under
                                       laboratory conditions to produce
                                       one representative composite
                                       sample for the four-week period.
                                      (B) Sample Analysis: Each four-
                                       week composite sample must be
                                       analyzed for all of the
                                       constituents listed in Condition
                                       (3). The analytical data,
                                       including quality control
                                       information, must be compiled and
                                       maintained on site for a minimum
                                       of three years. These data must
                                       be furnished upon request by any
                                       employee or representative of EPA
                                       or state of Pennsylvania.
                                      (2) Waste Holding: The dewatered
                                       filter cake waste must be stored
                                       as hazardous until the
                                       verification analyses are
                                       completed.
                                      If the four-week composite sample
                                       does not exceed any of the
                                       delisting levels set in Condition
                                       (3), the filter cake waste
                                       corresponding to this sample may
                                       be managed and disposed of in
                                       accordance with all applicable
                                       solid waste regulations. If the
                                       four-week composite sample
                                       exceeds any of the delisting
                                       levels set in Condition (3), the
                                       filter cake waste generated
                                       during the time period
                                       corresponding to the four-week
                                       composite sample must be
                                       retreated until it meets these
                                       levels (analyses must be
                                       repeated) or managed and disposed
                                       of in accordance with subtitle C
                                       of RCRA.
                                      Filter cake waste which is
                                       generated but for which analyses
                                       are not complete or valid must be
                                       managed and disposed of in
                                       accordance with subtitle C of
                                       RCRA, until valid analyses
                                       demonstrate that the waste meets
                                       the delisting levels.
                                      (3) Delisting Levels: If the
                                       concentrations in the four-week
                                       composite sample of the filter
                                       cake waste for any of the
                                       hazardous constituents listed
                                       below exceed their respective
                                       maximum allowable concentrations
                                       (ppm) also listed below, the four-
                                       week batch of failing filter cake
                                       waste must either be retreated
                                       until it meets these levels or
                                       managed and disposed of in
                                       accordance with subtitle C of
                                       RCRA.
                                      (A) Inorganics (Leachable):
                                      Arsenic--0.79
                                      Barium--15.9
                                      Cadmium--0.16
                                      Chromium--0.79
                                      Cyanide--11.1
                                      Lead--0.79
                                      Mercury--0.032
                                      Selenium--0.16
                                      Silver--0.79
                                      Nickel--11.1
                                      Leachable metal concentrations
                                       must be measured in the filter
                                       cake leachate as per 40 CFR Sec.
                                       261.24. Cyanide extractions must
                                       be conducted using distilled
                                       water in place of the leaching
                                       media per 40 CFR Sec.  261.24.
                                      (B) Organics:
                                      Acetone--2.02E+03
                                      Acetophenone--3.53E+04
                                      Acetonitrile; Methyl cyanide--
                                       2.43E+01
                                      Acrolein--1.38E+02

[[Page 104]]

                                      Acrylonitrile--6.26E-04
                                      Aldrin--5.27E-03
                                      Aniline--8.72E-01
                                      Anthracene--3.01E+02
                                      Benzene--3.47E+00
                                      Benzo[a]anthracene--5.78E-01
                                      Benzo(b)fluoranthene--6.41E-01
                                      Benzo(k)fluoranthene--3.04E+03
                                      Benzo[a]pyrene--1.51E-01
                                      gamma-BHC; Lindane--5.90E-01
                                      Bis(2-chloroethyl) ether--6.94E-04
                                      Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate--
                                       1.64E+02
                                      Bromodichloromethane--2.94E+03
                                      Bromoform; Tribromomethane--
                                       3.76E+03
                                      Butyl benzyl phthalate--2.49E+05
                                      Carbon disulfide--4.98E+04
                                      Carbon tetrachloride--5.49E+00
                                      Chlordane--7.51E+01
                                      p-Chloroaniline--1.85E+02
                                      Chlorobenzene--5.95E+02
                                      Chlorobenzilate--1.68E+03
                                      p-Chloro-m-cresol--5.18E+02
                                      Chloroform--1.94E+00
                                      2-Chlorophenol--1.72E+02
                                      Chrysene--5.92E+01
                                      Cresol--4.91E+03
                                      2,4-D; 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic
                                       acid--4.17E+02
                                      4,4'-DDD; DDD--2.33E+00
                                      4,4'-DDE; DDE--3.86E+00
                                      4,4'-DDT; DDT--1.21E+01
                                      Dibenz[a,h]anthracene--2.86E-02
                                      Dibromochloromethane;
                                       Chlorodibromomethane--3.05E+03
                                      1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane--4.09E-
                                       02
                                      1,2-Dibromoethane; Ethylene
                                       dibromide--2.37E-03
                                      Di-n-butyl phthalate--9.84E+05
                                      o-Dichlorobenzene; 1,2-
                                       Dichlorobenzene--1.95E+04
                                      m-Dichlorobenzene; 1,3-
                                       Dichlorobenzene--1.87E+05
                                      p-Dichlorobenzene; 1,4-
                                       Dichlorobenzene--1.03E+03
                                      3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine--2.21E-01
                                      Dichlorodifluoromethane--4.15E+05
                                      1,1-Dichloroethane--4.45E-02
                                      1,2-Dichloroethane; Ethylene
                                       dichloride--1.45E+00
                                      1,1-Dichloroethylene--4.96E+00
                                      trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene--
                                       1.42E+02
                                      2,4-Dichlorophenol--1.69E+02
                                      1,2-Dichloropropane--2.73E+00
                                      1,3-Dichloropropene (total cis and
                                       trans isomers)--2.32E-02
                                      Dieldrin--5.04E-03
                                      Diethyl phthalate--1.00E+06
                                      Dimethoate--1.32E+00
                                      7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene--
                                       1.46E-02
                                      2,4-Dimethylphenol--4.87E+01
                                      Dimethyl phthalate--1.00E+06
                                      m-Dinitrobenzene--5.14E+00
                                      4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol--2.00E+02
                                      2,4-Dinitrophenol--8.96E+01
                                      Dinitrotoluene (total of-2,4- and
                                       2,6- isomers)--4.54E-03
                                      Dinoseb; DNBP--5.26E+02
                                      Di-n-octyl phthalate--1.34E+05
                                      1,4-Dioxane--7.89E-02
                                      Diphenylamine--4.81E+04
                                      Disulfoton--3.34E+00
                                      Endosulfan I and Endosulfan II
                                       (total)--7.74E+01
                                      Endrin--3.92E+00
                                      Ethylbenzene--1.94E+04
                                      Fluoranthene--1.16E+05
                                      Fluorene--4.09E+01
                                      Heptachlor--1.31E+01
                                      Heptachlor epoxide--3.26E+00
                                      Hexachlorobenzene--1.02E+00
                                      Hexachlorobutadiene--2.01E+01
                                      Hexachlorocyclopentadiene--3.23E+0
                                       4

[[Page 105]]

                                      Hexachloroethane--1.15E+01
                                      Hexachlorophene;--1.22E+04
                                      Indeno (1,2,3-cd) pyrene--1.16E+02
                                      Isobutyl alcohol; Isobutanol--
                                       3.22E+04
                                      Isophorone--2.86E+00
                                      Methacrylonitrile; 2-methyl-2-
                                       Propenenitrile--5.77E-01
                                      Methoxychlor--1.03E+05
                                      Methylbromide; Bromomethane--
                                       1.41E+02
                                      Methyl chloride; Chloromethane--
                                       3.22E+04
                                      Methylene chloride;
                                       Dichloromethane--9.07E-01
                                      Methyl ethyl ketone; 2-Butanone--
                                       1.50E+03
                                      Methyl methacrylate--5.08E+05
                                      Methyl parathion; Phosphorothioic
                                       acid--5.27E+01
                                      4-Methyl-2-pentanone; Methyl
                                       isobutyl ketone--6.40E+03
                                      Naphthalene--1.00E+06
                                      Nitrobenzene--2.56E+01
                                      N-Nitroso-di-n-butylamine--8.15E-
                                       05
                                      N-Nitrosodiethylamine--2.00E-07
                                      N-Nitrosodimethylamine--2.19E-05
                                      N-Nitrosodiphenylamine--4.55E+01
                                      N-Nitrosodipropylamine; Di-n-
                                       propylnitrosamine; N-Nitrosodi-n-
                                       propylamine--5.02E-05
                                      Nitrosopyrrolidine; N-
                                       Nitrosopyrrolidine; l-nitroso-
                                       Pyrrolidine--3.06E-05
                                      Polychlorinated biphenyls;--
                                       4.77E+01
                                      Pentachlorobenzene--8.91E+03
                                      Pentachloronitrobenzene--2.82E+00
                                      Pentachlorophenol--1.14E+04
                                      Phenanthrene--5.46E+01
                                      Phenol--8.00E+04
                                      Pronamide--2.13E+05
                                      Pyrene--1.00E+06
                                      Pyridine--1.31E+01
                                      Silvex; 2,4,5-TP; 2-(2,4,5-
                                       trichlorophenoxy)-Propanoic acid--
                                       3.87E+01
                                      Styrene--9.14E+00
                                      2,4,5-T; 2,4,5-
                                       Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid--
                                       6.63E+03
                                      1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene--
                                       2.19E+02
                                      1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane--2.28E-
                                       02
                                      Tetrachloroethene;
                                       Tetrachloroethylene--1.34E+01
                                      2,3,4,6-Tetrachlorophenol--
                                       1.17E+04
                                      Tetraethyl dithiopyrophosphate--
                                       2.51E+02
                                      Toluene--4.58E+04
                                      Toxaphene--3.09E+02
                                      1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene--4.75E+04
                                      1,1,1-Trichloroethane--8.70E+02
                                      1,1,2-Trichloroethane--9.03E-02
                                      Trichloroethylene;
                                       Trichloroethene--4.47E+00
                                      Trichlorofluoromethane--3.31E+05
                                      2,4,5-Trichlorophenol--8.20E+04
                                      2,4,6-Trichlorophenol--1.38E+00
                                      1,2,3-Trichloropropane--5.46E+02
                                      sym-Trinitrobenzene--2.17E+00
                                      Vinyl chloride--7.11E-01
                                      Xylene (total)--8.49E+05
Goodyear Tire and  Randleman, NC....  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Rubber Co.                            sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006) generated from
                                       electroplating operations.
Gould, Inc.......  McConnelsville,    Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
                    OH.                Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after November 27,
                                       1985.
Hoechst Celanese   Bucks, Alabama...  Distillation bottoms generated (at
 Corporation.                          a maximum annual rate of 31,500
                                       cubic yards) from the production
                                       of sodium hydrosulfite (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F003). This
                                       exclusion was published on July
                                       17, 1990. This exclusion does not
                                       include the waste contained in
                                       Hoechst Celanese's on-site
                                       surface impoundment.
Hoechst Celanese   Leeds, South       Distillation bottoms generated (at
 Corporation.       Carolina.          a maximum annual rate of 38,500
                                       cubic yards) from the production
                                       of sodium hydrosulfite (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F003). This
                                       exclusion was published on July
                                       17, 1990.
Hanover Wire       Hanover,           Dewatered filter cake (EPA
 Cloth Division.    Pennsylvania.      Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after August 15, 1986.
Holston Army       Kingsport,         Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Ammunition Plant.  Tennessee.         sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste Nos.
                                       F003, F005, and K044) generated
                                       from the manufacturing and
                                       processing of explosives and
                                       containing spent non-halogenated
                                       solvents after November 14, 1986.
Imperial Clevite.  Salem, IN........  Solid resin cakes containing EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F002
                                       generated after August 27, 1985,
                                       from solvent recovery operations.

[[Page 106]]

Indiana Steel &    Munci, IN........  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Wire Corporation                      sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste Nos.
 (formerly                             F006 and K062) generated from
 General Cable                         electroplating operations and
 Co.).                                 steel finishing operations after
                                       October 24, 1986. This exclusion
                                       does not apply to sludges in any
                                       on-site impoundments as of this
                                       date.
International      Terre Haute,       Spent non-halogenated solvents and
 Minerals and       Indiana.           still bottoms (EPA Hazardous
 Chemical                              Waste No. F003) generated from
 Corporation.                          the recovery of n-butyl alchohol
                                       after August 15, 1986.
Kawneer Company,   Springdale,        Wastewater treatment filter press
 Incorporated.      Arkansas.          sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated (at a maximum
                                       annual rate of 26 cubic yards)
                                       from the chemical conversion
                                       coating of aluminum. This
                                       exclusion was published on
                                       November 13, 1990.
Kay-Fries, Inc...  Stoney Point, NY.  Biological aeration lagoon sludge
                                       and filter press sludge generated
                                       after September 21, 1984, which
                                       contain EPA Hazardous Waste Nos.
                                       F003 and F005 as well as that
                                       disposed of in a holding lagoon
                                       as of September 21, 1984.
Keymark Corp.....  Fonda, NY........  Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F019)
                                       generated from chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after November 27, 1985.
Keymark Corp.....  Fonda, NY........  Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F019)
                                       generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       and contained in an on-site
                                       impoundment on August 12, 1987.
                                       This is a one-time exclusion.
Lederle            Pearl River, NY..  Spent non-halogenated solvents and
 Laboratories.                         still bottoms (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste Nos. F003 and F005)
                                       generated from the recovery of
                                       the following solvents: Xylene,
                                       acetone, ethyl acetate, ethyl
                                       ether, methyl isobutyl ketone, n-
                                       butyl alcohol, cyclohexanone,
                                       methanol, toluene, and pyridine
                                       after August 2, 1988. Excusion
                                       applies to primary and secondary
                                       filter press sludges and compost
                                       soils generated from these
                                       sludges.
Lincoln Plating    Lincoln, NE......  Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Company.                              Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after November 17,
                                       1986.
Loxcreen Company,  Hayti, MO........  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Inc.                                  sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after July 16, 1986.
MAHLE, Inc.......  Morristown,        Wastewater treatment sludge filter
                    Tennessee.         cake (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       (generated at a maximum annual
                                       rate of 33 cubic yards), after
                                       August 21, 1992. In order to
                                       confirm that the characteristics
                                       of the waste do not change
                                       significantly, the facility must,
                                       on an annual basis sample and
                                       test for the constituents listed
                                       in 40 CFR 261.24 using the method
                                       specified therein. The annual
                                       analytical results (including
                                       quality control information) must
                                       be compiled, certified according
                                       to 40 CFR 260.22(i)(12),
                                       maintained on-site for a minimum
                                       of five years, and made available
                                       for inspection upon request by
                                       representatives of EPA or the
                                       State of Tennessee. Failure to
                                       maintain the required records on-
                                       site will be considered by EPA,
                                       at its discretion, sufficient
                                       basis to revoke the exclusion to
                                       the extent directed by EPA.
Marquette          Milwaukee,         Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
 Electronics        Wisconsin.         Hazardous Waste No. F006)
 Incorporated.                         generated from electroplating
                                       operations. This exclusion was
                                       published on April 20, 1989.
Martin Marietta    Ocala, Florida...  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Aerospace.                            sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006) generated from
                                       electroplating operations after
                                       January 23, 1987.
Mason              Bay St. Louis,     Wastewater treatment sludge filter
 Chamberlain,       Mississippi.       cake (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
 Incorporated.                         F019) generated (at a maximum
                                       annual rate of 1,262 cubic yards)
                                       from the chemical conversion
                                       coating of aluminum. This
                                       exclusion was published on
                                       October 27, 1989.
Merck & Company,   Elkton, Virginia.  One-time exclusion for fly ash
 Incorporated.                         (EPA Hazardous Waste No. F002)
                                       from the incineration of
                                       wastewater treatment sludge
                                       generated from pharmaceutical
                                       production processes and stored
                                       in an on-site fly ash lagoon.
                                       This exclusion was published on
                                       May 12, 1989.
Maytag Company...  Newton, IA.......  Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations and wastewater
                                       treatment sludges (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. F019) generated from
                                       the chemical conversion coating
                                       of aluminum November 17, 1986.
Metropolitan       Cincinnati, OH...  Sluiced bottom ash sludge
 Sewer District                        (approximately 25,000 cubic
 of Greater                            yards), contained in the North
 Cincinnati.                           Lagoon, on September 21, 1984,
                                       which contains EPA Hazardous
                                       Wastes Nos. F001, F002, F003,
                                       F004, and F005.
Michelin Tire      Sandy Springs,     Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Corp.              South Carolina.    sludge (EPA Hazardous Wastes No.
                                       F006) generated from
                                       electroplating operations after
                                       November 14, 1986.
Monroe Auto        Paragould, AR....  Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
 Equipment.                            Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after vacuum
                                       filtration after November 27,
                                       1985. This exclusion does not
                                       apply to the sludge contained in
                                       the on-site impoundment.
North American     Greenville,        Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Philips Consumer   Tennessee.         Hazardous Waste No. F006)
 Electronics                           generated from electroplating
 Corporation.                          operations. This exclusion was
                                       published on April 20, 1989.

[[Page 107]]

Philway Products,  Ashland, Ohio....  Filter press sludge generated (at
 Incorporated.                         a maximum annual rate of 96 cubic
                                       yards) during the treatment of
                                       electroplating wastewaters using
                                       lime (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006). This exclusion was
                                       published on October 26, 1990.
Plastene Supply    Portageville,      Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Company.           Missouri.          sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006) generated from
                                       electroplating operations after
                                       August 15, 1986.
POP Fasteners....  Shelton,           Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
                    Connecticut.       Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations (at a maximum annual
                                       rate of 1,000 cubic yards) after
                                       September 19, 1994. In order to
                                       confirm that the characteristics
                                       of the waste do not change
                                       significantly, the facility must,
                                       on an annual basis, analyze a
                                       representative composite sample
                                       for the constituents listed in
                                       Sec.  261.24 using the method
                                       specified therein. The annual
                                       analytical results, including
                                       quality control information, must
                                       be compiled, certified according
                                       to Sec.  260.22(i)(12),
                                       maintained on site for a minimum
                                       of five years, and made available
                                       for inspection upon request by
                                       any employee or representative of
                                       EPA or the State of Connecticut.
                                       Failure to maintain the required
                                       records on site will be
                                       considered by EPA, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA.
Reynolds Metals    Sheffield, AL....  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Company.                              sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after August 15, 1986.
Reynolds Metals    Sheffield, AL....  Wastewater treatment filter press
 Company.                              sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated (at a maximum
                                       annual rate of 3,840 cubic yards)
                                       from the chemical conversion
                                       coating of aluminum. This
                                       exclusion was published on July
                                       17, 1990.
Siegel-Robert,     St. Louis, MO....  Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
 Inc.                                  Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after November 27,
                                       1985.
Square D Company.  Oxford, Ohio.....  Dewatered filter press sludge (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after August 15, 1986.
Syntex             Springfield, MO..  Kiln ash, cyclone ash, separator
 Agribusiness.                         sludge, and filtered wastewater
                                       (except spent activiated carbon)
                                       (EPA Hazardous Waste No. F020
                                       generated during the treatment of
                                       wastewater treatment sludge by
                                       the EPA's Mobile Incineration
                                       System at the Denney Farm Site in
                                       McDowell, Missouri after June 2,
                                       1988, so long as:
                                      (1) The incinerator is monitored
                                       continuously and is in compliance
                                       with operating permit conditions.
                                       Should the incinerator fail to
                                       comply with the permit conditions
                                       relevant to the mechanical
                                       operation of the incinerator,
                                       Syntex must test the residues
                                       generated during the run when the
                                       failure occurred according to the
                                       requirements of Conditions (2)
                                       through (6), regardless of
                                       whether or not the demonstration
                                       in Condition (7) has been made.
                                      (2) Four grab samples of
                                       wastewater must be composited
                                       from the volume of filtered
                                       wastewater collected after each
                                       eight hour run and, prior to
                                       disposal the composite samples
                                       must be analyzed for the EP toxic
                                       metals, nickel, and cyanide. If
                                       arsenic, chromium, lead, and
                                       silver EP leachate test results
                                       exceed 0.61 ppm; barium levels
                                       exceed 12 ppm; cadmium and
                                       selenium levels exceed 0.12 ppm;
                                       mercury levels exceed 0.02 ppm;
                                       nickel levels exceed 6.1 ppm; or
                                       cyanide levels exceed 2.4 ppm,
                                       the wastewater must be retreated
                                       to achieve these levels or must
                                       be disposed in accordance with
                                       all applicable hazardous waste
                                       regulations. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies.
                                      (3) One grab sample must be taken
                                       from each drum of kiln and
                                       cyclone ash generated during each
                                       eight hour run; all grabs
                                       collected during a given eight
                                       hour run must then be composited
                                       to form one composite sample. A
                                       composite sample of four grab
                                       samples of the separator sludge
                                       must be collected at the end of
                                       each eight hour run. Prior to the
                                       disposal of the residues from
                                       each eight hour run, an EP
                                       leachate test must be performed
                                       on these composite samples and
                                       the leachate analyzed for the EP
                                       toxic metals, nickel, and cyanide
                                       (using a distilled water
                                       extraction for the cyanide
                                       extraction) to demonstrate that
                                       the following maximum allowable
                                       treatment residue concentrations
                                       listed below are not exceeded.
                                       Analyses must be performed
                                       according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. Any residues which
                                       exceed any of the levels listed
                                       below must be retreated to
                                       achieve these levels or must be
                                       disposed in accordance with all
                                       applicable hazardous waste
                                       regulations.
                                      Maximum Allowable Solids Treatment
                                       Residue EP Leachate
                                       Concentrations (mg/L)
                                        Arsenic--1.6
                                        Barium--32
                                        Cadmium--0.32
                                        Chromium--1.6
                                        Lead--1.6
                                        Mercury--0.065
                                        Nickel--16
                                        Selenium--0.32
                                        Silver--1.6
                                        Cyanide--6.5

[[Page 108]]

                                      (4)--If Syntex stabilizes any of
                                       the kiln and cyclone ash or
                                       separator sludge, a Portland
                                       cement-type stabilization process
                                       must be used and Syntex must
                                       collect a composite sample of
                                       four grab samples from each batch
                                       of stabilized waste. An MEP
                                       leachate test must be performed
                                       on these composite samples and
                                       the leachate analyzed for the EP
                                       toxic metals, nickel, and cyanide
                                       (using a distilled water
                                       extraction for the cyanide
                                       leachate analysis) to demonstrate
                                       that the maximum allowable
                                       treatment residue concentrations
                                       listed in Condition (3) are not
                                       exceeded during any run of the
                                       MEP extraction. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. Any residues which
                                       exceed any of the levels listed
                                       in Condition (3) must be
                                       retreated to achieve these levels
                                       or must be disposed in accordance
                                       with all applicable hazardous
                                       waste regulations. (If the
                                       residues are stabilized, the
                                       analyses required in this
                                       condition supercede the analyses
                                       required in Condition (3).)
                                      (5) Syntex must generate, prior to
                                       disposal of residues,
                                       verification data from each eight
                                       hour run from each treatment
                                       residue (i.e., kiln and cyclone
                                       ash, separator sludge, and
                                       filtered wastewater) to
                                       demonstrate that the maximum
                                       allowable treatment residue
                                       concentrations listed below are
                                       not exceeded. Samples must be
                                       collected as specified in
                                       Conditions (2) and (3). Analyses
                                       must be performed according to SW-
                                       846 methodologies. Any solid or
                                       liquid residues which exceed any
                                       of the levels listed below must
                                       be retreated to achieve these
                                       levels or must be disposed in
                                       accordance with Subtitle C of
                                       RCRA.
                                      Maximum Allowable Wastewater
                                       Concentrations (ppm):
                                        Benz(a)anthracene--1 x 10<SUP>-4
                                        Benzo(a)pyrene--4 x 10<SUP>-5
                                        Benzo(b)fluoranthene--2 x 10<SUP>-4
                                        Chloroform--0.07
                                        Chrysene--0.002
                                        Dibenz(a,h)anthracene--9 x 10<SUP>-6
                                        1,2-Dichloroethane--0.06
                                        Dichloromethane--0.06
                                        Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene--0.002
                                        Polychlorinated biphenyls--1 x
                                       10<SUP>-4
                                        1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene--0.13
                                        2,3,4,6-Tetrachlorophenol--12
                                        Toluene--120
                                        Trichloroethylene--0.04
                                        2,4,5-Trichlorophenol--49
                                        2,4,6-Trichlorophenol--0.02
                                      Maximum Allowable Solid Treatment
                                       Residue Concentrations (ppm):
                                        Benz(a)anthracene--1.1
                                        Benzo(a)pyrene--0.43
                                        Benzo(b)fluoranthene--1.8
                                        Chloroform--5.4
                                        Chrysene--170
                                        Dibenz(a,h)anthracene--0.083
                                        Dichloromethane--2.4
                                        1,2-Dichloroethane--4.1
                                        Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene--330
                                        Polychlorinated biphenyls--0.31
                                        1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene--720
                                        Trichloroethylene--6.6
                                        2,4,6-Trichlorophenol--3.9
                                      (6) Syntex must generate, prior to
                                       disposal of residues,
                                       verification data from each eight
                                       hour run for each treatment
                                       residue (i.e., kiln and cyclone
                                       ash, separator sludge, and
                                       filtered wastewater) to
                                       demonstrate that the residues do
                                       not contain tetra-, penta-, or
                                       hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins or
                                       furans at levels of regulatory
                                       concern. Samples must be
                                       collected as specified in
                                       Conditions (2) and (3). The TCDD
                                       equivalent levels for wastewaters
                                       must be less than 2 ppq and less
                                       than 5 ppt for the solid
                                       treatment residues. Any residues
                                       with detected dioxins or furans
                                       in excess of these levels must be
                                       retreated or must be disposed as
                                       acutely hazardous. Method 8290, a
                                       high resolution gas
                                       chromatography and high
                                       resolution mass spectroscopy
                                       (HRGC/HRMS) analytical method,
                                       must be used. For tetra- and
                                       pentachloronated dioxin and furan
                                       homologs, the maximum practical
                                       quantitation limit must not
                                       exceed 15 ppt for solids and 120
                                       ppq for wastewaters. For
                                       hexachlorinated homologs, the
                                       maximum practical quantitation
                                       limit must not exceed 37 ppt for
                                       solids and 300 ppq for
                                       wastewaters.
                                      (7)(A) The test data from
                                       Conditions (1), (2), (3), (4),
                                       (5) and (6) must be kept on file
                                       by Syntex for inspection purposes
                                       and must be compiled, summarized,
                                       and submitted to the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section, PSPD/
                                       OSW (WH-563), US EPA, 401 M
                                       Street, S.W., Washington, DC
                                       20460 by certified mail on a
                                       monthly basis and when the
                                       treatment of the lagoon sludge is
                                       concluded. All data submitted
                                       will be placed in the RCRA
                                       docket.
                                      (B) The testing requirements for
                                       Conditions (2), (3), (4), (5),
                                       and (6) will continue until
                                       Syntex provides the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section, with
                                       the results of four consecutive
                                       batch analyses for the petitioned
                                       wastes, none of which exceed the
                                       maximum allowable treatment
                                       residue concentrations listed in
                                       these conditions and the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section,
                                       notifies Syntex that the
                                       conditions have been lifted.

[[Page 109]]

                                      (8) Syntex must provide a signed
                                       copy of the following
                                       certification statement when
                                       submitting data in response to
                                       the conditions listed above:
                                       ``Under civil and criminal
                                       penalty of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations, I
                                       certify that the information
                                       contained in or accompanying this
                                       document is true, accurate, and
                                       complete. As to the (those)
                                       identified section(s) of this
                                       document for which I cannot
                                       personally verify its (their)
                                       accuracy, I certify as the
                                       company official having
                                       supervisory responsibility for
                                       the persons who, acting under my
                                       direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.''
SR of Tennessee..  Ripley, TN.......  Dewatered wastewater treatment
                                       sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006) generated from the copper,
                                       nickel, and chromium
                                       electroplating of plastic parts
                                       after November 17, 1986.
Tennessee          Ripley, Tennessee  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Electroplating.                       sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste Nos.
                                       F006) generated from
                                       electroplating operations after
                                       November 17, 1986. To ensure
                                       chromium levels do not exceed the
                                       regulatory standards there must
                                       be continuous batch testing of
                                       the filter press sludge for
                                       chromium for 45 days after the
                                       exclusion is granted. Each batch
                                       of treatment residue must be
                                       representatively sampled and
                                       tested using the EP toxicity test
                                       for chromium. This data must be
                                       kept on file at the facility for
                                       inspection purposes. If the
                                       extract levels exceed 0.922 ppm
                                       of chromium the waste must be
                                       managed and disposed of as
                                       hazardous. If these conditions
                                       are not met, the exclusion does
                                       not apply. This exclusion does
                                       not apply to sludges in any on-
                                       site impoundments as of this
                                       date.
Tennessee          Ripley, TN.......  Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
 Electroplating.                       Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations and contained in an on-
                                       site surface impoundment (maximum
                                       volume of 6,300 cubic yards).
                                       This is a one-time exclusion.
                                       This exclusion was published on
                                       April 8, 1991.
Texas Eastman....  Longview, Texas..  Incinerator ash (at a maximum
                                       generation of 7,000 cubic yards
                                       per calendar year) generated from
                                       the incineration of sludge from
                                       the wastewater treatment plant
                                       (EPA Hazardous Waste No. D001,
                                       D003, D018, D019, D021, D022,
                                       D027, D028, D029, D030, D032,
                                       D033, D034, D035, D036, D038,
                                       D039, D040, F001, F002, F003,
                                       F005, and that is disposed of in
                                       Subtitle D landfills after
                                       September 25, 1996. Texas Eastman
                                       must implement a testing program
                                       that meets the following
                                       conditions for the petition to be
                                       valid:
                                      1. Delisting Levels: All leachable
                                       concentrations for those metals
                                       must not exceed the following
                                       levels (mg/l). Metal
                                       concentrations must be measured
                                       in the waste leachate by the
                                       method specified in 40 CFR Sec.
                                       261.24.
                                      (A) Inorganic Constituents
                                      Antimony--0.27; Arsenic--2.25;
                                       Barium--90.0; Beryllium--0.0009;
                                       Cadmium--0.225; Chromium--4.5;
                                       Cobalt--94.5; Copper--58.5; Lead--
                                       0.675; Mercury--0.045; Nickel--
                                       4.5; Selenium--1.0; Silver--5.0;
                                       Thallium--0.135; Tin--945.0;
                                       Vanadium--13.5; Zinc--450.0
                                      (B) Organic Constituents
                                      Acenaphthene--90.0; Acetone--
                                       180.0; Benzene--0.135;
                                       Benzo(a)anthracene--0.00347;
                                       Benzo(a)pyrene--0.00045; Benzo(b)
                                       fluoranthene--0.00320; Bis(2
                                       ethylhexyl) phthalate--0.27;
                                       Butylbenzyl phthalate--315.0;
                                       Chloroform--0.45; Chlorobenzene--
                                       31.5; Carbon Disulfide--180.0;
                                       Chrysene--0.1215; 1,2-
                                       Dichlorobenzene--135.0; 1,4-
                                       Dichlorobenzene--0.18; Di-n-butyl
                                       phthalate--180.0; Di-n-octyl
                                       phthalate--35.0; 1,4 Dioxane--
                                       0.36; Ethyl Acetate--1350.0;
                                       Ethyl Ether--315.0; Ethylbenzene--
                                       180.0; Flouranthene--45.0;
                                       Fluorene--45.0; 1-Butanol--180.0;
                                       Methyl Ethyl Ketone--200.0;
                                       Methylene Chloride--0.45; Methyl
                                       Isobutyl Ketone--90.0;
                                       Naphthalene--45.0; Pyrene--45.0;
                                       Toluene--315.0; Xylenes--3150.0
                                      2. Waste Holding and Handling:
                                       Texas Eastman must store in
                                       accordance with its RCRA permit,
                                       or continue to dispose of as
                                       hazardous all FBI ash generated
                                       until the Initial and Subsequent
                                       Verification Testing described in
                                       Paragraph 4 and 5 below is
                                       completed and valid analyses
                                       demonstrate that all Verification
                                       Testing Conditions are satisfied.
                                       After completion of Initial and
                                       Subsequent Verification Testing,
                                       if the levels of constituents
                                       measured in the samples of the
                                       FBI ash do not exceed the levels
                                       set forth in Paragraph 1 above,
                                       and written notification is given
                                       by EPA, then the waste is non-
                                       hazardous and may be managed and
                                       disposed of in accordance with
                                       all applicable solid waste
                                       regulations.
                                      3. Verification Testing
                                       Requirements: Sample collection
                                       and analyses, including quality
                                       control procedures, must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. If EPA judges the
                                       incineration process to be
                                       effective under the operating
                                       conditions used during the
                                       initial verification testing
                                       described in Paragraph 4 below,
                                       Texas Eastman may replace the
                                       testing required in Paragraph 4
                                       with the testing required in
                                       Paragraph 5 below. Texas Eastman
                                       must, however, continue to test
                                       as specified in Paragraph 4 until
                                       notified by EPA in writing that
                                       testing in Paragraph 4 may be
                                       replaced by the testing described
                                       in Paragraph 5.
                                      4. Initial Verification Testing:
                                       During the first 40 operating
                                       days of the FBI incinerator after
                                       the final exclusion is granted,
                                       Texas Eastman must collect and
                                       analyze daily composites of the
                                       FBI ash. Daily composites must be
                                       composed of representative grab
                                       samples collected every 6 hours
                                       during each 24-hour FBI operating
                                       cycle. The FBI ash must be
                                       analyzed, prior to disposal of
                                       the ash, for all constituents
                                       listed in Paragraph 1. Texas
                                       Eastman must report the
                                       operational and analytical test
                                       data, including quality control
                                       information, obtained during this
                                       initial period no later than 90
                                       days after receipt of the
                                       validated analytical results.

[[Page 110]]

                                      5. Subsequent Verification
                                       Testing: Following the completion
                                       of the Initial Verification
                                       Testing, Texas Eastman may
                                       request to monitor operating
                                       conditions and analyze samples
                                       representative of each quarter of
                                       operation during the first year
                                       of ash generation. The samples
                                       must represent the untreated ash
                                       generated over one quarter.
                                       Following written notification
                                       from EPA, Texas Eastman may begin
                                       the quarterly testing described
                                       in this Paragraph.
                                      6. Termination of Organic Testing:
                                       Texas Eastman must continue
                                       testing as required under
                                       Paragraph 5 for organic
                                       constituents specified in
                                       Paragraph 1 until the analyses
                                       submitted under Paragraph 5 show
                                       a minimum of two consecutive
                                       quarterly samples below the
                                       delisting levels in Paragraph 1.
                                       Texas Eastman may then request
                                       that quarterly organic testing be
                                       terminated. After EPA notifies
                                       Texas Eastman in writing it may
                                       terminate quarterly organic
                                       testing.
                                      7. Annual Testing: Following
                                       termination of quarterly testing
                                       under either Paragraphs 5 or 6,
                                       Texas Eastman must continue to
                                       test a representative composite
                                       sample for all constituents
                                       listed in Paragraph 1 (including
                                       organics) on an annual basis (no
                                       later than twelve months after
                                       the date that the final exclusion
                                       is effective).
                                      8. Changes in Operating
                                       Conditions: If Texas Eastman
                                       significantly changes the
                                       incineration process described in
                                       its petition or implements any
                                       new manufacturing or production
                                       process(es) which generate(s) the
                                       ash and which may or could affect
                                       the composition or type of waste
                                       generated established under
                                       Paragraph 3 (by illustration {
                                       but not limitation}, use of
                                       stabilization reagents or
                                       operating conditions of the
                                       fluidized bed incinerator), Texas
                                       Eastman must notify the EPA in
                                       writing and may no longer handle
                                       the wastes generated from the new
                                       process as non-hazardous until
                                       the wastes meet the delisting
                                       levels set in Paragraph 1 and it
                                       has received written approval to
                                       do so from EPA.
                                      9. Data Submittals: The data
                                       obtained through Paragraph 3 must
                                       be submitted to Mr. William
                                       Gallagher, Chief, Region 6
                                       Delisting Program, U.S. EPA, 1445
                                       Ross Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75202-
                                       2733, Mail Code, (6PD-O) within
                                       the time period specified.
                                       Records of operating conditions
                                       and analytical data from
                                       Paragraph 3 must be compiled,
                                       summarized, and maintained on
                                       site for a minimum of five years.
                                       These records and data must be
                                       furnished upon request by EPA, or
                                       the State of Texas, and made
                                       available for inspection. Failure
                                       to submit the required data
                                       within the specified time period
                                       or maintain the required records
                                       on site for the specified time
                                       will be considered by EPA, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by a signed
                                       copy of the following
                                       certification statement to attest
                                       to the truth and accuracy of the
                                       data submitted:
                                      Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code,
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 USC 1001 and 42
                                       USC 6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate and complete.
                                      As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       waste will be void as if it never
                                       had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.
                                      10. Notification Requirements:
                                       Texas Eastman must provide a one-
                                       time written notification to any
                                       State Regulatory Agency to which
                                       or through which the delisted
                                       waste described above will be
                                       transported for disposal at least
                                       60 days prior to the commencement
                                       of such activities. Failure to
                                       provide such a notification will
                                       result in a violation of the
                                       delisting petition and a possible
                                       revocation of the decision.
Universal Oil      Decatur, Alabama.  Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Products.                             Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations and contained in two
                                       on-site lagoons on August 15,
                                       1986. This is a one-time
                                       exclusion.
U.S. EPA           Jefferson,         One-time exclusion for scrubber
 Combustion         Arkansas.          water (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
 Research                              F020) generated in 1985 from the
 Facility.                             incineration of Vertac still
                                       bottoms. This exclusion was
                                       published on June 28, 1989.
U.S. Nameplate     Mount Vernon,      Retreated wastewater treatment
 Company, Inc.      Iowa.              sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F006) previously generated from
                                       electroplating operations and
                                       currently contained in an on-site
                                       surface impoundment after
                                       September 28, 1988. This is a one-
                                       time exclusion for the reteated
                                       wastes only. This exclution does
                                       not relieve the waste unit from
                                       regulatory compliance under
                                       Subtitle C.
VAW of America     St. Augustine,     Wastewater treatment sludge filter
 Incorporated.      Florida.           cake (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum.
                                       This exclusion was published on
                                       February 1, 1989.
Vermont American,  Newark, OH.......  Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
 Corp.                                 Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after November 27,
                                       1985.

[[Page 111]]

Waterloo           Pocahontas, AR...  Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Industries.                           Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after dewatering and
                                       held on-site on July 17, 1986 and
                                       any such sludge generated (after
                                       dewatering) after July 17, 1986.
Watervliet         Watervliet, NY...  Wastewater treatment sludges (EPA
 Arsenal.                              Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations after January 10,
                                       1986.
William L.         Newnan, Georgia..  Dewatered wastewater treatment
 Bonnell Co.                           sludges (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       F019) generated from the chemical
                                       conversion coating of aluminum
                                       after November 14, 1986. This
                                       exclusion does not include
                                       sludges contained in Bonnell's on-
                                       site surface impoundments.
Windsor Plastics,  Evansville, IN...  Spent non-halogenated solvents and
 Inc.                                  still bottoms (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. F003) generated from
                                       the recovery of acetone after
                                       November 17, 1986.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


             Table 2--Wastes Excluded From Specific Sources
------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Facility           Address                Waste description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cyanamid  Hannibal,          Wastewater and sludge (EPA
                    Missouri.          Hazardous Waste No. K038)
                                       generated from the washing and
                                       stripping of phorate production
                                       and contained in on-site lagoons
                                       on May 8, 1987, and such
                                       wastewater and sludge generated
                                       after May 8, 1987.
Amoco Oil Co.....  Wood River, IL...  150 million gallons of DAF from
                                       petroleum refining contained in
                                       in four surge ponds after
                                       treatment with the Chemifix
                                       stabilization process. This waste
                                       contains EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       K048. This exclusion applies to
                                       the 150 million gallons of waste
                                       after chemical stabilization as
                                       long as the mixing ratios of the
                                       reagent with the waste are
                                       monitored continuously and do not
                                       vary outside of the limits
                                       presented in the demonstration
                                       samples; one grab sample is taken
                                       each hour from each treatment
                                       unit, composited, and EP toxicity
                                       tests performed on each sample.
                                       If the levels of lead or total
                                       chromium exceed 0.5 ppm in the EP
                                       extract, then the waste that was
                                       processed during the compositing
                                       period is considered hazardous;
                                       the treatment residue shall be
                                       pumped into bermed cells to
                                       ensure that the waste is
                                       identifiable in the event that
                                       removal is necessary.
Akzo Chemicals     Axis, AL.........  Brine purification muds generated
 Inc. (formerly                        from their chlor-alkali
 Stauffer                              manufacturing operations (EPA
 Chemical                              Hazardous Waste No. K071) and
 Company).                             disposed of in brine mud pond
                                       HWTF: 5 EP-201.
Bekaert Steel      Rogers, Arkansas.  Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
 Corporation.                          Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations (at a maximum annual
                                       rate of 1250 cubic yards to be
                                       measured on a calendar year
                                       basis) after [insert publication
                                       date of the final rule]. In order
                                       to confirm that the
                                       characteristics of the waste do
                                       not change significantly, the
                                       facility must, on an annual
                                       basis, before July 1 of each
                                       year, analyze a representative
                                       composite sample for the
                                       constituents listed in Sec.
                                       261.24 as well as antimony,
                                       copper, nickel, and zinc using
                                       the method specified therein. The
                                       annual analytical results,
                                       including quality control
                                       information, must be compiled,
                                       certified according to Sec.
                                       260.22(i)(12) of this chapter,
                                       maintained on site for a minimum
                                       of five years, and made available
                                       for inspection upon request of
                                       any employee or representative of
                                       EPA or the State of Arkansas.
                                       Failure to maintain the required
                                       documents on site will be
                                       considered by EPA, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA.
Bethlehem Steel    Steelton, PA.....  Uncured and cured chemically
 Corp.                                 stabilized electric arc furnace
                                       dust/sludge (CSEAFD) treatment
                                       residue (K061) generated from the
                                       primary production of steel after
                                       May 22, 1989. This exclusion is
                                       conditioned upon the data
                                       obtained from Bethlehem's full-
                                       scale CSEAFD treatment facility
                                       because Bethlehem's original data
                                       were obtained from a laboratory-
                                       scale CSEAFD treatment process.
                                       To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern once the full-scale
                                       treatment facility is in
                                       operation, Bethlehem must
                                       implement a testing program for
                                       the petitioned waste. This
                                       testing program must meet the
                                       following conditions for the
                                       exclusion to be valid:
                                      (1) Testing:
                                      (A) Initial Testing: During the
                                       first four weeks of operation of
                                       the full-scale treatment system,
                                       Bethlehem must collect
                                       representative grab samples of
                                       each treated batch of the CSEAFD
                                       and composite the grab samples
                                       daily. The daily composites,
                                       prior to disposal, must be
                                       analyzed for the EP leachate
                                       concentrations of all the EP
                                       toxic metals, nickel and cyanide
                                       (using distilled water in the
                                       cyanide extractions), and the
                                       total constituent concentrations
                                       of reactive sulfide and reactive
                                       cyanide. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. Bethlehem must
                                       report the analytical test data
                                       obtained during this initial
                                       period no later than 90 days
                                       after the treatment of the first
                                       full-scale batch.

[[Page 112]]

                                      (B) Subsequent Testing: Bethlehem
                                       must collect representative grab
                                       samples from every treated batch
                                       of CSEAFD generated daily and
                                       composite all of the grab samples
                                       to produce a weekly composite
                                       sample. Bethlehem then must
                                       analyze each weekly composite
                                       sample for the EP leachate
                                       concentrations of all the EP
                                       toxic metals and nickel. Analyses
                                       must be performed according to SW-
                                       846 methodologies. The analytical
                                       data, including all quality
                                       control information, must be
                                       compiled and maintained on site
                                       for a minimum of three years.
                                       These data must be furnished upon
                                       request and made available for
                                       inspection by any employee or
                                       representative of EPA or the
                                       State of Pennsylvania.
                                      (2) Delisting Levels: If the EP
                                       extract concentrations resulting
                                       from the testing in condition
                                       (1)(A) or (1)(B) for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, or silver exceed
                                       0.315 mg/L, for barium exceeds
                                       6.3 mg/l; for cadmium or selenium
                                       exceed 0.063 mg/l; for mercury
                                       exceeds 0.0126 mg/l; for nickel
                                       exceeds 3.15 mg/l; or for cyanide
                                       exceeds 4.42 mg/L, or total
                                       reactive cyanide or total
                                       reactive sulfide levels exceed
                                       250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       respectively, the waste must
                                       either be re-treated or managed
                                       and disposed in accordance with
                                       subtitle C of RCRA.
                                      (3) Data submittals: Within one
                                       week of system start-up,
                                       Bethlehem must notify the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section (see
                                       address below) when their full-
                                       scale stabilization system is on-
                                       line and waste treatment has
                                       begun. All data obtained through
                                       the initial testing condition
                                       (1)(A), must be submitted to the
                                       Section Chief, Variances Section,
                                       PSPD/OSW, (OS-343), U.S. EPA, 401
                                       M Street, S.W., Washington, DC
                                       20460 within the time period
                                       specified in condition (1)(A). At
                                       the Section Chief's request,
                                       Bethlehem must submit analytical
                                       data obtained through condition
                                       (1)(B) to the above address,
                                       within the time period specified
                                       by the Section Chief. Failure to
                                       submit the required data obtained
                                       from either condition (1)(A) or
                                       (1)(B) within the specified time
                                       periods will be considered by the
                                       Agency sufficient basis to revoke
                                       Bethlehem's exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by the
                                       following certification
                                       statement:
                                      ``Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 U.S.C. 6928), I
                                       certify that the information
                                       contained in or accompanying this
                                       document is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      ``As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      ``In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       wastes will be void as if it
                                       never had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.''
Bethlehem Steel    Johnstown, PA....  Uncured and cured chemically
 Corp.                                 stabilized electric arc furnace
                                       dust/sludge (CSEAFD) treatment
                                       residue (K061) generated from the
                                       primary production of steel after
                                       May 22, 1989. This exclusion is
                                       conditioned upon the data
                                       obtained from Bethlehem's full-
                                       scale CSEAFD treatment facility
                                       because Bethlehem's original data
                                       were obtained from a labortory-
                                       scale CSEAFD treatment process.
                                       To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern once the full-scale
                                       treatment facility is in
                                       operation, Bethlehem must
                                       implement a testing program for
                                       the petitioned waste. This
                                       testing program must meet the
                                       following conditions for the
                                       exclusion to be valid:
                                      (1) Testing:
                                      (A) Initial Testing: During the
                                       first four weeks of operation of
                                       the full-scale treatment system,
                                       Bethlehem must collect
                                       representative grab samples of
                                       each treated batch of the CSEAFD
                                       and composite the grab samples
                                       daily. The daily composites,
                                       prior to disposal, must be
                                       analyzed for the EP leachate
                                       concentrations of all the EP
                                       toxic metals, nickel and cyanide
                                       (using distilled water in the
                                       cyanide extractions), and the
                                       total constituent concentrations
                                       of reactive sulfide and reactive
                                       cyanide. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. Bethlehem must
                                       report the analytical test data
                                       obtained during this initial
                                       period no later than 90 days
                                       after the treatment of the first
                                       full-scale batch.
                                      (B) Subsequent Testing: Bethlehem
                                       must collect representative grab
                                       samples from every treated batch
                                       of CSEAFD generated daily and
                                       composite all of the grab samples
                                       to produce a weekly composite
                                       sample. Bethlehem then must
                                       analyze each weekly composite
                                       sample for the EP leachate
                                       concentrations of all the EP
                                       toxic metals and nickel. Analyses
                                       must be performed according to SW-
                                       846 methodologies. The analytical
                                       data, including all quality
                                       control information, must be
                                       compiled and maintained on site
                                       for a minimum of three years.
                                       These data must be furnished upon
                                       request and made available for
                                       inspection by any employee or
                                       representative of EPA or the
                                       State of Pennsylvania.

[[Page 113]]

                                      (2) Delisting Levels: If the EP
                                       extract concentrations resulting
                                       from the testing in condition
                                       (1)(A) or (1)(B) for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, or silver exceed
                                       0.315 mg/L, for barium exceeds
                                       6.3 mg/l; for cadmium or selenium
                                       exceed 0.063 mg/l; for mercury
                                       exceeds 0.0126 mg/l; for nickel
                                       exceeds 3.15 mg/l; or for cyanide
                                       exceeds 4.42 mg/L, or total
                                       reactive cyanide or total
                                       reactive sulfide levels exceed
                                       250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       respectively, the waste must
                                       either be re-treated or managed
                                       and disposed in accordance with
                                       subtitle C of RCRA.
                                      (3) Data submittals: Within one
                                       week of system start-up,
                                       Bethlehem must notify the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section (see
                                       address below) when their full-
                                       scale stabilization system is on-
                                       line and waste treatment has
                                       begun. All data obtained through
                                       the initial testing condition
                                       (1)(A), must be submitted to the
                                       Section Chief, Variances Section,
                                       PSPD/OSW, (OS-343), U.S. EPA, 401
                                       M Street, SW., Washington, DC
                                       20406 within the time period
                                       specified in condition (1)(A). At
                                       the Section Chief's request,
                                       Bethlehem must submit analytical
                                       data obtained through condition
                                       (1)(B) to the above address,
                                       within the time period specified
                                       by the Section Chief. Failure to
                                       submit the required data obtained
                                       from either condition (1)(A) or
                                       (1)(B) within the specified time
                                       periods will be considered by the
                                       Agency sufficient basis to revoke
                                       Bethlehem's exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by the
                                       following certification
                                       statement:
                                      ``Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 U.S.C. 6928), I
                                       certify that the information
                                       contained in or accompanying this
                                       document is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      ``As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      ``In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       wastes will be void as if it
                                       never had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.''
BF Goodrich        Calvert City,      Brine purification muds and
 Intermediates      Kentucky.          saturator insolubles (EPA
 Company, Inc.                         Hazardous Waste No. K071) after
                                       August 18, 1989. This exclusion
                                       is conditional upon the
                                       collection and submission of data
                                       obtained from BFG's full-scale
                                       treatment system because BFG's
                                       original data was based on data
                                       presented by another petitioner
                                       using an identical treatment
                                       process. To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern once the full-scale
                                       treatment facility is in
                                       operation, BFG must implement a
                                       testing program. All sampling and
                                       analyses (including quality
                                       control procedures) must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       procedures. This testing program
                                       must meet the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be valid:
                                      (1) Initial Testing: During the
                                       first four weeks of full-scale
                                       operation, BFG must do the
                                       following:
                                      (A) Collect representative grab
                                       samples from every batch of the
                                       treated mercury brine
                                       purification muds and treated
                                       saturator insolubles on a daily
                                       basis and composite the grab
                                       samples to produce two separate
                                       daily composite samples (one of
                                       the treated mercury brine
                                       purification muds and one of the
                                       treated saturator insolubles).
                                       Prior to disposal of the treated
                                       batches, two daily composite
                                       samples must be analyzed for EP
                                       leachate concentration of
                                       mercury. BFG must report the
                                       analytical test data, including
                                       all quality control data, within
                                       90 days after the treatment of
                                       the first full-scale batch.
                                      (B) Collect representative grab
                                       samples from every batch of the
                                       treated mercury brine
                                       purification muds and treated
                                       saturator insolubles on a daily
                                       basis and composite the grab
                                       samples to produce two separate
                                       weekly composite samples (one of
                                       the treated mercury brine muds
                                       and one of the treated saturator
                                       insolubles). Prior to disposal of
                                       the treated batches, two weekly
                                       composite samples must be
                                       analyzed for the EP leachate
                                       concentrations of all the EP
                                       toxic metals (except mercury),
                                       nickel, and cyanide (using
                                       distilled water in the cyanide
                                       extractions), and the total
                                       constituent concentrations of
                                       reactive sulfide and reactive
                                       cyanide. BFG must report the
                                       analytical test data, including
                                       all quality control data,
                                       obtained during this initial
                                       period no later than 90 days
                                       after the treatment of the first
                                       full-scale batch.
                                      (2) Subsequent Testing: After the
                                       first four weeks of full-scale
                                       operation, BFG must do the
                                       following:
                                      (A) Continue to sample and test as
                                       described in condition (1)(A).
                                       BFG must compile and store on-
                                       site for a minimum of three years
                                       all analytical data and quality
                                       control data. These data must be
                                       furnished upon request and made
                                       available for inspection by any
                                       employee or representative of EPA
                                       or the State of Kentucky.

[[Page 114]]

                                      (B) Continue to sample and test as
                                       described in condition (1)(B).
                                       BFG must compile and store on-
                                       site for a minimum of three years
                                       all analytical data and quality
                                       control data. These data must be
                                       furnished upon request and made
                                       available for inspection by any
                                       employee or representative of EPA
                                       or the State of Kentucky. These
                                       testing requirements shall be
                                       terminated by EPA when the
                                       results of four consecutive
                                       weekly composite samples of both
                                       the treated mercury brine muds
                                       and treated saturator insolubles,
                                       obtained from either the initial
                                       testing or subsequent testing,
                                       show the maximum allowable levels
                                       in condition (3) are not exceeded
                                       and the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section, notifies BFG that the
                                       requirements of this condition
                                       have been lifted.
                                      (3) If, under condition (1) or
                                       (2), the EP leachate
                                       concentrations for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, or silver exceed
                                       0.316 mg/l; for barium exceeds
                                       6.31 mg/l; for cadmium or
                                       selenium exceed 0.063 mg/l; for
                                       mercury exceeds 0.0126 mg/l, for
                                       nickel exceeds 3.16 mg/l; for
                                       cyanide exceeds 4.42 mg/l; or for
                                       total reactive cyanide or total
                                       reactive sulfide levels exceed
                                       250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       respectively, the waste must
                                       either be retreated until it
                                       meets these levels or managed and
                                       disposed of in accordance with
                                       subtitle C of RCRA.
                                      (4) Within one week of system
                                       start-up, BFG must notify the
                                       Section Chief, Variances Section
                                       (see address below) when the full-
                                       scale system is on-line and waste
                                       treatment has begun. All data
                                       obtained through condition (1)
                                       must be submitted to the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section, PSPD/
                                       OSW (OS-343), U.S. EPA, 401 M
                                       Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460
                                       within the time period specified
                                       in condition (1). At the Section
                                       Chief's request, BFG must submit
                                       any other analytical data
                                       obtained through condition (2) to
                                       the above address, within the
                                       time period specified by the
                                       Section Chief. Failure to submit
                                       the required data will be
                                       considered by the Agency
                                       sufficient basis to revoke BFG's
                                       exclusion to the extent directed
                                       by EPA. All data must be
                                       accompanied by the following
                                       certification statement:
                                      ``Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 U.S.C. Sec.
                                       6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate and complete.
                                      As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       wastes will be void as if it
                                       never had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.''
CF&I Steel         Pueblo, Colorado.  Fully-cured chemically stabilized
 Corporation.                          electric arc furnace dust/sludge
                                       (CSEAFD) treatment residue (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. K061)
                                       generated from the primary
                                       production of steel after May 9,
                                       1989. This exclusion is
                                       conditioned upon the data
                                       obtained from CF&I's full-scale
                                       CSEAFD treatment facility because
                                       CF&I's original data was obtained
                                       from a laboratory-scale CSEAFD
                                       treatment process. To ensure that
                                       hazardous constituents are not
                                       present in the waste at levels of
                                       regulatory concern once the full-
                                       scale treatment facility is in
                                       operation, CF&I must implement a
                                       testing program for the
                                       petitioned waste. This testing
                                       program must meet the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be vaild:
                                      (1) Testing:
                                      (A) Initial Testing: During the
                                       first four weeks of operation of
                                       the full-scale treatment system,
                                       CF&I must collect representative
                                       grab samples of each treated
                                       batch of the CSEAFD and composite
                                       the grab samples daily. The daily
                                       composites, prior to disposal,
                                       must be analyzed for the EP
                                       leachate concentrations of all
                                       the EP toxic metals, nickel, and
                                       cyanide (using distilled water in
                                       the cyanide extractions), and the
                                       total constituent concentrations
                                       of reactive sulfide and reactive
                                       cyanide. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. CF&I must report
                                       the analytical test data obtained
                                       during this initial period no
                                       later than 90 days after the
                                       treatment of the first full-scale
                                       batch.
                                      (B) Subsequent Testing: CF&I must
                                       collect representative grab
                                       samples from every treated batch
                                       of CSEAFD generated daily and
                                       composite all of the grab samples
                                       to produce a weekly composite
                                       sample. CF&I then must analyze
                                       each weekly composite sample for
                                       the EP leachate concentrations of
                                       all of the EP toxic metals and
                                       nickel. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. The analytical
                                       data, including all quality
                                       control information, must be
                                       compiled and maintained on site
                                       for a minimum of three years.
                                       These data must be furnished upon
                                       request and made available for
                                       inspection by any employee or
                                       representative of EPA or the
                                       State of Colorado.
                                      (2) Delisting levels: If the EP
                                       extract concentrations determined
                                       in conditions (1)(A) or (1)(B)
                                       for chromium, lead, arsenic, or
                                       silver exceed 0.315 mg/1; for
                                       barium exceeds 6.3 mg/1; for
                                       cadmium or selenium exceed 0.063
                                       mg/1; for mercury exceeds 0.0126
                                       mg/1; for nickel exceeds 3.15 mg/
                                       1; or for cyanide exceeds 4.42 mg/
                                       1, or total reactive cyanide or
                                       total reactive sulfide levels
                                       exceed 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       respectively, the waste must
                                       either be re-treated or managed
                                       and disposed in accordance with
                                       Subtitle C of RCRA.

[[Page 115]]

                                      (3) Data submittals: Within one
                                       week of system start-up, CF&I
                                       must notify the Section Chief,
                                       Variances Section (see address
                                       below) when their full-scale
                                       stabilization system is on-line
                                       and waste treatment has begun.
                                       All data obtained through the
                                       initial testing condition (1)(A),
                                       must be submitted to the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section, PSPD/
                                       OSW, (OS-343), U.S. EPA, 401 M
                                       Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460
                                       within the time period specified
                                       in condition (1)(A). At the
                                       Section Chief's request, CF&I
                                       must submit analytical data
                                       obtained through condition (1)(B)
                                       to the above address, within the
                                       time period specified by the
                                       Section Chief. Failure to submit
                                       the required data obtained from
                                       either condition (1)(A) or (1)(B)
                                       within the specified time periods
                                       will be considered by the Agency
                                       sufficient basis to revoke CF&I's
                                       exclusion to the extent directed
                                       by EPA. All data must be
                                       accompanied by the following
                                       certification statement: ``Under
                                       civil and criminal penalty of law
                                       for the making of submission of
                                       false or fraudulent statements or
                                       representations (pursuant to the
                                       applicable provisions of the
                                       Federal Code which include, but
                                       may not be limited to, 18 U.S.C.
                                       6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate and complete. As
                                       to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete. In the event that any
                                       of this information is determined
                                       by EPA in its sole discretion to
                                       be false, inaccurate or
                                       incomplete, and upon conveyance
                                       of this fact to the company, I
                                       recognize and agree that this
                                       exclusion of wastes will be void
                                       as if it never had effect or to
                                       the extent directed by EPA and
                                       that the company will be liable
                                       for any actions taken in
                                       contravention of the company's
                                       RCRA and CERCLA obligations
                                       premised upon the company's
                                       reliance on the void exclusion.''
Conversion         Horsham,           Chemically Stabilized Electric Arc
 Systems, Inc.      Pennsylvania.      Furnace Dust (CSEAFD) that is
                                       generated by Conversion Systems,
                                       Inc. (CSI) (using the Super
                                       Detox<SUP>TM treatment process as
                                       modified by CSI to treat EAFD
                                       (EPA Hazardous Waste No. K061))
                                       at the following sites and that
                                       is disposed of in Subtitle D
                                       landfills:
                                      Northwestern Steel, Sterling,
                                       Illinois after June 13, 1995.
                                      CSI must implement a testing
                                       program for each site that meets
                                       the following conditions for the
                                       exclusion to be valid:
                                      (1) Verification Testing
                                       Requirements: Sample collection
                                       and analyses, including quality
                                       control procedures, must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies.
                                      (A) Initial Verification Testing:
                                       During the first 20 operating
                                       days of full-scale operation of a
                                       newly constructed Super Detox<SUP>TM
                                       treatment facility, CSI must
                                       analyze a minimum of four (4)
                                       composite samples of CSEAFD
                                       representative of the full 20-day
                                       period. Composites must be
                                       comprised of representative
                                       samples collected from every
                                       batch generated. The CSEAFD
                                       samples must be analyzed for the
                                       constituents listed in Condition
                                       (3). CSI must report the
                                       operational and analytical test
                                       data, including quality control
                                       information, obtained during this
                                       initial period no later than 60
                                       days after the generation of the
                                       first batch of CSEAFD.
                                      (B) Addition of New Super Detox<SUP>TM
                                       Treatment Facilities to
                                       Exclusion: If the Agency's review
                                       of the data obtained during
                                       initial verification testing
                                       indicates that the CSEAFD
                                       generated by a specific Super
                                       Detox<SUP>TM treatment facility
                                       consistently meets the delisting
                                       levels specified in Condition
                                       (3), the Agency will publish a
                                       notice adding to this exclusion
                                       the location of the new Super
                                       Detox<SUP>TM treatment facility and
                                       the name of the steel mill
                                       contracting CSI's services. If
                                       the Agency's review of the data
                                       obtained during initial
                                       verification testing indicates
                                       that the CSEAFD generated by a
                                       specific Super Detox<SUP>TM treatment
                                       facility fails to consistently
                                       meet the conditions of the
                                       exclusion, the Agency will not
                                       publish the notice adding the new
                                       facility.
                                      (C) Subsequent Verification
                                       Testing: For the Sterling,
                                       Illinois facility and any new
                                       facility subsequently added to
                                       CSI's conditional multiple-site
                                       exclusion, CSI must collect and
                                       analyze at least one composite
                                       sample of CSEAFD each month. The
                                       composite samples must be
                                       composed of representative
                                       samples collected from all
                                       batches treated in each month.
                                       These monthly representative
                                       samples must be analyzed, prior
                                       to the disposal of the CSEAFD,
                                       for the constituents listed in
                                       Condition (3). CSI may, at its
                                       discretion, analyze composite
                                       samples gathered more frequently
                                       to demonstrate that smaller
                                       batches of waste are
                                       nonhazardous.
                                      (2) Waste Holding and Handling:
                                       CSI must store as hazardous all
                                       CSEAFD generated until
                                       verification testing as specified
                                       in Conditions (1)(A) and (1)(C),
                                       as appropriate, is completed and
                                       valid analyses demonstrate that
                                       Condition (3) is satisfied. If
                                       the levels of constituents
                                       measured in the samples of CSEAFD
                                       do not exceed the levels set
                                       forth in Condition (3), then the
                                       CSEAFD is non-hazardous and may
                                       be disposed of in Subtitle D
                                       landfills. If constituent levels
                                       in a sample exceed any of the
                                       delisting levels set in Condition
                                       (3), the CSEAFD generated during
                                       the time period corresponding to
                                       this sample must be retreated
                                       until it meets these levels, or
                                       managed and disposed of in
                                       accordance with Subtitle C of
                                       RCRA. CSEAFD generated by a new
                                       CSI treatment facility must be
                                       managed as a hazardous waste
                                       prior to the addition of the name
                                       and location of the facility to
                                       the exclusion. After addition of
                                       the new facility to the
                                       exclusion, CSEAFD generated
                                       during the verification testing
                                       in Condition (1)(A) is also non-
                                       hazardous, if the delisting
                                       levels in Condition (3) are
                                       satisfied.

[[Page 116]]

                                      (3) Delisting Levels: All
                                       leachable concentrations for
                                       those metals must not exceed the
                                       following levels (ppm): Antimony--
                                       0.06; arsenic--0.50; barium--7.6;
                                       beryllium--0.010; cadmium--0.050;
                                       chromium--0.33; lead--0.15;
                                       mercury--0.009; nickel--1;
                                       selenium--0.16; silver--0.30;
                                       thallium--0.020; vanadium--2; and
                                       zinc--70. Metal concentrations
                                       must be measured in the waste
                                       leachate by the method specified
                                       in 40 CFR 261.24.
                                      (4) Changes in Operating
                                       Conditions: After initiating
                                       subsequent testing as described
                                       in Condition (1)(C), if CSI
                                       significantly changes the
                                       stabilization process established
                                       under Condition (1) (e.g., use of
                                       new stabilization reagents), CSI
                                       must notify the Agency in
                                       writing. After written approval
                                       by EPA, CSI may handle CSEAFD
                                       wastes generated from the new
                                       process as non-hazardous, if the
                                       wastes meet the delisting levels
                                       set in Condition (3).
                                      (5) Data Submittals: At least one
                                       month prior to operation of a new
                                       Super Detox<SUP>TM treatment facility,
                                       CSI must notify, in writing, the
                                       Chief of the Waste Identification
                                       Branch (see address below) when
                                       the Super Detox<SUP>TM treatment
                                       facility is scheduled to be on-
                                       line. The data obtained through
                                       Condition (1)(A) must be
                                       submitted to the Branch Chief of
                                       the Waste Identification Branch,
                                       OSW (Mail Code 5304), U.S. EPA,
                                       401 M Street, SW, Washington, DC
                                       20460 within the time period
                                       specified. Records of operating
                                       conditions and analytical data
                                       from Condition (1) must be
                                       compiled, summarized, and
                                       maintained on site for a minimum
                                       of five years. These records and
                                       data must be furnished upon
                                       request by EPA, or the State in
                                       which the CSI facility is
                                       located, and made available for
                                       inspection. Failure to submit the
                                       required data within the
                                       specified time period or maintain
                                       the required records on site for
                                       the specified time will be
                                       considered by EPA, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by a signed
                                       copy of the following
                                       certification statement to attest
                                       to the truth and accuracy of the
                                       data submitted:
                                      Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code,
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 U.S.C. 1001 and 42
                                       U.S.C. 6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate and complete.
                                      As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       waste will be void as if it never
                                       had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.
DOE-RL...........  Richland,          Effluents (EPA Hazardous Waste
                    Washington.        Nos. F001, F002, F003, F004,
                                       F005, and F039 derived from F001
                                       through F005) generated from the
                                       200 Area Effluent Treatment
                                       Facility (ETF) located at the
                                       Hanford site (at a maximum
                                       generation rate of 19 million
                                       gallons per year) after June 13,
                                       1995. To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the wastes at levels of
                                       regulatory concern while the
                                       treatment facility is in
                                       operation, DOE must implement a
                                       testing program. This testing
                                       program must meet the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be valid:
                                      (1) Testing: Sample collection and
                                       analyses (including quality
                                       control (QC) procedures) must be
                                       performed according to SW-846 (or
                                       other EPA-approved)
                                       methodologies. If EPA judges the
                                       treatment process to be effective
                                       under the operating conditions
                                       used during the initial
                                       verification testing, DOE may
                                       replace the testing required in
                                       Condition (1)(A) with the testing
                                       required in Condition (1)(B). DOE
                                       must continue to test as
                                       specified in Condition (1)(A)
                                       until notified by EPA in writing
                                       that testing in Condition (1) (A)
                                       may be replaced by Condition
                                       (1)(B).
                                      (A) Initial Verification Testing:
                                       During the period required to
                                       fill the first three verification
                                       tanks (each designed to hold
                                       approximately 650,000 gallons)
                                       with effluents generated from an
                                       on-line, full-scale Effluent
                                       Treatment Facility (ETF), DOE
                                       must monitor the range of typical
                                       operating conditions for the ETF.
                                       DOE must collect a representative
                                       sample from each of the first
                                       three verification tanks filled
                                       with ETF effluents. The samples
                                       must be analyzed, prior to
                                       disposal of ETF effluents, for
                                       all constituents listed in
                                       Condition (3). DOE must report
                                       the operational and analytical
                                       test data, including quality
                                       control information, obtained
                                       during this initial period no
                                       later than 90 days after the
                                       first verification tank is filled
                                       with ETF effluents.
                                      (B) Subsequent Verification
                                       Testing: Following notification
                                       by EPA, DOE may substitute the
                                       testing conditions in this
                                       condition for (1)(A). DOE must
                                       continue to monitor operating
                                       conditions, and collect and
                                       analyze representative samples
                                       from every tenth verification
                                       tank filled with ETF effluents.
                                       These representative samples must
                                       be analyzed, prior to disposal of
                                       ETF effluents, for all
                                       constituents listed in Condition
                                       (3). If all constituent levels in
                                       a sample do not meet the
                                       delisting levels specified in
                                       Condition (3), DOE must analyze
                                       representative samples from the
                                       following two verification tanks
                                       generated prior to disposal. DOE
                                       may also collect and analyze
                                       representative samples more
                                       frequently.

[[Page 117]]

                                      (2) Waste Holding and Handling:
                                       DOE must store as hazardous all
                                       ETF effluents generated during
                                       verification testing (as
                                       specified in Conditions (1)(A)
                                       and (1)(B)), that is until valid
                                       analyses demonstrate that
                                       Condition (3) is satisfied. If
                                       the levels of hazardous
                                       constituents in the samples of
                                       ETF effluents are equal to or
                                       below all of the levels set forth
                                       in Condition (3), then the ETF
                                       effluents are not hazardous and
                                       may be managed and disposed of in
                                       accordance with all applicable
                                       solid waste regulations. If
                                       hazardous constituent levels in
                                       any representative sample
                                       collected from a verification
                                       tank exceed any of the delisting
                                       levels set in Condition (3), the
                                       ETF effluents in that
                                       verification tank must be re-
                                       treated until the ETF effluents
                                       meet these levels. Following re-
                                       treatment, DOE must repeat
                                       analyses in Condition (3) prior
                                       to disposal.
                                      (3) Delisting Levels: All total
                                       constituent concentrations in the
                                       waste samples must be measured
                                       using the appropriate methods
                                       specified in ``Test Methods for
                                       Evaluating Solid Wastes: Physical/
                                       Chemical Methods,'' U.S. EPA
                                       Publication SW-846 (or other EPA-
                                       approved methods). All total
                                       constituent concentrations must
                                       be equal to or less than the
                                       following levels (ppm):
                                      Inorganic Constituents
                                      Ammonium--10.0
                                      Antimony--0.06
                                      Arsenic--0.5
                                      Barium--20.0
                                      Beryllium--0.04
                                      Cadmium--0.05
                                      Chromium--1.0
                                      Cyanide--2.0
                                      Fluoride--40.0
                                      Lead--0.15
                                      Mercury--0.02
                                      Nickel--1.0
                                      Selenium--0.5
                                      Silver--2.0
                                      Vanadium--2.0
                                      Zinc--100.0
                                      Organic Constituents
                                      Acetone--40.0
                                      Benzene--0.05
                                      Benzyl alcohol--100.0
                                      1-Butyl alcohol--40.0
                                      Carbon tetrachloride--0.05
                                      Chlorobenzene--1.0
                                      Chloroform--0.1
                                      Cresol--20.0
                                      1,4-Dichlorobenzene--0.75
                                      1,2-Dichloroethane--0.05
                                      1,1-Dichloroethylene--0.07
                                      Di-n-octyl phthalate--7.0
                                      Hexachloroethane--0.06
                                      Methyl ethyl ketone--200.0
                                      Methyl isobutyl ketone--30.0
                                      Naphthalene--10.0
                                      Tetrachloroethylene--0.05
                                      Toluene--10.0
                                      Tributyl phosphate--0.2
                                      1,1,1-Trichloroethane--2.0
                                      1,1,2-Trichloroethane--0.05
                                      Trichloroethylene--0.05
                                      Vinyl Chloride--0.02
                                      (4) Changes in Operating
                                       Conditions: After completing the
                                       initial verification testing in
                                       Condition (1)(A), if DOE
                                       significantly changes the
                                       operating conditions established
                                       in Condition (1), DOE must notify
                                       the Agency in writing. After
                                       written approval by EPA, DOE must
                                       re-institute the testing required
                                       in Condition (1)(A). DOE must
                                       report the operations and test
                                       data, required by Condition
                                       (1)(A), including quality control
                                       data, obtained during this period
                                       no later than 60 days after the
                                       changes take place. Following
                                       written notification by EPA, DOE
                                       may replace testing Condition
                                       (1)(A) with (1)(B). DOE must
                                       fulfill all other requirements in
                                       Condition (1), as appropriate.

[[Page 118]]

                                      (5) Data Submittals: At least two
                                       weeks prior to system start-up,
                                       DOE must notify, in writing, the
                                       Chief of the Waste Identification
                                       Branch (see address below) when
                                       the Effluent Treatment Process
                                       will be on-line and waste
                                       treatment will begin. The data
                                       obtained through Condition (1)(A)
                                       must be submitted to the Branch
                                       Chief, Waste Identification
                                       Branch, OSW (Mail Code 5304),
                                       U.S. EPA, 401 M Street, S.W.,
                                       Washington, DC 20460 within the
                                       time period specified. Records of
                                       operating conditions and
                                       analytical data from Condition
                                       (1) must be compiled, summarized,
                                       and maintained on site for a
                                       minimum of three years. These
                                       records and data must be
                                       furnished upon request by EPA or
                                       the State of Washington and made
                                       available for inspection. Failure
                                       to submit the required data
                                       within the specified time period
                                       or to maintain the required
                                       records on site for the specified
                                       time will be considered by EPA,
                                       at its discretion, sufficient
                                       basis to revoke the exclusion to
                                       the extent directed by EPA. All
                                       data must be accompanied by a
                                       signed copy of the following
                                       certification statement to attest
                                       to the truth and accuracy of the
                                       data submitted:
                                      Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code,
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 USC 1001 and 42
                                       USC 6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate, and complete.
                                      As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the official having
                                       supervisory responsibility for
                                       the persons who, acting under my
                                       direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate,
                                       and complete.
                                      In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate, or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to DOE, I recognize and agree
                                       that this exclusion of waste will
                                       be void as if it never had effect
                                       or to the extent directed by EPA
                                       and that the DOE will be liable
                                       for any actions taken in
                                       contravention of its RCRA and
                                       CERCLA obligations premised upon
                                       DOE's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.
Envirite of        Harvey, Illinois.  See waste description under
 Illinois                              Envirite of Pennsylvania.
 (formerly
 Envirite
 Corporation).
Envirite of Ohio   Canton, Ohio.....  See waste description under
 (formerly                             Envirite of Pennsylvania.
 Envirite
 Corporation).
Envirite of        York,              Spent pickle liquor (EPA Hazardous
 Pennsylvania       Pennsylvania.      Waste No. K062) generated from
 (formerly                             steel finishing operations of
 Envirite                              facilities within the iron and
 Corporation).                         steel industry (SIC Codes 331 and
                                       332); wastewater treatment sludge
                                       (EPA Hazardous Waste No. K002)
                                       generated from the production of
                                       chrome yellow and orange
                                       pigments; wastewater treatment
                                       sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       K003) generated from the
                                       production of molybdate orange
                                       pigments; wastewater treatment
                                       sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       K004) generated from the
                                       production of zinc yellow
                                       pigments; wastewater treatment
                                       sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste K005)
                                       generated from the production of
                                       chrome green pigments; wastewater
                                       treatment sludge (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. K006) generated from
                                       the production of chrome oxide
                                       green pigments (anhydrous and
                                       hydrated); wastewater treatment
                                       sludge (EPA Hazardous Waste No.
                                       K007) generated from the
                                       production of iron blue pigments;
                                       oven residues (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste No. K008) generated from
                                       the production of chrome oxide
                                       green pigments after November 14,
                                       1986. To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern, the facility must
                                       implement a contingency testing
                                       program for the petitioned
                                       wastes. This testing program must
                                       meet the following conditions for
                                       the exclusions to be valid:
                                       (1) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be representatively
                                       sampled and tested using the EP
                                       Toxicity test for arsenic,
                                       barium, cadmium, chromium, lead,
                                       selenium, silver, mercury, and
                                       nickel. If the extract
                                       concentrations for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, and silver exceed
                                       0.315 ppm; barium levels exceed
                                       6.3 ppm; cadmium and selenium
                                       exceed 0.063 ppm; mercury exceeds
                                       0.0126 ppm; or nickel levels
                                       exceed 2.205 ppm, the waste must
                                       be retreated or managed and
                                       disposed as a hazardous waste
                                       under 40 CFR Parts 262 to 265 and
                                       the permitting standards of 40
                                       CFR Part 270.
                                       (2) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be tested for
                                       reactive and leachable cyanide.
                                       If the reactive cyanide levels
                                       exceed 250 ppm; or leachable
                                       cyanide levels (using the EP
                                       Toxicity test without acetic acid
                                       adjustment) exceed 1.26 ppm, the
                                       waste must be re-treated or
                                       managed and disposed as hazardous
                                       waste under 40 CFR Parts 262 to
                                       265 and the permitting standards
                                       of 40 CFR 270.
                                       (3) Each batch of waste must be
                                       tested for the total content of
                                       specific organic toxicants. If
                                       the total content of anthracene
                                       exceeds 76.8 ppm, 1.2-diphenyl
                                       hydrazine exceeds 0.001 ppm,
                                       methylene chloride exceeds 8.18
                                       ppm, methyl ethyl ketone exceeds
                                       326 ppm, n-nitrosodiphenylamine
                                       exceeds 11.9 ppm, phenol exceeds
                                       1,566 ppm, tetrachloroethylene
                                       exceeds 0.188 ppm, or
                                       trichloroethylene exceeds 0.592
                                       ppm, the waste must be managed
                                       and disposed as a hazardous waste
                                       under 40 CFR Parts 262 to 265 and
                                       the permitting standards of 40
                                       CFR Part 27 0.

[[Page 119]]

                                      (4) A grab sample must be
                                       collected from each batch to form
                                       one monthly composite sample
                                       which must be tested using GC/MS
                                       analysis for the compounds listed
                                       in #3, above, as well as the
                                       remaining organics on the
                                       priority pollutant list. (See 47
                                       FR 52309, November 19, 1982, for
                                       a list of the priority
                                       pollutants.)
                                      (5) The data from conditions 1-4
                                       must be kept on file at the
                                       facility for inspection purposes
                                       and must be compiled, summarized,
                                       and submitted to the
                                       Administrator by certified mail
                                       semi-annually. The Agency will
                                       review this information and if
                                       needed will propose to modify or
                                       withdraw the exclusion. The
                                       organics testing described in
                                       conditions 3 and 4, above, is not
                                       required until six months from
                                       the date of promulgation. The
                                       Agency's decision to
                                       conditionally exclude the
                                       treatment residue generated from
                                       the wastewater treatment systems
                                       at these facilities applies only
                                       to the wastewater and solids
                                       treatment systems as they
                                       presently exist as described in
                                       the delisting petition. The
                                       exclusion does not apply to the
                                       proposed process additions
                                       described in the petition as
                                       recovery, including
                                       crystallization, electrolytic
                                       metals recovery, evaporative
                                       recovery, and ion exchange.
Giant Refining     Bloomfield, New    Waste generated during the
 Company, Inc.      Mexico.            excavation of soils from two
                                       wastewater treatment impoundments
                                       (referred to as the South and
                                       North Oily Water Ponds) used to
                                       contain water outflow from an API
                                       separator (EPA Hazardous Waste
                                       No. K051). This is a one-time
                                       exclusion for approximately 2,000
                                       cubic yards of stockpiled waste.
                                       This exclusion was published on
                                       September 3, 1996.
                                      Notification Requirements: Giant
                                       Refining Company must provide a
                                       one-time written notification to
                                       any State Regulatory Agency to
                                       which or through which the
                                       delisted waste described above
                                       will be transported for disposal
                                       at least 60 days prior to the
                                       commencement of such activities.
                                       Failure to provide such a
                                       notification will result in a
                                       violation of the delisting
                                       petition and a possible
                                       revocation of the decision.
LCP Chemical.....  Orrington, ME....  Brine purification muds and
                                       wastewater treatment sludges
                                       generated after August 27, 1985
                                       from their chlor-alkali
                                       manufacturing operations (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste Nos. K071 and
                                       K106) that have been batch tested
                                       for mercury using the EP toxicity
                                       procedures and have been found to
                                       contain less than 0.05 ppm
                                       mercury in the EP extract. Brine
                                       purification muds and wastewater
                                       treatment sludges that exceed
                                       this level will be considered a
                                       hazardous waste.
Marathon Oil Co..  Texas City, Texas  Residual solids (at a maximum
                                       annual generation rate of 1,000
                                       cubic yards) generated from the
                                       thermal desorption treatment and,
                                       where necessary, stabilization of
                                       wastewater treatment plant API/
                                       DAF filter cake (EPA Hazardous
                                       Waste Nos. K048 and K051), after
                                       [insert date of publication].
                                       Marathon must implement a testing
                                       program that meets the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be valid:
                                      (1) Testing: Sample collection and
                                       analyses (including quality
                                       control (QC) procedures) must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. If EPA judges the
                                       treatment process to be effective
                                       under the operating conditions
                                       used during the initial
                                       verification testing, Marathon
                                       may replace the testing required
                                       in Condition (1)(A) with the
                                       testing required in Condition
                                       (1)(B). Marathon must continue to
                                       test as specified in Condition
                                       (1)(A), including testing for
                                       organics in Conditions (3)(B) and
                                       (3)(C), until and unless notified
                                       by EPA in writing that testing in
                                       Condition (1)(A) may be replaced
                                       by Condition (1)(B), or that
                                       testing for organics may be
                                       terminated as described in (1)(C)
                                       (to the extent directed by EPA).
                                      (A) Initial Verification Testing:
                                       During at least the first 40
                                       operating days of full-scale
                                       operation of the thermal
                                       desorption unit, Marathon must
                                       monitor the operating conditions
                                       and analyze 5-day composites of
                                       residual solids. 5-day composites
                                       must be composed of
                                       representative grab samples
                                       collected from every batch during
                                       each 5-day period of operation.
                                       The samples must be analyzed
                                       prior to disposal of the residual
                                       solids for constituents listed in
                                       Condition (3). Marathon must
                                       report the operational and
                                       analytical test data, including
                                       quality control information,
                                       obtained during this initial
                                       period no later than 90 days
                                       after the treatment of the first
                                       full-scale batch.
                                      (B) Subsequent Verification
                                       Testing: Following notification
                                       by EPA, Marathon may substitute
                                       the testing conditions in (1)(B)
                                       for (1)(A). Marathon must
                                       continue to monitor operating
                                       conditions, and analyze samples
                                       representative of each month of
                                       operation. The samples must be
                                       composed of representative grab
                                       samples collected during at least
                                       the first five days of operation
                                       of each month. These monthly
                                       representative samples must be
                                       analyzed for the constituents
                                       listed in Condition (3) prior to
                                       the disposal of the residual
                                       solids. Marathon may, at its
                                       discretion, analyze composite
                                       samples gathered more frequently
                                       to demonstrate that smaller
                                       batches of waste are
                                       nonhazardous.
                                      (C) Termination of Organic
                                       Testing: Marathon must continue
                                       testing as required under
                                       Condition (1)(B) for organic
                                       constituents specified in
                                       Conditions (3)(B) and (3)(C)
                                       until the analyses submitted
                                       under Condition (1)(B) show a
                                       minimum of four consecutive
                                       monthly representative samples
                                       with levels of specific
                                       constituents significantly below
                                       the delisting levels in
                                       Conditions (3)(B) and (3)(C), and
                                       EPA notifies Marathon in writing
                                       that monthly testing for specific
                                       organic constituents may be
                                       terminated. Following termination
                                       of monthly testing, Marathon must
                                       continue to test a representative
                                       5-day composite sample for all
                                       constituents listed in Conditions
                                       (3)(B) and (3)(C) on an annual
                                       basis. If delisting levels for
                                       any constituents listed in
                                       Conditions (3)(B) and (3)(C) are
                                       exceeded in the annual sample,
                                       Marathon must reinstitute
                                       complete testing as required in
                                       Condition (1)(B).

[[Page 120]]

                                      (2) Waste Holding and Handling:
                                       Marathon must store as hazardous
                                       all residual solids generated
                                       until verification testing (as
                                       specified in Conditions (1)(A)
                                       and (1)(B)) is completed and
                                       valid analysis demonstrates that
                                       Condition (3) is satisfied. If
                                       the levels of hazardous
                                       constituents in the samples of
                                       residual solids are below all of
                                       the levels set forth in Condition
                                       (3), then the residual solids are
                                       non-hazardous and may be managed
                                       and disposed of in accordance
                                       with all applicable solid waste
                                       regulations. If hazardous
                                       constituent levels in any 5-day
                                       composite or other representative
                                       sample equal or exceed any of the
                                       delisting levels set in Condition
                                       (3), the residual solids
                                       generated during the
                                       corresponding time period must be
                                       retreated and/or stabilized as
                                       allowed below, until the residual
                                       solids meet these levels, or
                                       managed and disposed of in
                                       accordance with Subtitle C of
                                       RCRA.
                                      If the residual solids contain
                                       leachable inorganic
                                       concentrations at or above the
                                       delisting levels set forth in
                                       Condition (3)(A), then Marathon
                                       may stabilize the material with
                                       Type 1 portland cement as
                                       demonstrated in the petition to
                                       immobilize the metals. Following
                                       stabilization, Marathon must
                                       repeat analyses in Condition
                                       (3)(A) prior to disposal.
                                      (3) Delisting Levels: Leachable
                                       concentrations in Conditions
                                       (3)(A) and (3)(B) must be
                                       measured in the waste leachate by
                                       the method specified in 40 CFR
                                       261.24. The indicator parameters
                                       in Condition (3)(C) must be
                                       measured as the total
                                       concentration in the waste.
                                       Concentrations must be less than
                                       the following levels (ppm):
                                      (A) Inorganic Constituents:
                                       antimony-0.6; arsenic, chromium,
                                       or silver-5.0; barium-100.0;
                                       beryllium-0.4; cadmium-0.5; lead-
                                       1.5; mercury-0.2; nickel-10.0;
                                       selenium-1.0; vanadium-20.0.
                                      (B) Organic Constituents:
                                       acenaphthene-200; benzene-0.5;
                                       benzo(a)anthracene-0.01;
                                       benzo(a)pyrene-0.02;
                                       benzo(b)fluoranthene-0.02;
                                       chrysene-0.02; ethyl benzene-70;
                                       fluoranthene-100; fluorene-100;
                                       naphthalene-100; pyrene-100;
                                       toluene-100.
                                      (C) Indicator Parameters: 1-methyl
                                       naphthalene-3; benzo(a)pyrene-3.
                                      (4) Changes in Operating
                                       Conditions: After completing the
                                       initial verification test period
                                       in Condition (1)(A), if Marathon
                                       significantly changes the
                                       operating conditions established
                                       under Condition (1), Marathon
                                       must notify the Agency in
                                       writing. After written approval
                                       by EPA, Marathon must re-
                                       institute the testing required in
                                       Condition (1)(A) for a minimum of
                                       four 5-day operating periods.
                                       Marathon must report the
                                       operations and test data,
                                       required by Condition (1)(A),
                                       including quality control data,
                                       obtained during this period no
                                       later than 60 days after the
                                       changes take place. Following
                                       written notification by EPA,
                                       Marathon may replace testing
                                       Condition (1)(A) with (1)(B).
                                       Marathon must fulfill all other
                                       requirements in Condition (1), as
                                       appropriate.
                                      (5) Data Submittals: At least two
                                       weeks prior to system start-up,
                                       Marathon must notify in writing
                                       the Section Chief Delisting
                                       Section (see address below) when
                                       the thermal desorption and
                                       stabilization units will be on-
                                       line and waste treatment will
                                       begin. The data obtained through
                                       Condition (1)(A) must be
                                       submitted to the Section Chief,
                                       Delisting Section, OSW (OS-333),
                                       U.S. EPA, 401 M Street, SW.,
                                       Washington, DC 20460 within the
                                       time period specified. Records of
                                       operating conditions and
                                       analytical data from Condition
                                       (1) must be compiled, summarized,
                                       and maintained on site for a
                                       minimum of five years. These
                                       records and data must be
                                       furnished upon request by EPA or
                                       the State of Texas and made
                                       available for inspection. Failure
                                       to submit the required data
                                       within the specified time period
                                       or maintain the required records
                                       on site for the specified time
                                       will be considered by EPA, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke the exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by a signed
                                       copy of the following
                                       certification statement to attest
                                       to the truth and accuracy of the
                                       data submitted:
                                      ``Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code,
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 U.S.C. 1001 and 42
                                       U.S.C 6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate, and complete.
                                      As to the (those) identified
                                       sections(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate,
                                       and complete.
                                      In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate, or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       waste will be void as if it never
                                       had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.''
Mearl Corp.......  Peekskill, NY....  Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste Nos. K006 and
                                       K007) generated from the
                                       production of chrome oxide green
                                       and iron blue pigments after
                                       November 27, 1985.
Monsanto           Sauget, Illinois.  Brine purification muds (EPA
 Industrial                            Hazardous Waste No. K071)
 Chemicals                             generated from the mercury cell
 Company.                              process in chlorine production,
                                       where separately prepurified
                                       brine is not used after August
                                       15, 1986.

[[Page 121]]

Occidental         Sheffield,         Retorted wastewater treatment
 Chemical Corp.     Alabama.           sludge from the mercury cell
 Muscle Shoals                         process in chlorine production
 Plant.                                (EPA Hazardous Waste No. K106)
                                       after September 19, 1989. This
                                       exclusion is conditional upon the
                                       submission of data obtained from
                                       Occidental's full-scale retort
                                       treatment system because
                                       Occidental's original data were
                                       based on a pilot-scale retort
                                       system. To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern once the full-scale
                                       treatment facility is in
                                       operation, Occidental must
                                       implement a testing program. All
                                       sampling and analyses (including
                                       quality control procedures) must
                                       be performed according to SW-846
                                       procedures. This testing program
                                       must meet the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be valid:
                                      (1) Initial Testing--During the
                                       first four weeks of full-scale
                                       retort operation, Occidental must
                                       do the following:
                                      (A) Collect representative grab
                                       samples from every batch of
                                       retorted material and composite
                                       the grab samples to produce a
                                       weekly composite sample. The
                                       weekly composite samples, prior
                                       to disposal or recycling, must be
                                       analyzed for the EP leachate
                                       concentrations of all the EP
                                       toxic metals (except mercury),
                                       nickel, and cyanide (using
                                       distilled water in the cyanide
                                       extractions), and the total
                                       constitutent concentrations of
                                       reactive sulfide and reactive
                                       cyanide. Occidental must report
                                       the analytical test data,
                                       including all quality control
                                       data, obtained during this
                                       initial period no later than 90
                                       days after the treatment of the
                                       first full-scale batch.
                                      (B) Collect representative grab
                                       samples of every batch of
                                       retorted material prior to its
                                       disposal or recycling and analyze
                                       the sample for EP leachate
                                       concentration of mercury.
                                       Occidental must report the
                                       analytical test data, including
                                       all quality control data, within
                                       90 days after the treatment of
                                       the first full-scale batch.
                                      (2) Subsequent Testing--After the
                                       first four weeks of full-scale
                                       retort operation, Occidental must
                                       do the following:
                                      (A) Continue to sample and test as
                                       described in condition (1)(A).
                                       Occidental must compile and store
                                       on-site for a minimum of three
                                       years all analytical data and
                                       quality control data. These data
                                       must be furnished upon request
                                       and made available for inspection
                                       by any employee or representative
                                       of EPA or the State of Alabama.
                                       These testing requirements shall
                                       be terminated by EPA when the
                                       results of four consecutive
                                       weekly composite samples of the
                                       petitioned waste, obtained from
                                       either the initial testing or
                                       subsequent testing show the
                                       maximum allowable levels in
                                       condition (3) are not exceeded
                                       and the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section, notifies Occidental that
                                       the requirements of this
                                       condition have been lifted.
                                      (B) Continue to sample and test
                                       for mercury as described in
                                       condition (1)(B).
                                      Occidental must compile and store
                                       on-site for a minimum of three
                                       years all analytical data and
                                       quality control data. These data
                                       must be furnished upon request
                                       and made available for inspection
                                       by any employee or representative
                                       of EPA or the State of Alabama.
                                       These testing requirements shall
                                       remain in effect until Occidental
                                       provides EPA with analytical and
                                       quality control data for thirty
                                       consecutive batches of retorted
                                       material, collected as described
                                       in condition (1)(B),
                                       demonstrating that the EP
                                       leachable levels of mercury are
                                       below the maximum allowable level
                                       in condition (3) and the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section,
                                       notifies Occidental that the
                                       testing in condition (2)(B) may
                                       be replaced with (2)(C).
                                      (C) [If the conditions in (2)(B)
                                       are satisfied, the testing
                                       requirements for mercury in
                                       (2)(B) shall be replaced with the
                                       following condition]. Collect
                                       representative grab samples from
                                       every batch of retorted material
                                       on a daily basis and composite
                                       the grab samples to produce a
                                       weekly composite sample.
                                       Occidental must analyze each
                                       weekly composite sample prior to
                                       its disposal or recycling for the
                                       EP leachate concentration of
                                       mercury. Occidental must compile
                                       and store on-site for a minimum
                                       of three years all analytical
                                       data and quality control data.
                                       These data must be furnished upon
                                       request and made available for
                                       inspection by any employee or
                                       representative of EPA or the
                                       State of Alabama.
                                      (3) If, under condition (1) or
                                       (2), the EP leachate
                                       concentrations for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, or silver exceed
                                       1.616 mg/l; for barium exceeds
                                       32.3 mg/l; for cadmium or
                                       selenium exceed 0.323 mg/l; for
                                       mercury exceeds 0.065 mg/l, for
                                       nickel exceeds 16.15 mg/l; for
                                       cyanide exceeds 22.61 mg/l; or
                                       for total reactive cyanide or
                                       total reactive sulfide levels
                                       exceed 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       respectively, the waste must
                                       either be retreated until it
                                       meets these levels or managed and
                                       disposed of in accordance with
                                       subtitle C of RCRA.
                                      (4) Within one week of system
                                       start-up, Occidental must notify
                                       the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section (see address below) when
                                       the full-scale retort system is
                                       on-line and waste treatment has
                                       begun. All data obtained through
                                       condition (1) must be submitted
                                       to the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section, PSPD/OSW (OS-343), U.S.
                                       EPA, 401 M Street SW.,
                                       Washington, DC 20460 within the
                                       time period specified in
                                       condition (1). At the Section
                                       Chief's request, Occidental must
                                       submit any other analytical data
                                       obtained through condition (2) to
                                       the above address, within the
                                       time period specified by the
                                       Section Chief. Failure to submit
                                       the required data will be
                                       considered by the Agency
                                       sufficient basis to revoke
                                       Occidental's exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by the
                                       following certification
                                       statement:
                                      ``Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to, 18 U.S.C. 6928), I
                                       certify that the information
                                       contained in or accompanying this
                                       document is true, accurate and
                                       complete.

[[Page 122]]

                                      As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       wastes will be void as if it
                                       never had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.''
Occidental         Delaware City,     Sodium chloride treatment muds
 Chemical           Delaware.          (NaCl-TM), sodium chloride
 Corporation.                          saturator cleanings (NaCl-SC),
                                       and potassium chloride treatment
                                       muds (KCl-TM) (all classified as
                                       EPA Hazardous Waste No. K071)
                                       generated at a maximum combined
                                       rate (for all three wastes) of
                                       1,018 tons per year. This
                                       exclusion was published on April
                                       29, 1991 and is conditioned upon
                                       the collection of data from
                                       Occidental's full-scale brine
                                       treatment system because
                                       Occidental's request for
                                       exclusion was based on data from
                                       a laboratory-scale brine
                                       treatment process. To ensure that
                                       hazardous constituents are not
                                       present in the waste at levels of
                                       regulatory concern once the full-
                                       scale treatment system is in
                                       operation, Occidental must
                                       implement a testing program for
                                       the petitioned waste. All
                                       sampling and analyses (including
                                       quality control procedures) must
                                       be performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. This testing
                                       program must meet the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be valid:
                                      (1) Initial Testing: During the
                                       first four weeks of full-scale
                                       treatment system operation,
                                       Occidental must do the following:
                                      (A) Collect representative grab
                                       samples from each batch of the
                                       three treated wastestreams
                                       (sodium chloride saturator
                                       cleanings (NaCl-SC), sodium
                                       chloride treatment muds (NaCl-TM)
                                       and potassium chloride treatment
                                       muds (KCl-TM)) on an as generated
                                       basis, and composite the samples
                                       to produce three separate weekly
                                       composite samples (of each type
                                       of K071 waste). The three weekly
                                       composite samples, prior to
                                       disposal, must be analyzed for
                                       the EP leachate concentrations of
                                       all the EP toxic metals (except
                                       mercury), nickel and cyanide
                                       (using deionized water in the
                                       cyanide extractions), and the
                                       total constituent concentrations
                                       of reactive sulfide and reactive
                                       cyanide. Occidental must report
                                       the waste volumes produced and
                                       the analytical test data,
                                       including all quality control
                                       data, obtained during this
                                       initial period, no later than 90
                                       days after the treatment of the
                                       first full-scale batch.
                                      (B) Collect representative grab
                                       samples of each batch of the
                                       three treated wastestreams (NaCl-
                                       SC, NACl-TM and KCl-TM) and
                                       composite the grab samples to
                                       produce three separate daily
                                       composite samples (of each type
                                       of K071 waste) on an as generated
                                       basis. The three daily composite
                                       samples, prior to disposal, must
                                       be analyzed for the EP leachate
                                       concentration of mercury.
                                       Occidental must report the waste
                                       volumes produced and the
                                       analytical test data, including
                                       all quality control data,
                                       obtained during this initial
                                       period, no later than 90 days
                                       after the treatment of the first
                                       full-scale batch.
                                      (2) Subsequent Testing: After the
                                       first four weeks of full-scale
                                       treatment operations, Occidental
                                       must do the following (all
                                       sampling and analyses (including
                                       quality control procedures) must
                                       be performed according to SW-846
                                       procedures):
                                      (A) Continue to sample and test as
                                       described in condition (1)(A).
                                       Occidental must compile and store
                                       on-site for a minimum of three
                                       years the records of waste
                                       volumes produced and all
                                       analytical data and quality
                                       control data. These data must be
                                       furnished upon request and made
                                       available for inspection by any
                                       employee or representative of EPA
                                       or the State of Delaware. These
                                       testing requirements shall be
                                       terminated by EPA when the
                                       results of four consecutive
                                       weekly composite samples of the
                                       petitioned waste, obtained from
                                       either the initial testing or
                                       subsequent testing, show the
                                       maximum allowable levels in
                                       condition (3) are not exceeded
                                       and the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section, notifies Occidental that
                                       the requirements of this
                                       condition have been lifted.
                                      (B) Continue to sample and test
                                       for mercury as described in
                                       condition (1)(B). Occidental must
                                       compile and store on-site for a
                                       minimum of three years the
                                       records of waste volumes produced
                                       and all analytical data and
                                       quality control data. These data
                                       must be furnished upon request
                                       and made available for inspection
                                       by any employee or representative
                                       of EPA or the State of Delaware.
                                       These testing requirements shall
                                       be terminated and replaced with
                                       the requirements of condition
                                       (2)(C) if Occidental provides EPA
                                       with analytical and quality
                                       control data for thirty
                                       consecutive batches of treated
                                       material, collected as described
                                       in condition (1)(B),
                                       demonstrating that the EP
                                       leachable level of mercury in
                                       condition (3) is not exceeded (in
                                       all three treated wastes), and
                                       the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section, notifies Occidental that
                                       the testing in condition (2)(B)
                                       may be replaced with (2)(C).

[[Page 123]]

                                      (C) [If the conditions in (2)(B)
                                       are satisfied, the testing
                                       requirements for mercury in
                                       (2)(B) shall be replaced with the
                                       following condition.] Collect
                                       representative grab samples from
                                       each batch of the three treated
                                       wastestreams (NaCl-SC, NaCl-TM
                                       and KCl-TM) on an as generated
                                       basis and composite the grab
                                       samples to produce three separate
                                       weekly composite samples (of each
                                       type of K071 waste). The three
                                       weekly composite samples, prior
                                       to disposal, must be analyzed for
                                       the EP leachate concentration of
                                       mercury. Occidental must compile
                                       and store on-site for a minimum
                                       of three years the records of
                                       waste volumes produced and all
                                       analytical data and quality
                                       control data. These data must be
                                       furnished upon request and made
                                       available for inspection by any
                                       employee or representative of EPA
                                       or the State of Delaware.
                                      (3) If under conditions (1) or
                                       (2), the EP leachate
                                       concentration for chromium, lead,
                                       arsenic, or silver exceeds 0.77
                                       mg/L; for barium exceeds 15.5 mg/
                                       L; for cadmium or selenium
                                       exceeds 0.16 mg/L; for mercury
                                       exceeds 0.031 mg/L; for nickel or
                                       total cyanide exceeds 10.9 mg/L;
                                       or the total reactive cyanide or
                                       total reactive sulfide levels
                                       exceeds 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       the waste must either be
                                       retreated or managed and disposed
                                       of in accordance with all
                                       applicable hazardous waste
                                       regulations.
                                      (4) Within one week of system
                                       start-up, Occidental must notify
                                       the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section (see address below) when
                                       the full-scale system is on-line
                                       and waste treatment has begun.
                                       All data obtained through
                                       condition (1) must be submitted
                                       to the Section Chief, Variances
                                       Section, PSPD/OSW, (OS-333), U.S.
                                       EPA, 401 M Street, SW.,
                                       Washington, DC 20460 within the
                                       time period required in condition
                                       (1). At the Section Chief's
                                       request, Occidental must submit
                                       any other analytical data
                                       obtained through conditions (1)
                                       and (2) to the above address
                                       within the time period specified
                                       by the Section Chief. Failure to
                                       submit the required data will be
                                       considered by the Agency
                                       sufficient basis to revoke
                                       Occidental's exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       (either submitted to EPA or
                                       maintained at the site) must be
                                       accompanied by the following
                                       statement:
                                      ``Under civil and criminal penalty
                                       of law for the making or
                                       submission of false or fraudulent
                                       statements or representations
                                       (pursuant to the applicable
                                       provisions of the Federal Code,
                                       which include, but may not be
                                       limited to 18 U.S.C. 1001 and 42
                                       U.S.C. 6926), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate and complete.
                                      As to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete.
                                      In the event that any of this
                                       information is determined by EPA
                                       in its sole discretion to be
                                       false, inaccurate or incomplete,
                                       and upon conveyance of this fact
                                       to the company, I recognize and
                                       agree that this exclusion of
                                       wastes will be void as if it
                                       never had effect or to the extent
                                       directed by EPA and that the
                                       company will be liable for any
                                       actions taken in contravention of
                                       the company's RCRA and CERCLA
                                       obligations premised upon the
                                       company's reliance on the void
                                       exclusion.''
Perox,             Sharon,            Iron oxide (EPA Hazardous Waste
 Incorporated.      Pennsylvania.      No. K062) generated (at a maximum
                                       annual rate of 4800 cubic yards)
                                       from a spent hydrochloric acid
                                       pickle liquor regeneration plant
                                       for spent pickle liquor generated
                                       from steel finishing operations.
                                       This exclusion was published on
                                       November 13, 1990.
Pioneer Chlor      St. Gabriel, LA..  Brine purification muds, which
 Alkai Company,                        have been washed and vacuum
 Inc. (formerly                        filtered, generated after August
 Stauffer                              27, 1985 from their chlor-alkali
 Chemical                              manufacturing operations (EPA
 Company).                             Hazardous Waste No. K071) that
                                       have been batch tested for
                                       mercury using the EP toxicity
                                       procedure and have been found to
                                       contain less than 0.05 ppm in
                                       mercury in the EP extract. Brine
                                       purification muds that exceed
                                       this level will be considered a
                                       hazardous waste.
POP Fasteners....  Shelton,           Wastewater treatment sludge (EPA
                    Connecticut.       Hazardous Waste No. F006)
                                       generated from electroplating
                                       operations (at a maximum annual
                                       rate of 300 cubic yards) after
                                       December 7, 1992. In order to
                                       confirm that the characteristics
                                       of the waste do not change
                                       significantly, the facility must,
                                       on an annual basis, analyze a
                                       representative composite sample
                                       for the constituents listed in
                                       Sec.  261.24 using the method
                                       specified therein. The annual
                                       analytical results, including
                                       quality control information, must
                                       be compiled, certified according
                                       to Sec.  260.22(i)(12) of this
                                       chapter, maintained on site for a
                                       minimum of five years, and made
                                       available for inspection upon
                                       request by any employee or
                                       representative of EPA or the
                                       State of Connecticut. Failure to
                                       maintain the required records on
                                       site will be considered by EPA,
                                       at its discretion, sufficient
                                       basis to revoke the exclusion to
                                       the extent directed by EPA.
Roanoke Electric   Roanoke, VA......  Fully-cured chemically stabilized
 Steel Corp.                           electric arc furnace dust/sludge
                                       (CSEAFD) treatment residue (EPA
                                       Hazardous Waste No. K061)
                                       generated from the primary
                                       production of steel after March
                                       22, 1989. This exclusion is
                                       conditioned upon the data
                                       obtained from Roanoke's full-
                                       scale CSEAFD treatment facility
                                       because Roanoke's original data
                                       were obtained from a laboratory-
                                       scale CSEAFD treatment process.
                                       To ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern once the full-scale
                                       treatment facility is in
                                       operation, Roanoke must implement
                                       a testing program for the
                                       petitioned waste.
                                      This testing program must meet the
                                       following conditions for the
                                       exclusion to be valid:
                                      (1) Testing:

[[Page 124]]

                                      (A) Initial testing: During the
                                       first four weeks of operation of
                                       the full-scale treatment system,
                                       Roanoke must collect
                                       representative grab samples of
                                       each treated batch of the CSEAFD
                                       and composite the grab samples
                                       daily. The daily composites,
                                       prior to disposal, must be
                                       analyzed for the EP leachate
                                       concentrations of all the EP
                                       toxic metals, nickel and cyanide
                                       (using distilled water in the
                                       cyanide extractions), and the
                                       total constituent concentrations
                                       of reactive sulfide and reactive
                                       cyanide. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. Roanoke must
                                       report the analytical test data
                                       obtained during this initial
                                       period no later than 90 days
                                       after the treatment of the first
                                       full-scale batch.
                                      (B) Subsequent testing: Roanoke
                                       must collect representative grab
                                       samples from every treated batch
                                       of CSEAFD generated daily and
                                       composite all of the grab samples
                                       to produce a weekly composite
                                       sample. Roanoke then must analyze
                                       each weekly composite sample for
                                       all of the EP toxic metals and
                                       nickel. Analyses must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies. The analytical
                                       data, including all quality
                                       control information, must be
                                       compiled and maintained on site
                                       for a minimum of three years.
                                       These data must be furnished upon
                                       request and made available for
                                       inspection by any employee or
                                       representative of EPA or the
                                       State of Virginia.
                                      (2) Delisting levels: If the EP
                                       extract concentrations for
                                       chromium, lead, arsenic, or
                                       silver exceed 0.315 mg/l; for
                                       barium exceeds 6.3 mg/l; for
                                       cadmium or selenium exceed 0.063
                                       mg/l; for mercury exceeds 0.0126
                                       mg/l; for nickel exceeds 3.15 mg/
                                       l; or for cyanide exceeds 1.26 mg/
                                       l, or total reactive cyanide or
                                       total reactive sulfide levels
                                       exceed 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       respectively, the waste must
                                       either be re-treated or managed
                                       and disposed in accordance with
                                       Subtitle C of RCRA.
                                      (3) Data submittals: Within one
                                       week of system start-up, Roanoke
                                       must notify the Section Chief,
                                       Variances Section (see address
                                       below) when their full-scale
                                       stabilization system in on-line
                                       and waste treatment has begun.
                                       All data obtained through the
                                       initial testing condition (1)(A),
                                       must be submitted to the Section
                                       Chief, Variances Section, PSPD/
                                       OSW, (OS-343), U.S. EPA, 401 M
                                       Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460
                                       within the time period specified
                                       in condition (1)(A). Failure to
                                       submit the required data or keep
                                       the required records will be
                                       considered by the Agency, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke Roanoke's exclusion. All
                                       data must be accompanied by the
                                       following certification
                                       statement: ``Under civil and
                                       criminal penalty of law for the
                                       making or submission of false or
                                       fraudulent statements or
                                       representations (pursuant to the
                                       applicable provisions of the
                                       Federal Code which include, but
                                       may not be limited to, 18 USC
                                       6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate and complete. As
                                       to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete. In the event that any
                                       of this information is determined
                                       by EPA in its sole discretion to
                                       be false, inaccurate or
                                       incomplete, and upon conveyance
                                       of this fact to the company, I
                                       recognize and agree that this
                                       exclusion of wastes will be void
                                       as if it never had effect or to
                                       the extent directed by EPA and
                                       that the company will be liable
                                       for any actions taken in
                                       contravention of the company's
                                       RCRA and CERCLA obligations
                                       premised upon the company's
                                       reliance on the void exclusion.''
Texas Eastman....  Longview, Texas..  Incinerator ash (at a maximum
                                       generation of 7,000 cubic yards
                                       per calendar year) generated from
                                       the incineration of sludge from
                                       the wastewater treatment plant
                                       (EPA Hazardous Waste No. K009 and
                                       K010, and that is disposed of in
                                       Subtitle D landfills after
                                       September 25, 1996. Texas Eastman
                                       must implement a testing program
                                       that meets conditions found in
                                       Table 1. Wastes Excluded From Non-
                                       Specific Sources for the petition
                                       to be valid.
Tricil             Hilliard, Ohio...  Spent pickle liquor (EPA Hazardous
 Environmental                         Waste No. K062) generated by
 Systems, Inc.                         steel finishing operations of
                                       facilities within the iron and
                                       steel industry (SIC Codes 331 and
                                       332) after November 17, 1986. To
                                       ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern, the facility must
                                       implement a contingency testing
                                       program for the petitioned
                                       wastes. This testing program must
                                       meet the following conditions for
                                       the exclusions to be valid:
                                      (1) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be representatively
                                       sampled and tested using the
                                       total oil and grease test and the
                                       EP Toxicity test (or the Oily
                                       Waste EP test, if the oil and
                                       grease content of the waste
                                       exceeds one percent) for arsenic,
                                       barium, cadmium, chromium, lead,
                                       mercury, selenium, silver and
                                       nickel. If the extract
                                       concentrations for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, barium, and silver
                                       exceed 6.3 ppm; cadmium and
                                       selenium exceed 0.063 ppm;
                                       mercury levels exceed 0.013 ppm;
                                       or nickel levels exceed 2.2 ppm,
                                       the waste will be retreated or
                                       managed and disposed as a
                                       hazardous waste under 40 CFR
                                       parts 262 to 265 and the
                                       permitting standards of 40 CFR
                                       270.
                                      (2) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be tested for
                                       reactive and leachable cyanide.
                                       If the reactive cyanide levels
                                       exceed 250 ppm; or leachable
                                       cyanide levels (using ther EP
                                       Toxicity test without acetic acid
                                       adjustment) exceed 1.26 ppm, the
                                       waste must be retreated or
                                       managed and disposed as hazardous
                                       waste under 40 CFR parts 262 to
                                       265 and the permitting standards
                                       of 40 CFR Part 270.
                                      (3) Each batch of waste must be
                                       tested for the total content of
                                       the following organic toxicants.
                                       If the total content of any of
                                       the constituents exceeds the
                                       maximum levels shown, the waste
                                       must be managed and disposed as a
                                       hazardous waste under 40 CFR
                                       parts 262 and 265 and the
                                       permitting standards of 40 CFR
                                       Part 270.

[[Page 125]]

                                        Compound and Maximum Acceptable
                                                  Levels (ppm)
                                      Acrolein, 56.8
                                      Anthracene, 76.8
                                      Benzene, 0.106
                                      p-Chloro-m-cresol, 133
                                      1,1-Dichloroethane, 0.01
                                      Fluorene, 10.4
                                      Methylenechloride, 8.2
                                      Methyl ethyl ketone, 326
                                      n-Nitrosodiphenylamine, 11.9
                                      Phenanthrene, 14
                                      Tetrachloroethylene, 0.188
                                      Trichloroethylene, 0.59
                                      Chloroform, 0.013
                                      1,2-Dichloroethane, 0.0083
                                      1,2-trans-Dichloroethylene, 231
                                      2,4-Dimethylphenol, 12.5
                                      Vinyl chloride, 0.18
                                      1,2-Diphenyl hydrazine, 0.001
                                      (4) A grab sample must be
                                       collected from each batch to form
                                       one monthy composite sample,
                                       which must be tested using GC/MS
                                       analysis for the organic
                                       compounds shown above, as well as
                                       the remaining organics on the
                                       priority pollutant list (see 47
                                       FR 52309, November 19, 1982,
                                       Appendix A-126 Priority
                                       Pollutants).
                                      (5) The test data from conditions
                                       1-4 must be kept on file at the
                                       facility for inspection purposes
                                       and must be compiled, summarized,
                                       and submitted to the
                                       Administrator by certified mail
                                       on a semiannual basis. The Agency
                                       will review this information and
                                       if needed, will propose to modify
                                       or withdraw the exclusion. The
                                       organics testing described in
                                       conditions 3 and 4 above is not
                                       required until May 18, 1987. The
                                       Agency's decision to
                                       conditionally exclude the
                                       treatment residue generated from
                                       the wastewater treatment system
                                       at this facility applies only to
                                       the wastewater treatment residue
                                       described in this petition.
Tricil             Muskegon,          Spent pickle liquor (EPA Hazardous
 Environmental      Michigan.          Waste No. K062) generated by
 System, Inc.                          steel finishing operations of
                                       facilities within the iron and
                                       steel industry (SIC Codes 331 and
                                       332); after November 17, 1986. To
                                       ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern, the facility must
                                       implement a contingency testing
                                       program for the petitioned
                                       wastes. This testing program must
                                       meet the following conditions for
                                       the exclusion to be valid:
                                      (1) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be representatively
                                       sampled and tested using the
                                       total oil and grease test and the
                                       EP Toxicity test (or the Oily
                                       Waste EP test, if the oil and
                                       grease content of the waste
                                       exceeds one percent) for arsenic,
                                       barium, cadmium, chromium, lead,
                                       mercury, selenium, silver and
                                       nickel. If the extract
                                       concentrations for chromium,
                                       lead, arsenic, barium, and silver
                                       exceed 6.3 ppm, cadmium and
                                       selenium exceed 0.063 ppm;
                                       mercury levels exceed 0.013 ppm;
                                       or nickel levels exceed 2.2 ppm,
                                       the waste will be retreated or
                                       managed and disposed as a
                                       hazardous waste under 40 CFR
                                       parts 262 to 265 and the
                                       permitting standards of 40 CFR
                                       270.
                                      (2) Each batch of treatment
                                       residue must be tested for
                                       reactive and leachable cyanide.
                                       If the reactive cyanide levels
                                       exceed 250 ppm; or leachable
                                       cyanide levels (using the EP
                                       Toxicity test without acetic acid
                                       adjustment) exceed 1.26 ppm, the
                                       waste must be retreated or
                                       managed and disposed as hazardous
                                       waste under 40 CFR parts 262 to
                                       265 and the permitting standards
                                       of 40 CFR Part 270.
                                      (3) Each batch of waste must be
                                       tested for the total content of
                                       the following organic toxicants.
                                       If the total content of any of
                                       the constituents exceeds the
                                       maximum levels shown, the waste
                                       must be managed and disposed as a
                                       hazardous waste under 40 CFR
                                       parts 262 and 265 and the
                                       permitting standards of 40 CFR
                                       Part 270:
                                        Compound and Maximum Acceptable
                                                  Levels (ppm)
                                      Acrolein, 56.8
                                      Anthracene, 76.8
                                      Benzene, 0.106
                                      p-Chloro-m-cresol, 133
                                      1,1-Dichloroethane, 0.01
                                      Fluorene, 10.4
                                      Methylenechloride, 8.2
                                      Methyl ethyl ketone, 326
                                      n-Nitrosodiphenylamine, 11.9
                                      Phenanthrene, 14
                                      Tetrachloroethylene, 0.188
                                      Trichloroethylene, 0.59
                                      Chloroform, 0.013
                                      1,2-Dichloroethane, 0.0083
                                      1,2-trans-Dichloroethylene, 231
                                      2,4-Dimethylphenol, 12.5
                                      Vinyl chloride, 0.18

[[Page 126]]

                                      1,2-Diphenyl hydrazine, 0.001
                                      (4) A grab sample must be
                                       collected from each batch to form
                                       one monthly composite sample,
                                       which must be tested using GC/MS
                                       analysis for the organic
                                       compounds shown above, as well as
                                       the remaining organics on the
                                       priority pollutant list (see 47
                                       FR 52309, November 19, 1982,
                                       Appendix A-126 Priority
                                       Pollutants).
                                      (5) The test data from conditions
                                       1-4 must be kept on file at the
                                       facility for inspection purposes
                                       and must be compiled, summarized,
                                       and submitted to the
                                       Administrator by certified mail
                                       on a semiannual basis. The Agency
                                       will review this information and
                                       if needed, will propose to modify
                                       or withdraw the exclusion. The
                                       organics testing described in
                                       conditions 3 and 4 above is not
                                       required until May 18, 1987. The
                                       Agency's decision to
                                       conditionally exclude the
                                       treatment residue generated from
                                       the wasterwater treatment system
                                       at this facility applies only to
                                       the wastewater treatment residue
                                       described in this petition.
USX Steel          Chicago, Illinois  Fully-cured chemically stabilized
 Corporation, USS                      electric arc furnace dust/sludge
 Division,                             (CSEAFD) treatment residue (EPA
 Southworks                            Hazardous Waste No. K061)
 Plant, Gary                           generated from the primary
 Works.                                production of steel after April
                                       29, 1991. This exclusion (for
                                       35,000 tons of CSEAFD per year)
                                       is conditioned upon the data
                                       obtained from USX's full-scale
                                       CSEAFD treatment facility. To
                                       ensure that hazardous
                                       constituents are not present in
                                       the waste at levels of regulatory
                                       concern once the full-scale
                                       treatment facility is in
                                       operation, USX must implement a
                                       testing program for the
                                       petitioned waste. This testing
                                       program must meet the following
                                       conditions for the exclusion to
                                       be valid:
                                      (1) Testing: Sample collection and
                                       analyses (including quality
                                       control (QC) procedures) must be
                                       performed according to SW-846
                                       methodologies.
                                      (A) Initial Testing: During the
                                       first four weeks of operation of
                                       the full-scale treatment system,
                                       USX must collect representative
                                       grab samples of each treated
                                       batch of the CSEAFD and composite
                                       the grab samples daily. The daily
                                       composites, prior to disposal,
                                       must be analyzed for the EP
                                       leachate concentrations of all
                                       the EP toxic metals, nickel, and
                                       cyanide (using distilled water in
                                       the cyanide extractions), and the
                                       total concentrations of reactive
                                       sulfide and reactive cyanide. USX
                                       must report the analytical test
                                       data, including quality control
                                       information, obtained during this
                                       initial period no later than 90
                                       days after the treatment of the
                                       first full-scale batch.
                                      (B) Subsequent Testing: USX must
                                       collect representative grab
                                       samples from every treated batch
                                       of CSEAFD generated daily and
                                       composite all of the grab samples
                                       to produce a weekly composite
                                       sample. USX then must analyze
                                       each weekly composite sample for
                                       all of the EP toxic metals, and
                                       nickel. The analytical data,
                                       including quality control
                                       information, must be compiled and
                                       maintained on site for a minimum
                                       of three years. These data must
                                       be furnished upon request and
                                       made available for inspection by
                                       any employee or representative of
                                       EPA or the State of Illinois.
                                      (2) Delisting levels: If the EP
                                       extract concentrations for
                                       chromium, lead, arsenic, or
                                       silver exceed 0.315 mg/l; for
                                       barium exceeds 6.3 mg/l; for
                                       cadmium or selenium exceed 0.063
                                       mg/l; for mercury exceeds 0.0126
                                       mg/l; for nickel exceeds 3.15 mg/
                                       l; or for cyanide exceeds 4.42 mg/
                                       l, total reactive cyanide or
                                       total reactive sulfide levels
                                       exceed 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,
                                       respectively, the waste must
                                       either be re-treated until it
                                       meets these levels or managed and
                                       disposed of in accordance with
                                       Subtitle C of RCRA.
                                      (3) Data submittals: Within one
                                       week of system start-up USX must
                                       notify the Section Chief,
                                       Delisting Section (see address
                                       below) when their full-scale
                                       stabilization system is on-line
                                       and waste treatment has begun.
                                       The data obtained through
                                       condition (1)(A) must be
                                       submitted to the Section Chief,
                                       Delisting Section, CAD/OSW (OS-
                                       333), U.S. EPA, 401 M Street,
                                       S.W., Washington, DC 20460 within
                                       the time period specified. At the
                                       Section Chief's request, USX must
                                       submit any other analytical data
                                       obtained through conditions
                                       (1)(A) or (1)(B) within the time
                                       period specified by the Section
                                       Chief. Failure to submit the
                                       required data obtained from
                                       conditions (1)(A) or (1)(B)
                                       within the specified time period
                                       or maintain the required records
                                       for the specified time will be
                                       considered by the Agency, at its
                                       discretion, sufficient basis to
                                       revoke USX's exclusion to the
                                       extent directed by EPA. All data
                                       must be accompanied by the
                                       following certification
                                       statement: ``Under civil and
                                       criminal penalty of law for the
                                       making or submission of false or
                                       fraudulent statements or
                                       representations (pursuant to the
                                       applicable provisions of the
                                       Federal Code which include, but
                                       may not be limited to, 18 U.S.C.
                                       Sec.  6928), I certify that the
                                       information contained in or
                                       accompanying this document is
                                       true, accurate and complete. As
                                       to the (those) identified
                                       section(s) of this document for
                                       which I cannot personally verify
                                       its (their) truth and accuracy, I
                                       certify as the company official
                                       having supervisory responsibility
                                       for the persons who, acting under
                                       my direct instructions, made the
                                       verification that this
                                       information is true, accurate and
                                       complete. In the event that any
                                       of this information is determined
                                       by EPA in its sole discretion to
                                       be false, inaccurate or
                                       incomplete, and upon conveyance
                                       of this fact to the company, I
                                       recognize and agree that this
                                       exclusion of wastes will be void
                                       as if it never had effect or to
                                       the extent directed by EPA and
                                       that the company will be liable
                                       for any actions taken in
                                       contravention of the company's
                                       RCRA and CERCLA obligations
                                       premised upon the company's
                                       reliance on the void exclusion.''

[[Page 127]]

Vulcan Materials   Port Edwards, WI.  Brine purification muds (EPA
 Company.                              Hazardous Waste No. K071)
                                       generated from the mercury cell
                                       process in chlorine production,
                                       where separately prepurified
                                       brine is not used after November
                                       17, 1986. To assure that mercury
                                       levels in this waste are
                                       maintained at acceptable levels,
                                       the following conditions apply to
                                       this exclusion: Each batch of
                                       treated brine clarifier muds and
                                       saturator insolubles must be
                                       tested (by the extraction
                                       procedure) prior to disposal and
                                       the leachate concentration of
                                       mercury must be less than or
                                       equal to 0.0129 ppm. If the waste
                                       does not meet this requirement,
                                       then it must be re-treated or
                                       disposed of as hazardous. This
                                       exclusion does not apply to
                                       wastes for which either of these
                                       conditions is not satisfied.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Table 3--Wastes Excluded From Commercial Chemical Products, Off-
  Specification Species, Container Residues, and Soil Residues Thereof
------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Facility           Address                Waste description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas Eastman....  Longview, Texas..  Incinerator ash (at a maximum
                                       generation of 7,000 cubic yards
                                       per calendar year) generated from
                                       the incineration of sludge from
                                       the wastewater treatment plant
                                       (EPA Hazardous Waste No. U001,
                                       U002, U003, U019, U028, U031,
                                       U037, U044, U056, U069, U070,
                                       U107, U108, U112, U113, U115,
                                       U117, U122, U140, U147, U151,
                                       U154, U159, U161, U169, U190,
                                       U196, U211, U213, U226, U239, and
                                       U359, and that is disposed of in
                                       Subtitle D landfills after
                                       September 25, 1996. Texas Eastman
                                       must implement the testing
                                       program described in Table 1.
                                       Wastes Excluded From Non-Specific
                                       Sources for the petition to be
                                       valid.
Union Carbide      Taft, LA.........  Contaminated soil (approximately
 Corp.                                 11,000 cubic yards), which
                                       contains acrolein in
                                       concentrations of less than 9
                                       ppm.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[49 FR 37070, Sept. 21, 1984]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting appendix IX 
of part 261, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R03>
PART 262--STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO GENERATORS OF HAZARDOUS WASTE--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
262.10  Purpose, scope, and applicability.
262.11  Hazardous waste determination.
262.12  EPA identification numbers.

                         Subpart B--The Manifest

262.20  General requirements.
262.21  Acquisition of manifests.
262.22  Number of copies.
262.23  Use of the manifest.

                  Subpart C--Pre-Transport Requirements

262.30  Packaging.
262.31  Labeling.
262.32  Marking.
262.33  Placarding.
262.34  Accumulation time.

                 Subpart D--Recordkeeping and Reporting

262.40  Recordkeeping.
262.41  Biennial report.
262.42  Exception reporting.
262.43  Additional reporting.
262.44  Special requirements for generators of between 100 and 1000 kg/
          mo.

                  Subpart E--Exports of Hazardous Waste

262.50  Applicability.
262.51  Definitions.
262.52  General requirements.
262.53  Notification of intent to export.
262.54  Special manifest requirements.
262.55  Exception reports.
262.56  Annual reports.
262.57  Recordkeeping.
262.58  International agreements.

                  Subpart F--Imports of Hazardous Waste

262.60  Imports of hazardous waste.

                           Subpart G--Farmers

262.70  Farmers.

   Subpart H--Transfrontier shipments of hazardous waste for recovery 
                             within the OECD

262.80  Applicability.
262.81  Definitions.
262.82  General conditions.
262.83  Notification and consent.
262.84  Tracking document.
262.85  Contracts.
262.86  Provisions relating to recognized traders.
262.87  Reporting and recordkeeping.

[[Page 128]]

262.88  Pre-approval for U.S. Recovery Facilities (Reserved).
262.89  OECD Waste Lists.

Appendix to Part 262--Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest and Instructions 
          (EPA Forms 8700-22 and 8700-22A and Their Instructions)

    Authority: 42 U.S.C 6906, 6912, 6922-6925, 6937, and 6938.

    Source: 45 FR 33142, May 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 262.10  Purpose, scope, and applicability.

    (a) These regulations establish standards for generators of 
hazardous waste.
    (b) 40 CFR 261.5(c) and (d) must be used to determine the 
applicability of provisions of this part that are dependent on 
calculations of the quantity of hazardous waste generated per month.
    (c) A generator who treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste 
on-site must only comply with the following sections of this part with 
respect to that waste: Section 262.11 for determining whether or not he 
has a hazardous waste, Sec. 262.12 for obtaining an EPA identification 
number, Sec. 262.34 for accumulation of hazardous waste, Sec. 262.40 (c) 
and (d) for recordkeeping, Sec. 262.43 for additional reporting, and if 
applicable, Sec. 262.70 for farmers.
    (d) Any person who exports or imports hazardous waste subject to the 
Federal manifesting requirements of part 262, or subject to the 
universal waste management standards of 40 CFR Part 273, or subject to 
State requirements analogous to 40 CFR Part 273, to or from the 
countries listed in Sec. 262.58(a)(1) for recovery must comply with 
subpart H of this part.
    (e) Any person who imports hazardous waste into the United States 
must comply with the standards applicable to generators established in 
this part.
    (f) A farmer who generates waste pesticides which are hazardous 
waste and who complies with all of the requirements of Sec. 262.70 is 
not required to comply with other standards in this part or 40 CFR parts 
270, 264, 265, or 268 with respect to such pesticides.
    (g) A person who generates a hazardous waste as defined by 40 CFR 
part 261 is subject to the compliance requirements and penalties 
prescribed in section 3008 of the Act if he does not comply with the 
requirements of this part.
    (h) An owner or operator who initiates a shipment of hazardous waste 
from a treatment, storage, or disposal facility must comply with the 
generator standards established in this part.
    (i) Persons responding to an explosives or munitions emergency in 
accordance with 40 CFR 264.1(g)(8)(i)(D) or (iv) or 265.1(c)(11)(i)(D) 
or (iv), and 270.1(c)(3)(i)(D) or (iii) are not required to comply with 
the standards of this part.
    Note 1: The provisions of Sec. 262.34 are applicable to the on-site 
accumulation of hazardous waste by generators. Therefore, the provisions 
of Sec. 262.34 only apply to owners or operators who are shipping 
hazardous waste which they generated at that facility.

    Note 2: A generator who treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous 
waste on-site must comply with the applicable standards and permit 
requirements set forth in 40 CFR parts 264, 265, 266, 268, and 270.
[45 FR 33142, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 86970, Dec. 31, 1980; 47 
FR 1251, Jan. 11, 1982; 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 53 FR 27164, July 19, 
1988; 56 FR 3877, Jan. 31, 1991; 60 FR 25541, May 11, 1995; 61 FR 16309, 
Apr. 12, 1996; 62 FR 6651, Feb. 12, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 262.11  Hazardous waste determination.

    A person who generates a solid waste, as defined in 40 CFR 261.2, 
must determine if that waste is a hazardous waste using the following 
method:
    (a) He should first determine if the waste is excluded from 
regulation under 40 CFR 261.4.
    (b) He must then determine if the waste is listed as a hazardous 
waste in subpart D of 40 CFR part 261.

    Note: Even if the waste is listed, the generator still has an 
opportunity under 40 CFR 260.22 to demonstrate to the Administrator that 
the waste from his particular facility or operation is not a hazardous 
waste.

    (c) For purposes of compliance with 40 CFR part 268, or if the waste 
is not listed in subpart D of 40 CFR part 261, the generator must then 
determine whether the waste is identified in subpart C of 40 CFR part 
261 by either:

[[Page 129]]

    (1) Testing the waste according to the methods set forth in subpart 
C of 40 CFR part 261, or according to an equivalent method approved by 
the Administrator under 40 CFR 260.21; or
    (2) Applying knowledge of the hazard characteristic of the waste in 
light of the materials or the processes used.
    (d) If the waste is determined to be hazardous, the generator must 
refer to parts 261, 264, 265, 266, 268, and 273 of this chapter for 
possible exclusions or restrictions pertaining to management of the 
specific waste.
[45 FR 33142, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 76624, Nov. 19, 1980; 51 
FR 40637, Nov. 7, 1986; 55 FR 22684, June 1, 1990; 56 FR 3877, Jan. 31, 
1991; 60 FR 25541, May 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 262.12  EPA identification numbers.

    (a) A generator must not treat, store, dispose of, transport, or 
offer for transportation, hazardous waste without having received an EPA 
identification number from the Administrator.
    (b) A generator who has not received an EPA identification number 
may obtain one by applying to the Administrator using EPA form 8700-12. 
Upon receiving the request the Administrator will assign an EPA 
identification number to the generator.
    (c) A generator must not offer his hazardous waste to transporters 
or to treatment, storage, or disposal facilities that have not received 
an EPA identification number.


<R04>
                         Subpart B--The Manifest


<R05>
Sec. 262.20  General requirements.

    (a) A generator who transports, or offers for transportation, 
hazardous waste for offsite treatment, storage, or disposal must prepare 
a Manifest OMB control number 2050-0039 on EPA form 8700-22, and, if 
necessary, EPA form 8700-22A, according to the instructions included in 
the appendix to part 262.
    (b) A generator must designate on the manifest one facility which is 
permitted to handle the waste described on the manifest.
    (c) A generator may also designate on the manifest one alternate 
facility which is permitted to handle his waste in the event an 
emergency prevents delivery of the waste to the primary designated 
facility.
    (d) If the transporter is unable to deliver the hazardous waste to 
the designated facility or the alternate facility, the generator must 
either designate another facility or instruct the transporter to return 
the waste.
    (e) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to hazardous waste 
produced by generators of greater than 100 kg but less than 1000 kg in a 
calendar month where:
    (1) The waste is reclaimed under a contractual agreement pursuant to 
which:
    (i) The type of waste and frequency of shipments are specified in 
the agreement;
    (ii) The vehicle used to transport the waste to the recycling 
facility and to deliver regenerated material back to the generator is 
owned and operated by the reclaimer of the waste; and
    (2) The generator maintains a copy of the reclamation agreement in 
his files for a period of at least three years after termination or 
expiration of the agreement.
    (f) The requirements of this subpart and Sec. 262.32(b) do not apply 
to the transport of hazardous wastes on a public or private right-of-way 
within or along the border of contiguous property under the control of 
the same person, even if such contiguous property is divided by a public 
or private right-of-way. Notwithstanding 40 CFR 263.10(a), the generator 
or transporter must comply with the requirements for transporters set 
forth in 40 CFR 263.30 and 263.31 in the event of a discharge of 
hazardous waste on a public or private right-of-way.
[45 FR 33142, May 19, 1980, as amended at 49 FR 10500, Mar. 20, 1984; 51 
FR 10175, Mar. 24, 1986; 53 FR 45090, Nov. 8, 1988; 62 FR 6651, Feb. 12, 
1997]


<R05>
Sec. 262.21  Acquisition of manifests.

    (a) If the State to which the shipment is manifested (consignment 
State) supplies the manifest and requires its use, then the generator 
must use that manifest.
    (b) If the consignment State does not supply the manifest, but the 
State in which the generator is located (generator State) supplies the 
manifest and requires its use, then the generator must use that State's 
manifest.

[[Page 130]]

    (c) If neither the generator State nor the consignment State 
supplies the manifest, then the generator may obtain the manifest from 
any source.
[49 FR 10500, Mar. 20, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 262.22  Number of copies.

    The manifest consists of at least the number of copies which will 
provide the generator, each transporter, and the owner or operator of 
the designated facility with one copy each for their records and another 
copy to be returned to the generator.


<R05>
Sec. 262.23  Use of the manifest.

    (a) The generator must:
    (1) Sign the manifest certification by hand; and
    (2) Obtain the handwritten signature of the initial transporter and 
date of acceptance on the manifest; and
    (3) Retain one copy, in accordance with Sec. 262.40(a).
    (b) The generator must give the transporter the remaining copies of 
the manifest.
    (c) For shipments of hazardous waste within the United States solely 
by water (bulk shipments only), the generator must send three copies of 
the manifest dated and signed in accordance with this section to the 
owner or operator of the designated facility or the last water (bulk 
shipment) transporter to handle the waste in the United States if 
exported by water. Copies of the manifest are not required for each 
transporter.
    (d) For rail shipments of hazardous waste within the United States 
which originate at the site of generation, the generator must send at 
least three copies of the manifest dated and signed in accordance with 
this section to:
    (1) The next non-rail transporter, if any; or
    (2) The designated facility if transported solely by rail; or
    (3) The last rail transporter to handle the waste in the United 
States if exported by rail.
    (e) For shipments of hazardous waste to a designated facility in an 
authorized State which has not yet obtained authorization to regulate 
that particular waste as hazardous, the generator must assure that the 
designated facility agrees to sign and return the manifest to the 
generator, and that any out-of-state transporter signs and forwards the 
manifest to the designated facility.

    Note: See Sec. 263.20(e) and (f) for special provisions for rail or 
water (bulk shipment) transporters.

[45 FR 33142, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 86973, Dec. 31, 1980; 55 
FR 2354, Jan. 23, 1990]


<R04>
                  Subpart C--Pre-Transport Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 262.30  Packaging.

    Before transporting hazardous waste or offering hazardous waste for 
transportation off-site, a generator must package the waste in 
accordance with the applicable Department of Transportation regulations 
on packaging under 49 CFR parts 173, 178, and 179.


<R05>
Sec. 262.31  Labeling.

    Before transporting or offering hazardous waste for transportation 
off-site, a generator must label each package in accordance with the 
applicable Department of Transportation regulations on hazardous 
materials under 49 CFR part 172.


<R05>
Sec. 262.32  Marking.

    (a) Before transporting or offering hazardous waste for 
transportation off-site, a generator must mark each package of hazardous 
waste in accordance with the applicable Department of Transportation 
regulations on hazardous materials under 49 CFR part 172;
    (b) Before transporting hazardous waste or offering hazardous waste 
for transportation off-site, a generator must mark each container of 110 
gallons or less used in such transportation with the following words and 
information displayed in accordance with the requirements of 49 CFR 
172.304:
    HAZARDOUS WASTE--Federal Law Prohibits Improper Disposal. If found, 
contact the nearest police or public safety authority or the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency.

Generator's Name and Address ----------.
Manifest Document Number ------------.

[[Page 131]]


<R05>
Sec. 262.33  Placarding.

    Before transporting hazardous waste or offering hazardous waste for 
transportation off-site, a generator must placard or offer the initial 
transporter the appropriate placards according to Department of 
Transportation regulations for hazardous materials under 49 CFR part 
172, subpart F.


<R05>
Sec. 262.34  Accumulation time.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (d), (e), and (f) of this 
section, a generator may accumulate hazardous waste on-site for 90 days 
or less without a permit or without having interim status, provided 
that:
    (1) The waste is placed:
    (i) In containers and the generator complies with subpart I of 40 
CFR part 265; and/or
    (ii) In tanks and the generator complies with subpart J of 40 CFR 
part 265, except Secs. 265.197(c) and 265.200; and/or
    (iii) On drip pads and the generator complies with subpart W of 40 
CFR part 265 and maintains the following records at the facility:
    (A) A description of procedures that will be followed to ensure that 
all wastes are removed from the drip pad and associated collection 
system at least once every 90 days; and
    (B) Documentation of each waste removal, including the quantity of 
waste removed from the drip pad and the sump or collection system and 
the date and time of removal; and/or
    (iv) The waste is placed in containment buildings and the generator 
complies with subpart DD of 40 CFR part 265, has placed its professional 
engineer certification that the building complies with the design 
standards specified in 40 CFR 265.1101 in the facility's operating 
record no later than 60 days after the date of initial operation of the 
unit. After February 18, 1993, PE certification will be required prior 
to operation of the unit. The owner or operator shall maintain the 
following records at the facility:
    (A) A written description of procedures to ensure that each waste 
volume remains in the unit for no more than 90 days, a written 
description of the waste generation and management practices for the 
facility showing that they are consistent with respecting the 90 day 
limit, and documentation that the procedures are complied with; or
    (B) Documentation that the unit is emptied at least once every 90 
days.

In addition, such a generator is exempt from all the requirements in 
subparts G and H of 40 CFR part 265, except for Secs. 265.111 and 
265.114.
    (2) The date upon which each period of accumulation begins is 
clearly marked and visible for inspection on each container;

    (3) While being accumulated on-site, each container and tank is 
labeled or marked clearly with the words, ``Hazardous Waste''; and
    (4) The generator complies with the requirements for owners or 
operators in subparts C and D in 40 CFR part 265, with Sec. 265.16, and 
with 40 CFR 268.7(a)(4).
    (b) A generator who accumulates hazardous waste for more than 90 
days is an operator of a storage facility and is subject to the 
requirements of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265 and the permit requirements of 
40 CFR part 270 unless he has been granted an extension to the 90-day 
period. Such extension may be granted by EPA if hazardous wastes must 
remain on-site for longer than 90 days due to unforeseen, temporary, and 
uncontrollable circumstances. An extension of up to 30 days may be 
granted at the discretion of the Regional Administrator on a case-by-
case basis.
    (c)(1) A generator may accumulate as much as 55 gallons of hazardous 
waste or one quart of acutely hazardous waste listed in Sec. 261.33(e) 
in containers at or near any point of generation where wastes initially 
accumulate, which is under the control of the operator of the process 
generating the waste, without a permit or interim status and without 
complying with paragraph (a) of this section provided he:
    (i) Complies with Secs. 265.171, 265.172, and 265.173(a) of this 
chapter; and
    (ii) Marks his containers either with the words ``Hazardous Waste'' 
or with other words that identify the contents of the containers.
    (2) A generator who accumulates either hazardous waste or acutely 
hazardous waste listed in Sec. 261.33(e) in excess of the amounts listed 
in paragraph (c)(1) of this section at or near any point of generation 
must, with respect

[[Page 132]]

to that amount of excess waste, comply within three days with paragraph 
(a) of this section or other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
During the three day period the generator must continue to comply with 
paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through (ii) of this section. The generator must 
mark the container holding the excess accumulation of hazardous waste 
with the date the excess amount began accumulating.
    (d) A generator who generates greater than 100 kilograms but less 
than 1000 kilograms of hazardous waste in a calendar month may 
accumulate hazardous waste on-site for 180 days or less without a permit 
or without having interim status provided that:
    (1) The quantity of waste accumulated on-site never exceeds 6000 
kilograms;
    (2) The generator complies with the requirements of subpart I of 
part 265 of this chapter, except for Secs. 265.176 and 265.178;
    (3) The generator complies with the requirements of Sec. 265.201 in 
subpart J of part 265;
    (4) The generator complies with the requirements of paragraphs 
(a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section, the requirements of subpart C of part 
265, the requirements of 40 CFR 268.7(a)(4); and
    (5) The generator complies with the following requirements:
    (i) At all times there must be at least one employee either on the 
premises or on call (i.e., available to respond to an emergency by 
reaching the facility within a short period of time) with the 
responsibility for coordinating all emergency response measures 
specified in paragraph (d)(5)(iv) of this section. This employee is the 
emergency coordinator.
    (ii) The generator must post the following information next to the 
telephone:
    (A) The name and telephone number of the emergency coordinator;
    (B) Location of fire extinguishers and spill control material, and, 
if present, fire alarm; and
    (C) The telephone number of the fire department, unless the facility 
has a direct alarm.
    (iii) The generator must ensure that all employees are thoroughly 
familiar with proper waste handling and emergency procedures, relevant 
to their responsibilities during normal facility operations and 
emergencies;
    (iv) The emergency coordinator or his designee must respond to any 
emergencies that arise. The applicable responses are as follows:
    (A) In the event of a fire, call the fire department or attempt to 
extinguish it using a fire extinguisher;
    (B) In the event of a spill, contain the flow of hazardous waste to 
the extent possible, and as soon as is practicable, clean up the 
hazardous waste and any contaminated materials or soil;
    (C) In the event of a fire, explosion, or other release which could 
threaten human health outside the facility or when the generator has 
knowledge that a spill has reached surface water, the generator must 
immediately notify the National Response Center (using their 24-hour 
toll free number 800/424-8802). The report must include the following 
information:
    (1) The name, address, and U.S. EPA Identification Number of the 
generator;
    (2) Date, time, and type of incident (e.g., spill or fire);
    (3) Quantity and type of hazardous waste involved in the incident;
    (4) Extent of injuries, if any; and
    (5) Estimated quantity and disposition of recovered materials, if 
any.
    (e) A generator who generates greater than 100 kilograms but less 
than 1000 kilograms of hazardous waste in a calendar month and who must 
transport his waste, or offer his waste for transportation, over a 
distance of 200 miles or more for off-site treatment, storage or 
disposal may accumulate hazardous waste on-site for 270 days or less 
without a permit or without having interim status provided that he 
complies with the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section.
    (f) A generator who generates greater than 100 kilograms but less 
than 1000 kilograms of hazardous waste in a calendar month and who 
accumulates hazardous waste in quantities exceeding 6000 kg or 
accumulates hazardous waste for more than 180 days (or for more than 270 
days if he must transport his waste, or offer his waste for 
transportation, over a distance of 200

[[Page 133]]

miles or more) is an operator of a storage facility and is subject to 
the requirements of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265 and the permit requirements 
of 40 CFR part 270 unless he has been granted an extension to the 180-
day (or 270-day if applicable) period. Such extension may be granted by 
EPA if hazardous wastes must remain on-site for longer than 180 days (or 
270 days if applicable) due to unforeseen, temporary, and uncontrollable 
circumstances. An extension of up to 30 days may be granted at the 
discretion of the Regional Administrator on a case-by-case basis.
[47 FR 1251, Jan. 11, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 49 
FR 49571, Dec. 20, 1984; 51 FR 10175, Mar. 24, 1986; 51 FR 25472, July 
14, 1986; 55 FR 22684, June 1, 1990; 55 FR 50483, Dec. 6, 1990; 56 FR 
3877, Jan. 31, 1991; 56 FR 30195, July 1, 1991; 57 FR 37264, Aug. 18, 
1992; 59 FR 62926, Dec. 6, 1994; 61 FR 4911, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 FR 59950, 
Nov. 25, 1996]


<R04>
                 Subpart D--Recordkeeping and Reporting


<R05>
Sec. 262.40  Recordkeeping.

    (a) A generator must keep a copy of each manifest signed in 
accordance with Sec. 262.23(a) for three years or until he receives a 
signed copy from the designated facility which received the waste. This 
signed copy must be retained as a record for at least three years from 
the date the waste was accepted by the initial transporter.
    (b) A generator must keep a copy of each Biennial Report and 
Exception Report for a period of at least three years from the due date 
of the report.
    (c) A generator must keep records of any test results, waste 
analyses, or other determinations made in accordance with Sec. 262.11 
for at least three years from the date that the waste was last sent to 
on-site or off-site treatment, storage, or disposal.
    (d) The periods or retention referred to in this section are 
extended automatically during the course of any unresolved enforcement 
action regarding the regulated activity or as requested by the 
Administrator.
[45 FR 33142, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 3981, Jan. 28, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 262.41  Biennial report.

    (a) A generator who ships any hazardous waste off-site to a 
treatment, storage or disposal facility within the United States must 
prepare and submit a single copy of a Biennial Report to the Regional 
Administrator by March 1 of each even numbered year. The Biennial Report 
must be submitted on EPA Form 8700-13A, must cover generator activities 
during the previous year, and must include the following information:
    (1) The EPA identification number, name, and address of the 
generator;
    (2) The calendar year covered by the report;
    (3) The EPA identification number, name, and address for each off-
site treatment, storage, or disposal facility in the United States to 
which waste was shipped during the year;
    (4) The name and EPA identification number of each transporter used 
during the reporting year for shipments to a treatment, storage or 
disposal facility within the United States;
    (5) A description, EPA hazardous waste number (from 40 CFR part 261, 
subpart C or D), DOT hazard class, and quantity of each hazardous waste 
shipped off-site for shipments to a treatment, storage or disposal 
facility within the United States. This information must be listed by 
EPA identification number of each such off-site facility to which waste 
was shipped.
    (6) A description of the efforts undertaken during the year to 
reduce the volume and toxicity of waste generated.
    (7) A description of the changes in volume and toxicity of waste 
actually achieved during the year in comparison to previous years to the 
extent such information is available for years prior to 1984.
    (8) The certification signed by the generator or authorized 
representative.
    (b) Any generator who treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste 
on-site must submit a biennial report covering those wastes in 
accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR parts 270, 264, 265, and 266. 
Reporting for exports of hazardous waste is not required on the Biennial 
Report form. A separate annual

[[Page 134]]

report requirement is set forth at 40 CFR 262.56.
[48 FR 3981, Jan. 28, 1983, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 
FR 28746, July 15, 1985; 51 FR 28682, Aug. 8, 1986]



<R05>
Sec. 262.42  Exception reporting.

    (a)(1) A generator of greater than 1000 kilograms of hazardous waste 
in a calendar month who does not receive a copy of the manifest with the 
handwritten signature of the owner or operator of the designated 
facility within 35 days of the date the waste was accepted by the 
initial transporter must contact the transporter and/or the owner or 
operator of the designated facility to determine the status of the 
hazardous waste.
    (2) A generator of greater than 1000 kilograms of hazardous waste in 
a calendar month must submit an Exception Report to the EPA Regional 
Administrator for the Region in which the generator is located if he has 
not received a copy of the manifest with the handwritten signature of 
the owner or operator of the designated facility within 45 days of the 
date the waste was accepted by the initial transporter. The Exception 
Report must include:
    (i) A legible copy of the manifest for which the generator does not 
have confirmation of delivery;
    (ii) A cover letter signed by the generator or his authorized 
representative explaining the efforts taken to locate the hazardous 
waste and the results of those efforts.
    (b) A generator of greater than 100 kilograms but less than 1000 
kilograms of hazardous waste in a calendar month who does not receive a 
copy of the manifest with the handwritten signature of the owner or 
operator of the designated facility within 60 days of the date the waste 
was accepted by the initial transporter must submit a legible copy of 
the manifest, with some indication that the generator has not received 
confirmation of delivery, to the EPA Regional Administrator for the 
Region in which the generator is located.

    Note: The submission to EPA need only be a handwritten or typed note 
on the manifest itself, or on an attached sheet of paper, stating that 
the return copy was not received.

[52 FR 35898, Sept. 23, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 262.43  Additional reporting.

    The Administrator, as he deems necessary under sections 2002(a) and 
3002(6) of the Act, may require generators to furnish additional reports 
concerning the quantities and disposition of wastes identified or listed 
in 40 CFR part 261.


<R05>
Sec. 262.44  Special requirements for generators of between 100 and 1000 kg/mo.

    A generator of greater than 100 kilograms but less than 1000 
kilograms of hazardous waste in a calendar month is subject only to the 
following requirements in this subpart:
    (a) Section 262.40(a), (c), and (d), recordkeeping;
    (b) Section 262.42(b), exception reporting; and
    (c) Section 262.43, additional reporting.
[52 FR 35899, Sept. 23, 1987]


<R04>
                  Subpart E--Exports of Hazardous Waste

    Source: 51 FR 28682, Aug. 8, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 262.50  Applicability.

    This subpart establishes requirements applicable to exports of 
hazardous waste. Except to the extent Sec. 262.58 provides otherwise, a 
primary exporter of hazardous waste must comply with the special 
requirements of this subpart and a transporter transporting hazardous 
waste for export must comply with applicable requirements of part 263. 
Section 262.58 sets forth the requirements of international agreements 
between the United States and receiving countries which establish 
different notice, export, and enforcement procedures for the 
transportation, treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous waste for 
shipments between the United States and those countries.

[[Page 135]]


<R05>
Sec. 262.51  Definitions.

    In addition to the definitions set forth at 40 CFR 260.10, the 
following definitions apply to this subpart:
    Consignee means the ultimate treatment, storage or disposal facility 
in a receiving country to which the hazardous waste will be sent.
    EPA Acknowledgement of Consent means the cable sent to EPA from the 
U.S. Embassy in a receiving country that acknowledges the written 
consent of the receiving country to accept the hazardous waste and 
describes the terms and conditions of the receiving country's consent to 
the shipment.
    Primary Exporter means any person who is required to originate the 
manifest for a shipment of hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR 
part 262, subpart B, or equivalent State provision, which specifies a 
treatment, storage, or disposal facility in a receiving country as the 
facility to which the hazardous waste will be sent and any intermediary 
arranging for the export.
    Receiving country means a foreign country to which a hazardous waste 
is sent for the purpose of treatment, storage or disposal (except short-
term storage incidental to transportation).
    Transit country means any foreign country, other than a receiving 
country, through which a hazardous waste is transported.
[53 FR 27164, July 19, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 262.52  General requirements.

    Exports of hazardous waste are prohibited except in compliance with 
the applicable requirements of this subpart and part 263. Exports of 
hazardous waste are prohibited unless:
    (a) Notification in accordance with Sec. 262.53 has been provided;
    (b) The receiving country has consented to accept the hazardous 
waste;
    (c) A copy of the EPA Acknowledgment of Consent to the shipment 
accompanies the hazardous waste shipment and, unless exported by rail, 
is attached to the manifest (or shipping paper for exports by water 
(bulk shipment)).
    (d) The hazardous waste shipment conforms to the terms of the 
receiving country's written consent as reflected in the EPA 
Acknowledgment of Consent.


<R05>
Sec. 262.53  Notification of intent to export.

    (a) A primary exporter of hazardous waste must notify EPA of an 
intended export before such waste is scheduled to leave the United 
States. A complete notification should be submitted sixty (60) days 
before the initial shipment is intended to be shipped off site. This 
notification may cover export activities extending over a twelve (12) 
month or lesser period. The notification must be in writing, signed by 
the primary exporter, and include the following information:
    (1) Name, mailing address, telephone number and EPA ID number of the 
primary exporter;
    (2) By consignee, for each hazardous waste type:
    (i) A description of the hazardous waste and the EPA hazardous waste 
number (from 40 CFR part 261, subparts C and D), U.S. DOT proper 
shipping name, hazard class and ID number (UN/NA) for each hazardous 
waste as identified in 49 CFR parts 171 through 177;
    (ii) The estimated frequency or rate at which such waste is to be 
exported and the period of time over which such waste is to be exported.
    (iii) The estimated total quantity of the hazardous waste in units 
as specified in the instructions to the Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest 
Form (8700-22);
    (iv) All points of entry to and departure from each foreign country 
through which the hazardous waste will pass;
    (v) A description of the means by which each shipment of the 
hazardous waste will be transported (e.g., mode of transportation 
vehicle (air, highway, rail, water, etc.), type(s) of container (drums, 
boxes, tanks, etc.));
    (vi) A description of the manner in which the hazardous waste will 
be treated, stored or disposed of in the receiving country (e.g., land 
or ocean incineration, other land disposal, ocean dumping, recycling);
    (vii) The name and site address of the consignee and any alternate 
consignee; and
    (viii) The name of any transit countries through which the hazardous

[[Page 136]]

waste will be sent and a description of the approximate length of time 
the hazardous waste will remain in such country and the nature of its 
handling while there;
    (b) Notifications submitted by mail should be sent to the following 
mailing address: Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Office 
of Compliance, Enforcement Planning, Targeting, and Data Division 
(2222A), Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 
20460. Hand-delivered notifications should be sent to: Office of 
Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Office of Compliance, Enforcement 
Planning, Targeting, and Data Division (2222A), Environmental Protection 
Agency, Ariel Rios Bldg., 12th St. and Pennsylvania Ave., NW., 
Washington, DC. In both cases, the following shall be prominently 
displayed on the front of the envelope: ``Attention: Notification of 
Intent to Export.''
    (c) Except for changes to the telephone number in paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section, changes to paragraph (a)(2)(v) of this section and 
decreases in the quantity indicated pursuant to paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of 
this section when the conditions specified on the original notification 
change (including any exceedance of the estimate of the quantity of 
hazardous waste specified in the original notification), the primary 
exporter must provide EPA with a written renotification of the change. 
The shipment cannot take place until consent of the receiving country to 
the changes (except for changes to paragraph (a)(2)(viii) of this 
section and in the ports of entry to and departure from transit 
countries pursuant to paragraph (a)(2)(iv) of this section) has been 
obtained and the primary exporter receives an EPA Acknowledgment of 
Consent reflecting the receiving country's consent to the changes.
    (d) Upon request by EPA, a primary exporter shall furnish to EPA any 
additional information which a receiving country requests in order to 
respond to a notification.
    (e) In conjunction with the Department of State, EPA will provide a 
complete notification to the receiving country and any transit 
countries. A notification is complete when EPA receives a notification 
which EPA determines satisfies the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section. Where a claim of confidentiality is asserted with respect to 
any notification information required by paragraph (a) of this section, 
EPA may find the notification not complete until any such claim is 
resolved in accordance with 40 CFR 260.2.
    (f) Where the receiving country consents to the receipt of the 
hazardous waste, EPA will forward an EPA Acknowledgment of Consent to 
the primary exporter for purposes of Sec. 262.54(h). Where the receiving 
country objects to receipt of the hazardous waste or withdraws a prior 
consent, EPA will notify the primary exporter in writing. EPA will also 
notify the primary exporter of any responses from transit countries.
[51 FR 28682, Aug. 8, 1986, as amended at 56 FR 43705, Sept. 4, 1991; 61 
FR 16309, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 262.54  Special manifest requirements.

    A primary exporter must comply with the manifest requirements of 40 
CFR 262.20 through 262.23 except that:
    (a) In lieu of the name, site address and EPA ID number of the 
designated permitted facility, the primary exporter must enter the name 
and site address of the consignee;
    (b) In lieu of the name, site address and EPA ID number of a 
permitted alternate facility, the primary exporter may enter the name 
and site address of any alternate consignee.
    (c) In Special Handling Instructions and Additional Information, the 
primary exporter must identify the point of departure from the United 
States;
    (d) The following statement must be added to the end of the first 
sentence of the certification set forth in Item 16 of the Uniform 
Hazardous Waste Manifest Form: ``and conforms to the terms of the 
attached EPA Acknowledgment of Consent'';
    (e) In lieu of the requirements of Sec. 262.21, the primary exporter 
must obtain the manifest form from the primary exporter's State if that 
State supplies the manifest form and requires its use. If the primary 
exporter's State does not supply the manifest form, the

[[Page 137]]

primary exporter may obtain a manifest form from any source.
    (f) The primary exporter must require the consignee to confirm in 
writing the delivery of the hazardous waste to that facility and to 
describe any significant discrepancies (as defined in 40 CFR 264.72(a)) 
between the manifest and the shipment. A copy of the manifest signed by 
such facility may be used to confirm delivery of the hazardous waste.
    (g) In lieu of the requirements of Sec. 262.20(d), where a shipment 
cannot be delivered for any reason to the designated or alternate 
consignee, the primary exporter must:
    (1) Renotify EPA of a change in the conditions of the original 
notification to allow shipment to a new consignee in accordance with 
Sec. 262.53(c) and obtain an EPA Acknowledgment of Consent prior to 
delivery; or
    (2) Instruct the transporter to return the waste to the primary 
exporter in the United States or designate another facility within the 
United States; and
    (3) Instruct the transporter to revise the manifest in accordance 
with the primary exporter's instructions.
    (h) The primary exporter must attach a copy of the EPA 
Acknowledgment of Consent to the shipment to the manifest which must 
accompany the hazardous waste shipment. For exports by rail or water 
(bulk shipment), the primary exporter must provide the transporter with 
an EPA Acknowledgment of Consent which must accompany the hazardous 
waste but which need not be attached to the manifest except that for 
exports by water (bulk shipment) the primary exporter must attach the 
copy of the EPA Acknowledgment of Consent to the shipping paper.
    (i) The primary exporter shall provide the transporter with an 
additional copy of the manifest for delivery to the U.S. Customs 
official at the point the hazardous waste leaves the United States in 
accordance with Sec. 263.20(g)(4).


<R05>
Sec. 262.55  Exception reports.

    In lieu of the requirements of Sec. 262.42, a primary exporter must 
file an exception report with the Administrator if:
    (a) He has not received a copy of the manifest signed by the 
transporter stating the date and place of departure from the United 
States within forty-five (45) days from the date it was accepted by the 
initial transporter;
    (b) Within ninety (90) days from the date the waste was accepted by 
the initial transporter, the primary exporter has not received written 
confirmation from the consignee that the hazardous waste was received;
    (c) The waste is returned to the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 262.56  Annual reports.

    (a) Primary exporters of hazardous waste shall file with the 
Administrator no later than March 1 of each year, a report summarizing 
the types, quantities, frequency, and ultimate destination of all 
hazardous waste exported during the previous calendar year. Such reports 
shall include the following:
    (1) The EPA identification number, name, and mailing and site 
address of the exporter;
    (2) The calendar year covered by the report;
    (3) The name and site address of each consignee;
    (4) By consignee, for each hazardous waste exported, a description 
of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number (from 40 CFR part 
261, subpart C or D), DOT hazard class, the name and US EPA ID number 
(where applicable) for each transporter used, the total amount of waste 
shipped and number of shipments pursuant to each notification;
    (5) Except for hazardous waste produced by exporters of greater than 
100 kg but less than 1000 kg in a calendar month, unless provided 
pursuant to Sec. 262.41, in even numbered years:
    (i) A description of the efforts undertaken during the year to 
reduce the volume and toxicity of waste generated; and
    (ii) A description of the changes in volume and toxicity of waste 
actually achieved during the year in comparison to previous years to the 
extent such information is available for years prior to 1984.
    (6) A certification signed by the primary exporter which states:

[[Page 138]]

    I certify under penalty of law that I have personally examined and 
am familiar with the information submitted in this and all attached 
documents, and that based on my inquiry of those individuals immediately 
responsible for obtaining the information, I believe that the submitted 
information is true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are 
significant penalties for submitting false information including the 
possibility of fine and imprisonment.
    (b) Annual reports submitted by mail should be sent to the following 
mailing address: Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Office 
of Compliance, Enforcement Planning, Targeting, and Data Division 
(2222A), Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 
20460. Hand-delivered reports should be sent to: Office of Enforcement 
and Compliance Assurance, Office of Compliance, Enforcement Planning, 
Targeting, and Data Division (2222A), Environmental Protection Agency, 
Ariel Rios Bldg., 12th St. and Pennsylvania Ave., NW., Washington, DC.
[51 FR 28682, Aug. 8, 1986, as amended at 56 FR 43705, Sept. 4, 1991; 61 
FR 16309, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 262.57  Recordkeeping.

    (a) For all exports a primary exporter must:
    (1) Keep a copy of each notification of intent to export for a 
period of at least three years from the date the hazardous waste was 
accepted by the initial transporter;
    (2) Keep a copy of each EPA Acknowledgment of Consent for a period 
of at least three years from the date the hazardous waste was accepted 
by the initial transporter;
    (3) Keep a copy of each confirmation of delivery of the hazardous 
waste from the consignee for at least three years from the date the 
hazardous waste was accepted by the initial transporter; and
    (4) Keep a copy of each annual report for a period of at least three 
years from the due date of the report.
    (b) The periods of retention referred to in this section are 
extended automatically during the course of any unresolved enforcement 
action regarding the regulated activity or as requested by the 
Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 262.58  International agreements.

    (a) Any person who exports or imports hazardous waste subject to 
Federal manifest requirements of Part 262, or subject to the universal 
waste management standards of 40 CFR Part 273, or subject to State 
requirements analogous to 40 CFR Part 273, to or from designated member 
countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section for purposes of 
recovery is subject to Subpart H of this part. The requirements of 
Subparts E and F do not apply.
    (1) For the purposes of this Subpart, the designated OECD countries 
consist of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United States.
    (2) For the purposes of this Subpart, Canada and Mexico are 
considered OECD member countries only for the purpose of transit.
    (b) Any person who exports hazardous waste to or imports hazardous 
waste from: a designated OECD member country for purposes other than 
recovery (e.g., incineration, disposal), Mexico (for any purpose), or 
Canada (for any purpose) remains subject to the requirements of subparts 
E and F of this part.
[61 FR 16310, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R04>
                  Subpart F--Imports of Hazardous Waste


<R05>
Sec. 262.60  Imports of hazardous waste.

    (a) Any person who imports hazardous waste from a foreign country 
into the United States must comply with the requirements of this part 
and the special requirements of this subpart.
    (b) When importing hazardous waste, a person must meet all the 
requirements of Sec. 262.20(a) for the manifest except that:
    (1) In place of the generator's name, address and EPA identification 
number, the name and address of the foreign generator and the importer's 
name, address and EPA identification number must be used.

[[Page 139]]

    (2) In place of the generator's signature on the certification 
statement, the U.S. importer or his agent must sign and date the 
certification and obtain the signature of the initial transporter.
    (c) A person who imports hazardous waste must obtain the manifest 
form from the consignment State if the State supplies the manifest and 
requires its use. If the consignment State does not supply the manifest 
form, then the manifest form may be obtained from any source.
[51 FR 28685, Aug. 8, 1986]


<R04>
                           Subpart G--Farmers


<R05>
Sec. 262.70  Farmers.

    A farmer disposing of waste pesticides from his own use which are 
hazardous wastes is not required to comply with the standards in this 
part or other standards in 40 CFR parts 264, 265, 268, or 270 for those 
wastes provided he triple rinses each emptied pesticide container in 
accordance with Sec. 261.7(b)(3) and disposes of the pesticide residues 
on his own farm in a manner consisent with the disposal instructions on 
the pesticide label.
[53 FR 27165, July 19, 1988]


<R04>
   Subpart H--Transfrontier Shipments of Hazardous Waste for Recovery 
                             within the OECD

    Source: 61 FR 16310, Apr. 12, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 262.80  Applicability.

    (a) The requirements of this subpart apply to imports and exports of 
wastes that are considered hazardous under U.S. national procedures and 
are destined for recovery operations in the countries listed in 
Sec. 262.58(a)(1). A waste is considered hazardous under U.S. national 
procedures if it meets the Federal definition of hazardous waste in 40 
CFR 261.3 and it is subject to either the Federal manifesting 
requirements at 40 CFR Part 262, Subpart B, to the universal waste 
management standards of 40 CFR Part 273, or to State requirements 
analogous to 40 CFR Part 273.
    (b) Any person (notifier, consignee, or recovery facility operator) 
who mixes two or more wastes (including hazardous and non-hazardous 
wastes) or otherwise subjects two or more wastes (including hazardous 
and non-hazardous wastes) to physical or chemical transformation 
operations, and thereby creates a new hazardous waste, becomes a 
generator and assumes all subsequent generator duties under RCRA and any 
notifier duties, if applicable, under this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 262.81  Definitions.

    The following definitions apply to this subpart.
    (a) Competent authorities means the regulatory authorities of 
concerned countries having jurisdiction over transfrontier movements of 
wastes destined for recovery operations.
    (b) Concerned countries means the exporting and importing OECD 
member countries and any OECD member countries of transit.
    (c) Consignee means the person to whom possession or other form of 
legal control of the waste is assigned at the time the waste is received 
in the importing country.
    (d) Country of transit means any designated OECD country in 
Sec. 262.58(a)(1) and (a)(2) other than the exporting or importing 
country across which a transfrontier movement of wastes is planned or 
takes place.
    (e) Exporting country means any designated OECD member country in 
Sec. 262.58(a)(1) from which a transfrontier movement of wastes is 
planned or has commenced.
    (f) Importing country means any designated OECD country in 
Sec. 262.58(a)(1) to which a transfrontier movement of wastes is planned 
or takes place for the purpose of submitting the wastes to recovery 
operations therein.
    (g) Notifier means the person under the jurisdiction of the 
exporting country who has, or will have at the time the planned 
transfrontier movement commences, possession or other forms of legal 
control of the wastes and who proposes their transfrontier movement for 
the ultimate purpose of submitting them to recovery operations. When the 
United States (U.S.) is the exporting

[[Page 140]]

country, notifier is interpreted to mean a person domiciled in the U.S.
    (h) OECD area means all land or marine areas under the national 
jurisdiction of any designated OECD member country in Sec. 262.58. When 
the regulations refer to shipments to or from an OECD country, this 
means OECD area.
    (i) Recognized trader means a person who, with appropriate 
authorization of concerned countries, acts in the role of principal to 
purchase and subsequently sell wastes; this person has legal control of 
such wastes from time of purchase to time of sale; such a person may act 
to arrange and facilitate transfrontier movements of wastes destined for 
recovery operations.
    (j) Recovery facility means an entity which, under applicable 
domestic law, is operating or is authorized to operate in the importing 
country to receive wastes and to perform recovery operations on them.
    (k) Recovery operations means activities leading to resource 
recovery, recycling, reclamation, direct re-use or alternative uses as 
listed in Table 2.B of the Annex of OECD Council Decision C(88)90(Final) 
of 27 May 1988, (available from the Environmental Protection Agency, 
RCRA Information Center (RIC), 1235 Jefferson-Davis Highway, first 
floor, Arlington, VA 22203 (Docket # F-94-IEHF-FFFFF) and the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Environment 
Direcorate, 2 rue Andre Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France) which 
include:


R1  Use as a fuel (other than in direct incineration) or other means to 
generate energy

R2  Solvent reclamation/regeneration

R3  Recycling/reclamation of organic substances which are not used as 
solvents

R4  Recycling/reclamation of metals and metal compounds

R5  Recycling/reclamation of other inorganic materials

R6  Regeneration of acids or bases

R7  Recovery of components used for pollution control

R8  Recovery of components from catalysts

R9  Used oil re-refining or other reuses of previously used oil

R10  Land treatment resulting in benefit to agriculture or ecological 
improvement

R11  Uses of residual materials obtained from any of the operations 
numbered R1-R10

R12  Exchange of wastes for submission to any of the operations numbered 
R1-R11

6R13  Accumulation of material intended for any operation in Table 2.B

    (l) Transfrontier movement means any shipment of wastes destined for 
recovery operations from an area under the national jurisdiction of one 
OECD member country to an area under the national jurisdiction of 
another OECD member country.


<R05>
Sec. 262.82  General conditions.

    (a) Scope. The level of control for exports and imports of waste is 
indicated by assignment of the waste to a green, amber, or red list and 
by U.S. national procedures as defined in Sec. 262.80(a). The green, 
amber, and red lists are incorporated by reference in Sec. 262.89 (e).
    (1) Wastes on the green list are subject to existing controls 
normally applied to commercial transactions, except as provided below:
    (i) Green-list wastes that are considered hazardous under U.S. 
national procedures are subject to amber-list controls.
    (ii) Green-list waste that are sufficiently contaminated or mixed 
with amber-list wastes, such that the waste or waste mixture is 
considered hazardous under U.S. national procedures, are subject to 
amber-list controls.
    (iii) Green-list wastes that are sufficiently contaminated or mixed 
with other wastes subject to red-list controls such that the waste or 
waste mixture is considered hazardous under U.S. national procedures 
must be handled in accordance with the red-list controls.
    (2) Wastes on the amber list that are considered hazardous under 
U.S. national procedures as defined in Sec. 262.80(a) are subject to the 
amber-list controls of this Subpart.
    (i) If amber-list wastes are sufficiently contaminated or mixed with 
other wastes subject to red-list controls such that the waste or waste 
mixture is considered hazardous under U.S.

[[Page 141]]

national procedures, the wastes must be handled in accordance with the 
red-list controls.
    (ii) [Reserved].
    (3) Wastes on the red list that are considered hazardous under U.S. 
national procedures as defined in Sec. 262.80(a) are subject to the red-
list controls of this subpart.

    Note to paragraph (a)(3): Some wastes on the amber or red lists are 
not listed or otherwise identified as hazardous under RCRA (e.g., 
polychlorinated biphenyls) and therefore are not subject to the amber- 
or red-list controls of this subpart. Regardless of the status of the 
waste under RCRA, however, other Federal environmental statutes (e.g., 
the Toxic Substances Control Act) may restrict certain waste imports or 
exports. Such restrictions continue to apply without regard to this 
Subpart.

    (4) Wastes not yet assigned to a list are eligible for transfrontier 
movements, as follows:
    (i) If such wastes are considered hazardous under U.S. national 
procedures as defined in Sec. 262.80(a), these wastes are subject to the 
red-list controls; or
    (ii) If such wastes are not considered hazardous under U.S. national 
procedures as defined in Sec. 262.80(a), such wastes may move as though 
they appeared on the green list.
    (b) General conditions applicable to transfrontier movements of 
hazardous waste.
    (1) The waste must be destined for recovery operations at a facility 
that, under applicable domestic law, is operating or is authorized to 
operate in the importing country;
    (2) The transfrontier movement must be in compliance with applicable 
international transport agreements; and
    Note to paragraph (b)(2): These international agreements include, 
but are not limited to, the Chicago Convention (1944), ADR (1957), ADNR 
(1970), MARPOL Convention (1973/1978), SOLAS Convention (1974), IMDG 
Code (1985), COTIF (1985), and RID (1985).

    (3) Any transit of waste through a non-OECD member country must be 
conducted in compliance with all applicable international and national 
laws and regulations.
    (c) Provisions relating to re-export for recovery to a third 
country.
    (1) Re-export of wastes subject to the amber-list control system 
from the U.S., as the importing country, to a third country listed in 
Sec. 262.58(a)(1) may occur only after a notifier in the U.S. provides 
notification to and obtains consent of the competent authorities in the 
third country, the original exporting country, and new transit 
countries. The notification must comply with the notice and consent 
procedures in Sec. 262.83 for all concerned countries and the original 
exporting country. The competent authorities of the original exporting 
country as well as the competent authorities of all other concerned 
countries have 30 days to object to the proposed movement.
    (i) The 30-day period begins once the competent authorities of both 
the initial exporting country and new importing country issue 
Acknowledgements of Receipt of the notification.
    (ii) The transfrontier movement may commence if no objection has 
been lodged after the 30-day period has passed or immediately after 
written consent is received from all relevant OECD importing and transit 
countries.
    (2) Re-export of waste subject to the red-list control system from 
the original importing country to a third country listed in 
Sec. 262.58(a)(1) may occur only following notification of the competent 
authorities of the third country, the original exporting country, and 
new transit countries by a notifier in the original importing country in 
accordance with Sec. 262.83. The transfrontier movement may not proceed 
until receipt by the original importing country of written consent from 
the competent authorities of the third country, the original exporting 
country, and new transit countries.
    (3) In the case of re-export of amber or red-list wastes to a 
country other than those in Sec. 262.58(a)(1), notification to and 
consent of the competent authorities of the original OECD member country 
of export and any OECD member countries of transit is required as 
specified in paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section in addition to 
compliance with all international agreements and arrangements to which 
the first importing OECD member country is a

[[Page 142]]

party and all applicable regulatory requirements for exports from the 
first importing country.


<R05>
Sec. 262.83  Notification and consent.

    (a) Applicability. Consent must be obtained from the competent 
authorities of the relevant OECD importing and transit countries prior 
to exporting hazardous waste destined for recovery operations subject to 
this Subpart. Hazardous wastes subject to amber-list controls are 
subject to the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section; hazardous 
wastes subject to red-list controls are subject to the requirements of 
paragraph (c) of this section; and wastes not identified on any list are 
subject to the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section.
    (b) Amber-list wastes. The export from the U.S. of hazardous wastes 
as described in Sec. 262.80(a) that appear on the amber list is 
prohibited unless the notification and consent requirements of paragraph 
(b)(1) or paragraph (b)(2) of this section are met.
    (1) Transactions requiring specific consent:
    (i) Notification. At least 45 days prior to commencement of the 
transfrontier movement, the notifier must provide written notification 
in English of the proposed transfrontier movement to the Office of 
Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Office of Compliance, Enforcement 
Planning, Targeting and Data Division (2222A), Environmental Protection 
Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460, with the words 
``Attention: OECD Export Notification'' prominently displayed on the 
envelope. This notification must include all of the information 
identified in paragraph (e) of this section. In cases where wastes 
having similar physical and chemical characteristics, the same United 
Nations classification, and the same RCRA waste codes are to be sent 
periodically to the same recovery facility by the same notifier, the 
notifier may submit one notification of intent to export these wastes in 
multiple shipments during a period of up to one year.
    (ii) Tacit consent. If no objection has been lodged by any concerned 
country (i.e., exporting, importing, or transit countries) to a 
notification provided pursuant to paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section 
within 30 days after the date of issuance of the Acknowledgment of 
Receipt of notification by the competent authority of the importing 
country, the transfrontier movement may commence. Tacit consent expires 
one calendar year after the close of the 30 day period; renotification 
and renewal of all consents is required for exports after that date.
    (iii) Written consent. If the competent authorities of all the 
relevant OECD importing and transit countries provide written consent in 
a period less than 30 days, the transfrontier movement may commence 
immediately after all necessary consents are received. Written consent 
expires for each relevant OECD importing and transit country one 
calendar year after the date of that country's consent unless otherwise 
specified; renotification and renewal of each expired consent is 
required for exports after that date.
    (2) Shipments to facilities pre-approved by the competent 
authorities of the importing countries to accept specific wastes for 
recovery:
    (i) The notifier must provide EPA the information identified in 
paragraph (e) of this section in English, at least 10 days in advance of 
commencing shipment to a pre-approved facility. The notification should 
indicate that the recovery facility is pre-approved, and may apply to a 
single specific shipment or to multiple shipments as described in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section. This information must be sent to 
the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Office of 
Compliance, Enforcement Planning, Targeting and Data Division (2222A), 
Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460, 
with the words ``OECD Export Notification--Pre-approved Facility'' 
prominently displayed on the envelope.
    (ii) Shipments may commence after the notification required in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section has been received by the competent 
authorities of all concerned countries, unless the notifier has received 
information indicating that the competent authorities of one or more 
concerned countries objects to the shipment.

[[Page 143]]

    (c) Red-list wastes. The export from the U.S. of hazardous wastes as 
described in Sec. 262.80(a) that appear on the red list is prohibited 
unless notice is given pursuant to paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section 
and the notifier receives written consent from the importing country and 
any transit countries prior to commencement of the transfrontier 
movement.
    (d) Unlisted wastes. Wastes not assigned to the green, amber, or red 
list that are considered hazardous under U.S. national procedures as 
defined in Sec. 262.80(a) are subject to the notification and consent 
requirements established for red-list wastes in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section. Unlisted wastes that are not considered 
hazardous under U.S. national procedures as defined in Sec. 262.80(a) 
are not subject to amber or red controls when exported or imported.
    (e) Notification information. Notifications submitted under this 
section must include:
    (1) Serial number or other accepted identifier of the notification 
form;
    (2) Notifier name and EPA identification number (if applicable), 
address, and telephone and telefax numbers;
    (3) Importing recovery facility name, address, telephone and telefax 
numbers, and technologies employed;
    (4) Consignee name (if not the owner or operator of the recovery 
facility) address, and telephone and telefax numbers; whether the 
consignee will engage in waste exchange or storage prior to delivering 
the waste to the final recovery facility and identification of recovery 
operations to be employed at the final recovery facility;
    (5) Intended transporters and/or their agents;
    (6) Country of export and relevant competent authority, and point of 
departure;
    (7) Countries of transit and relevant competent authorities and 
points of entry and departure;
    (8) Country of import and relevant competent authority, and point of 
entry;
    (9) Statement of whether the notification is a single notification 
or a general notification. If general, include period of validity 
requested;
    (10) Date foreseen for commencement of transfrontier movement;
    (11) Designation of waste type(s) from the appropriate list (amber 
or red and waste list code), descriptions of each waste type, estimated 
total quantity of each, RCRA waste code, and United Nations number for 
each waste type; and
    (12) Certification/Declaration signed by the notifier that states:

    I certify that the above information is complete and correct to the 
best of my knowledge. I also certify that legally-enforceable written 
contractual obligations have been entered into, and that any applicable 
insurance or other financial guarantees are or shall be in force 
covering the transfrontier movement.

 Name:__________________________________________________________________
 Signature:_____________________________________________________________
 Date:__________________________________________________________________

    Note to paragraph (e)(12): The U.S. does not currently require 
financial assurance; however, U.S. exporters may be asked by other 
governments to provide and certify to such assurance as a condition of 
obtaining consent to a proposed movement.


<R05>
Sec. 262.84  Tracking document.

    (a) All U.S. parties subject to the contract provisions of 
Sec. 262.85 must ensure that a tracking document meeting the conditions 
of Sec. 262.84(b) accompanies each transfrontier shipment of wastes 
subject to amber-list or red-list controls from the initiation of the 
shipment until it reaches the final recovery facility, including cases 
in which the waste is stored and/or exchanged by the consignee prior to 
shipment to the final recovery facility, except as provided in 
Secs. 262.84(a)(1) and (2).
    (1) For shipments of hazardous waste within the U.S. solely by water 
(bulk shipments only) the generator must forward the tracking document 
with the manifest to the last water (bulk shipment) transporter to 
handle the waste in the U.S. if exported by water, (in accordance with 
the manifest routing procedures at Sec. 262.23(c)).
    (2) For rail shipments of hazardous waste within the U.S. which 
originate at the site of generation, the generator must forward the 
tracking document with the manifest (in accordance with the routing 
procedures for the manifest

[[Page 144]]

in Sec. 262.23(d)) to the next non-rail transporter, if any, or the last 
rail transporter to handle the waste in the U.S. if exported by rail.
    (b) The tracking document must include all information required 
under Sec. 262.83 (for notification), and the following:
    (1) Date shipment commenced.
    (2) Name (if not notifier), address, and telephone and telefax 
numbers of primary exporter.
    (3) Company name and EPA ID number of all transporters.
    (4) Identification (license, registered name or registration number) 
of means of transport, including types of packaging.
    (5) Any special precautions to be taken by transporters.
    (6) Certification/declaration signed by notifier that no objection 
to the shipment has been lodged as follows:

    I certify that the above information is complete and correct to the 
best of my knowledge. I also certify that legally-enforceable written 
contractual obligations have been entered into, that any applicable 
insurance or other financial guarantees are or shall be in force 
covering the transfrontier movement, and that:
    1. All necessary consents have been received; OR
    2. The shipment is directed at a recovery facility within the OECD 
area and no objection has been received from any of the concerned 
countries within the 30 day tacit consent period; OR
    3. The shipment is directed at a recovery facility pre-authorized 
for that type of waste within the OECD area; such an authorization has 
not been revoked, and no objection has been received from any of the 
concerned countries.

(delete sentences that are not applicable)

 Name:__________________________________________________________________
 Signature:_____________________________________________________________
 Date:__________________________________________________________________

    (7) Appropriate signatures for each custody transfer (e.g. 
transporter, consignee, and owner or operator of the recovery facility).
    (c) Notifiers also must comply with the special manifest 
requirements of 40 CFR 262.54(a), (b), (c), (e), and (i) and consignees 
must comply with the import requirements of 40 CFR part 262, subpart F.
    (d) Each U.S. person that has physical custody of the waste from the 
time the movement commences until it arrives at the recovery facility 
must sign the tracking document (e.g. transporter, consignee, and owner 
or operator of the recovery facility).
    (e) Within 3 working days of the receipt of imports subject to this 
Subpart, the owner or operator of the U.S. recovery facility must send 
signed copies of the tracking document to the notifier, to the Office of 
Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Office of Compliance, Enforcement 
Planning, Targeting and Data Division (2222A), Environmental Protection 
Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460, and to the competent 
authorities of the exporting and transit countries.


<R05>
Sec. 262.85  Contracts.

    (a) Transfrontier movements of hazardous wastes subject to amber or 
red control procedures are prohibited unless they occur under the terms 
of a valid written contract, chain of contracts, or equivalent 
arrangements (when the movement occurs between parties controlled by the 
same corporate or legal entity). Such contracts or equivalent 
arrangements must be executed by the notifier and the owner or operator 
of the recovery facility, and must specify responsibilities for each. 
Contracts or equivalent arrangements are valid for the purposes of this 
section only if persons assuming obligations under the contracts or 
equivalent arrangements have appropriate legal status to conduct the 
operations specified in the contract or equivalent arrangement.
    (b) Contracts or equivalent arrangements must specify the name and 
EPA ID number, where available, of:
    (1) The generator of each type of waste;
    (2) Each person who will have physical custody of the wastes;
    (3) Each person who will have legal control of the wastes; and
    (4) The recovery facility.
    (c) Contracts or equivalent arrangements must specify which party to 
the contract will assume responsibility for alternate management of the 
wastes if its disposition cannot be carried out as described in the 
notification of intent to export. In such cases, contracts must specify 
that:

[[Page 145]]

    (1) The person having actual possession or physical control over the 
wastes will immediately inform the notifier and the competent 
authorities of the exporting and importing countries and, if the wastes 
are located in a country of transit, the competent authorities of that 
country; and
    (2) The person specified in the contract will assume responsibility 
for the adequate management of the wastes in compliance with applicable 
laws and regulations including, if necessary, arranging their return to 
the original country of export.
    (d) Contracts must specify that the consignee will provide the 
notification required in Sec. 262.82(c) prior to re-export of controlled 
wastes to a third country.
    (e) Contracts or equivalent arrangements must include provisions for 
financial guarantees, if required by the competent authorities of any 
concerned country, in accordance with applicable national or 
international law requirements. <ls-thn-eq>
    Note to paragraph (e): Financial guarantees so required are intended 
to provide for alternate recycling, disposal or other means of sound 
management of the wastes in cases where arrangements for the shipment 
and the recovery operations cannot be carried out as foreseen. The U.S. 
does not require such financial guarantees at this time; however, some 
OECD countries do. It is the responsibility of the notifier to ascertain 
and comply with such requirements; in some cases, transporters or 
consignees may refuse to enter into the necessary contracts absent 
specific references or certifications to financial guarantees.
    (f) Contracts or equivalent arrangements must contain provisions 
requiring each contracting party to comply with all applicable 
requirements of this subpart.
    (g) Upon request by EPA, U.S. notifiers, consignees, or recovery 
facilities must submit to EPA copies of contracts, chain of contracts, 
or equivalent arrangements (when the movement occurs between parties 
controlled by the same corporate or legal entity). Information contained 
in the contracts or equivalent arrangements for which a claim of 
confidentiality is asserted accordance with 40 CFR 2.203(b) will be 
treated as confidential and will be disclosed by EPA only as provided in 
40 CFR 260.2.
    Note to paragraph (g): Although the U.S. does not require routine 
submission of contracts at this time, OECD Council Decision C(92)39/
FINAL allows members to impose such requirements. When other OECD 
countries require submission of partial or complete copies of the 
contract as a condition to granting consent to proposed movements, EPA 
will request the required information; absent submission of such 
information, some OECD countries may deny consent for the proposed 
movement.


<R05>
Sec. 262.86  Provisions relating to recognized traders.

    (a) A recognized trader who takes physical custody of a waste and 
conducts recovery operations (including storage prior to recovery) is 
acting as the owner or operator of a recovery facility and must be so 
authorized in accordance with all applicable Federal laws.
    (b) A recognized trader acting as a notifier or consignee for 
transfrontier shipments of waste must comply with all the requirements 
of this Subpart associated with being a notifier or consignee.


<R05>
Sec. 262.87  Reporting and recordkeeping.

    (a) Annual reports. For all waste movements subject to this Subpart, 
persons (e.g., notifiers, recognized traders) who meet the definition of 
primary exporter in Sec. 262.51 shall file an annual report with the 
Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Office of Compliance, 
Enforcement Planning, Targeting and Data Division (2222A), Environmental 
Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 20460, no later than 
March 1 of each year summarizing the types, quantities, frequency, and 
ultimate destination of all such hazardous waste exported during the 
previous calendar year. (If the primary exporter is required to file an 
annual report for waste exports that are not covered under this Subpart, 
he may include all export information in one report provided the 
following information on exports of waste destined for recovery within 
the designated OECD

[[Page 146]]

member countries is contained in a separate section). Such reports shall 
include the following:
    (1) The EPA identification number, name, and mailing and site 
address of the notifier filing the report;
    (2) The calendar year covered by the report;
    (3) The name and site address of each final recovery facility;
    (4) By final recovery facility, for each hazardous waste exported, a 
description of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number (from 
40 CFR part 261, subpart C or D), designation of waste type(s) from OECD 
waste list and applicable waste code from the OECD lists, DOT hazard 
class, the name and U.S. EPA identification number (where applicable) 
for each transporter used, the total amount of hazardous waste shipped 
pursuant to this Subpart, and number of shipments pursuant to each 
notification;
    (5) In even numbered years, for each hazardous waste exported, 
except for hazardous waste produced by exporters of greater than 100kg 
but less than 1000kg in a calendar month, and except for hazardous waste 
for which information was already provided pursuant to Sec. 262.41:
    (i) A description of the efforts undertaken during the year to 
reduce the volume and toxicity of waste generated; and
    (ii) A description of the changes in volume and toxicity of the 
waste actually achieved during the year in comparison to previous years 
to the extent such information is available for years prior to 1984; and
    (6) A certification signed by the person acting as primary exporter 
that states:
    I certify under penalty of law that I have personally examined and 
am familiar with the information submitted in this and all attached 
documents, and that based on my inquiry of those individuals immediately 
responsible for obtaining the information, I believe that the submitted 
information is true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are 
significant penalties for submitting false information including the 
possibility of fine and imprisonment.
    (b) Exception reports. Any person who meets the definition of 
primary exporter in Sec. 262.51 must file an exception report in lieu of 
the requirements of Sec. 262.42 with the Administrator if any of the 
following occurs:
    (1) He has not received a copy of the tracking documentation signed 
by the transporter stating point of departure of the waste from the 
United States, within forty-five (45) days from the date it was accepted 
by the initial transporter;
    (2) Within ninety (90) days from the date the waste was accepted by 
the initial transporter, the notifier has not received written 
confirmation from the recovery facility that the hazardous waste was 
received;
    (3) The waste is returned to the United States.
    (c) Recordkeeping. (1) Persons who meet the definition of primary 
exporter in Sec. 262.51 shall keep the following records:
    (i) A copy of each notification of intent to export and all written 
consents obtained from the competent authorities of concerned countries 
for a period of at least three years from the date the hazardous waste 
was accepted by the initial transporter;
    (ii) A copy of each annual report for a period of at least three 
years from the due date of the report; and
    (iii) A copy of any exception reports and a copy of each 
confirmation of delivery (i.e., tracking documentation) sent by the 
recovery facility to the notifier for at least three years from the date 
the hazardous waste was accepted by the initial transporter or received 
by the recovery facility, whichever is applicable.
    (2) The periods of retention referred to in this section are 
extended automatically during the course of any unresolved enforcement 
action regarding the regulated activity or as requested by the 
Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 262.88  Pre-approval for U.S. Recovery Facilities (Reserved).


<R05>
Sec. 262.89  OECD Waste Lists.

    (a) General. For the purposes of this Subpart, a waste is considered 
hazardous under U.S. national procedures, and hence subject to this 
Subpart, if the waste:

[[Page 147]]

    (1) Meets the Federal definition of hazardous waste in 40 CFR 261.3; 
and
    (2) Is subject to either the Federal RCRA manifesting requirements 
at 40 CFR part 262, subpart B, to the universal waste management 
standards of 40 CFR part 273, or to State requirements analogous to 40 
CFR part 273.
    (b) If a waste is hazardous under paragraph (a) of this section and 
it appears on the amber or red list, it is subject to amber- or red-list 
requirements respectively;
    (c) If a waste is hazardous under paragraph (a) of this section and 
it does not appear on either amber or red lists, it is subject to red-
list requirements.
    (d) The appropriate control procedures for hazardous wastes and 
hazardous waste mixtures are addressed in Sec. 262.82.
    (e) The OECD Green List of Wastes (revised May 1994), Amber List of 
Wastes and Red List of Wastes (both revised May 1993) as set forth in 
Appendix 3, Appendix 4 and Appendix 5, respectively, to the OECD Council 
Decision C(92)39/FINAL (Concerning the Control of Transfrontier 
Movements of Wastes Destined for Recovery Operations) are incorporated 
by reference. These incorporations by reference were approved by the 
Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 
1 CFR part 51 on July 11, 1996. These materials are incorporated as they 
exist on the date of the approval and a notice of any change in these 
materials will be published in the Federal Register. The materials are 
available for inspection at: the Office of the Federal Register, 800 
North Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, Washington, DC; the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, RCRA Information Center (RIC), 1235 
Jefferson-Davis Highway, first floor, Arlington, VA 22203 (Docket # F-
94-IEHF-FFFFF) and may be obtained from the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Environment Direcorate, 2 rue Andre 
Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France.

Appendix to Part 262--Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest and Instructions 
         (EPA Forms 8700-22 and 8700-22A and Their Instructions)

                          U.S. EPA Form 8700-22

    Read all instructions before completing this form.
    This form has been designed for use on a 12-pitch (elite) 
typerwriter; a firm point pen may also be used--press down hard.
    Federal regulations require generators and transporters of hazardous 
waste and owners or operators of hazardous waste treatment, storage, and 
disposal facilities to use this form (8700-22) and, if necessary, the 
continuation sheet (Form 8700-22A) for both inter and intrastate 
transportation.
    Federal regulations also require generators and transporters of 
hazardous waste and owners or operators of hazardous waste treatment, 
storage and disposal facilities to complete the following information:

                                * * * * *

[[Page 148]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.004

    The following statement must be included with each Uniform Hazardous 
Waste Manifest, either on the form, in the instructions to the form, or 
accompanying the form:
    Public reporting burden for this collection of information is 
estimated to average: 37 minutes for generators, 15 minutes for 
transporters, and 10 minutes for treatment, storage and disposal 
facilities. This includes time for reviewing instructions, gathering 
data, and completing and reviewing the form. Send comments regarding the 
burden estimate, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to: 
Chief, Information Policy Branch, PM-223, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, 401 M Street SW., Washington, DC 20460; and to the Office of 
Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, 
Washington, DC 20503.

[[Page 149]]

                               GENERATORS

    Item 1. Generator's U.S. EPA ID Number--Manifest Document Number

    Enter the generator's U.S. EPA twelve digit identification number 
and the unique five digit number assigned to this Manifest (e.g., 00001) 
by the generator.

                         Item 2. Page 1 of ----

    Enter the total number of pages used to complete this Manifest, 
i.e., the first page (EPA Form 8700-22) plus the number of Continuation 
Sheets (EPA Form 8700-22A), if any.

              Item 3. Generator's Name and Mailing Address

    Enter the name and mailing address of the generator. The address 
should be the location that will manage the returned Manifest forms.

                    Item 4. Generator's Phone Number

    Enter a telephone number where an authorized agent of the generator 
may be reached in the event of an emergency.

                   Item 5. Transporter 1 Company Name

    Enter the company name of the first transporter who will transport 
the waste.

                       Item 6. U.S. EPA ID Number

    Enter the U.S. EPA twelve digit identification number of the first 
transporter identified in item 5.

                   Item 7. Transporter 2 Company Name

    If applicable, enter the company name of the second transporter who 
will transport the waste. If more than two transporters are used to 
transport the waste, use a Continuation Sheet(s) (EPA Form 8700-22A) and 
list the transporters in the order they will be transporting the waste.

                       Item 8. U.S. EPA ID Number

    If applicable, enter the U.S. EPA twelve digit identification number 
of the second transporter identified in item 7.

    Note: If more than two transporters are used, enter each additional 
transporter's company name and U.S. EPA twelve digit identification 
number in items 24-27 on the Continuation Sheet (EPA Form 8700-22A). 
Each Continuation Sheet has space to record two additional transporters. 
Every transporter used between the generator and the designated facility 
must be listed.

            Item 9. Designated Facility Name and Site Address

    Enter the company name and site address of the facility designated 
to receive the waste listed on this Manifest. The address must be the 
site address, which may differ from the company mailing address.

                       Item 10. U.S. EPA ID Number

    Enter the U.S. EPA twelve digit identification number of the 
designated facility identified in item 9.

 Item 11. U.S. DOT Description [Including Proper Shipping Name, Hazard 
                      Class, and ID Number (UN/NA)]

    Enter the U.S. DOT Proper Shipping Name, Hazard Class, and ID Number 
(UN/NA) for each waste as identified in 49 CFR 171 through 177.

    Note: If additional space is needed for waste descriptions, enter 
these additional descriptions in item 28 on the Continuation Sheet (EPA 
Form 8700-22A).

                   Item 12. Containers (No. and Type)

    Enter the number of containers for each waste and the appropriate 
abbreviation from Table I (below) for the type of container.

                      Table I--Types of Containers

DM=Metal drums, barrels, kegs
DW=Wooden drums, barrels, kegs
DF=Fiberboard or plastic drums, barrels, kegs
TP=Tanks portable
TT=Cargo tanks (tank trucks)
TC=Tank cars
DT=Dump truck
CY=Cylinders
CM=Metal boxes, cartons, cases (including roll-offs)
CW=Wooden boxes, cartons, cases
CF=Fiber or plastic boxes, cartons, cases
BA=Burlap, cloth, paper or plastic bags

                         Item 13. Total Quantity

    Enter the total quantity of waste described on each line.

                        Item 14. Unit (Wt./Vol.)

    Enter the appropriate abbreviation from Table II (below) for the 
unit of measure.

                       Table II--Units of Measure

G=Gallons (liquids only)
P=Pounds
T=Tons (2000 lbs)
Y=Cubic yards
L=Liters (liquids only)
K=Kilograms
M=Metric tons (1000 kg)
N=Cubic meters

    Item 15. Special Handling Instructions and Additional Information

    Generators may use this space to indicate special transportation, 
treatment, storage,

[[Page 150]]

or disposal information or Bill of Lading information. States may not 
require additional, new, or different information in this space. For 
international shipments, generators must enter in this space the point 
of departure (City and State) for those shipments destined for 
treatment, storage, or disposal outside the jurisdiction of the United 
States.

                   Item 16. Generator's Certification

    The generator must read, sign (by hand), and date the certification 
statement. If a mode other than highway is used, the word ``highway'' 
should be lined out and the appropriate mode (rail, water, or air) 
inserted in the space below. If another mode in addition to the highway 
mode is used, enter the appropriate additional mode (e.g., and rail) in 
the space below.
    Primary exporters shipping hazardous wastes to a facility located 
outside of the United States must add to the end of the first sentence 
of the certification the following words ``and conforms to the terms of 
the EPA Acknowledgment of Consent to the shipment.''
    In signing the waste minimization certification statement, those 
generators who have not been exempted by statute or regulation from the 
duty to make a waste minimization certification under section 3002(b) of 
RCRA are also certifying that they have complied with the waste 
minimization requirements.
    Generators may preprint the words, ``On behalf of'' in the signature 
block or may hand write this statement in the signature block prior to 
signing the generator certifications.

    Note: All of the above information except the handwritten signature 
required in item 16 may be preprinted.

                                * * * * *

                              TRANSPORTERS

     Item 17. Transporter 1 Acknowledgement of Receipt of Materials

    Enter the name of the person accepting the waste on behalf of the 
first transporter. That person must acknowledge acceptance of the waste 
described on the Manifest by signing and entering the date of receipt.

     Item 18. Transporter 2 Acknowledgement of Receipt of Materials

    Enter, if applicable, the name of the person accepting the waste on 
behalf of the second transporter. That person must acknowledge 
acceptance of the waste described on the Manifest by signing and 
entering the date of receipt.

    Note: International Shipments--Transporter Responsibilities.

Exports-- Transporters must sign and enter the date the waste left the 
United States in item 15 of Form 8700-22.

Imports-- Shipments of hazardous waste regulated by RCRA and transported 
into the United States from another country must upon entry be 
accompanied by the U.S. EPA Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest. 
Transporters who transport hazardous waste into the United States from 
another country are responsible for completing the Manifest (40 CFR 
263.10(c)(1)).

   Owners and Operators of Treatment, Storage, or Disposal Facilities

                  Item 19. Discrepancy Indication Space

    The authorized representative of the designated (or alternate) 
facility's owner or operator must note in this space any significant 
discrepancy between the waste described on the Manifest and the waste 
actually received at the facility.
    Owners and operators of facilities located in unauthorized States 
(i.e., the U.S. EPA administers the hazardous waste management program) 
who cannot resolve significant discrepancies within 15 days of receiving 
the waste must submit to their Regional Administrator (see list below) a 
letter with a copy of the Manifest at issue describing the discrepancy 
and attempts to reconcile it (40 CFR 264.72 and 265.72).
    Owners and operators of facilities located in authorized States 
(i.e., those States that have received authorization from the U.S. EPA 
to administer the hazardous waste program) should contact their State 
agency for information on State Discrepancy Report requirements.

                       EPA Regional Administrators

Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region I, J.F. Kennedy Fed. Bldg., 
Boston, MA 02203
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, 
NY 10278
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region III, 6th and Walnut Sts., 
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region IV, 345 Courtland St., NE., 
Atlanta, GA 30365
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region V, 77 West Jackson Blvd., 
Chicago, IL 60604
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region VI, 1201 Elm Street, Dallas, TX 
75270
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region VII, 324 East 11th Street, 
Kansas City, MO 64106
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region VIII, 1860 Lincoln Street, 
Denver, CO 80295
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region IX, 215 Freemont Street, San 
Francisco, CA 94105
Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region X, 1200 Sixth Avenue, Seattle, 
WA 98101

[[Page 151]]

    Item 20. Facility Owner or Operator: Certification of Receipt of 
 Hazardous Materials Covered by This Manifest Except as Noted in Item 19

    Print or type the name of the person accepting the waste on behalf 
of the owner or operator of the facility. That person must acknowledge 
acceptance of the waste described on the Manifest by signing and 
entering the date of receipt.
    Items A-K are not required by Federal regulations for intra- or 
interstate transportation. However, States may require generators and 
owners or operators of treatment, storage, or disposal facilities to 
complete some or all of items A-K as part of State manifest reporting 
requirements. Generators and owners and operators of treatment, storage, 
or disposal facilities are advised to contact State officials for 
guidance on completing the shaded areas of the Manifest.

[[Page 152]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.005

        Instructions--Continuation Sheet, U.S. EPA Form 8700-22A

    Read all instructions before completing this form.
    This form has been designed for use on a 12-pitch (elite) 
typewriter; a firm point pen may also be used--press down hard.
    This form must be used as a continuation sheet to U.S. EPA Form 
8700-22 if:

<bullet> More than two transporters are to be used to transport the 
waste;
<bullet> More space is required for the U.S. DOT description and related 
information in Item 11 of U.S. EPA Form 8700-22.


[[Page 153]]


    Federal regulations require generators and transporters of hazardous 
waste and owners or operators of hazardous waste treatment, storage, or 
disposal facilities to use the uniform hazardous waste manifest (EPA 
Form 8700-22) and, if necessary, this continuation sheet (EPA Form 8700-
22A) for both inter- and intrastate transportation.

                               GENERATORS

    Item 21. Generator's U.S. EPA ID Number--Manifest Document Number

    Enter the generator's U.S. EPA twelve digit identification number 
and the unique five digit number assigned to this Manifest (e.g., 00001) 
as it appears in item 1 on the first page of the Manifest.

                           Item 22. Page ----

    Enter the page number of this Continuation Sheet.

                        Item 23. Generator's Name

    Enter the generator's name as it appears in item 3 on the first page 
of the Manifest.

                 Item 24. Transporter ---- Company Name

    If additional transporters are used to transport the waste described 
on this Manifest, enter the company name of each additional transporter 
in the order in which they will transport the waste. Enter after the 
word ``Transporter'' the order of the transporter. For example, 
Transporter 3 Company Name. Each Continuation Sheet will record the 
names of two additional transporters.

                       Item 25. U.S. EPA ID Number

    Enter the U.S. EPA twelve digit identification number of the 
transporter described in item 24.

                 Item 26. Transporter ---- Company Name

    If additional transporters are used to transport the waste described 
on this Manifest, enter the company name of each additional transporter 
in the order in which they will transport the waste. Enter after the 
word ``Transporter'' the order of the transporter. For example, 
Transporter 4 Company Name. Each Continuation Sheet will record the 
names of two additional transporters.

                       Item 27. U.S. EPA ID Number

    Enter the U.S. EPA twelve digit identification number of the 
transporter described in item 26.

Item 28. U.S. DOT Description Including Proper Shipping Name, Hazardous 
                      Class, and ID Number (UN/NA)

    Refer to item 11.

                   Item 29. Containers (No. and Type)

    Refer to item 12.

                         Item 30. Total Quantity

    Refer to item 13.

                        Item 31. Unit (Wt./Vol.)

    Refer to item 14.

                 Item 32. Special Handling Instructions

    Generators may use this space to indicate special transportation, 
treatment, storage, or disposal information or Bill of Lading 
information. States are not authorized to require additional, new, or 
different information in this space.

                                * * * * *

                              TRANSPORTERS

    Item 33. Transporter ---- Acknowledgement of Receipt of Materials

    Enter the same number of the Transporter as identified in item 24. 
Enter also the name of the person accepting the waste on behalf of the 
Transporter (Company Name) identified in item 24. That person must 
acknowledge acceptance of the waste described on the Manifest by signing 
and entering the date of receipt.

    Item 34. Transporter ---- Acknowledgement of Receipt of Materials

    Enter the same number as identified in item 26. Enter also the name 
of the person accepting the waste on behalf of the Transporter (Company 
Name) identified in item 26. That person must acknowledge acceptance of 
the waste described on the Manifest by signing and entering the date of 
receipt.

                                * * * * *

   OWNERS AND OPERATORS OF TREATMENT, STORAGE, OR DISPOSAL FACILITIES

                  Item 35. Discrepancy Indication Space

    Refer to item 19.
    Items L-R are not required by Federal regulations for intra- or 
interstate transportation. However, States may require generators and 
owners or operators of treatment, storage, or disposal facilities to 
complete some or all of items L-R as part of State

[[Page 154]]

manifest reporting requirements. Generators and owners and operators of 
treatment, storage, or disposal facilities are advised to contact State 
officials for guidance on completing the shaded areas of the manifest.
[49 FR 10501, Mar. 20, 1984, as amended at 51 FR 28685, Aug. 8, 1986; 51 
FR 35192, Oct. 1, 1986; 53 FR 45091, Nov. 8, 1988; 62 FR 1834, Jan. 14, 
1997]


<R03>
PART 263--STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO TRANSPORTERS OF HAZARDOUS WASTE--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
263.10  Scope.
263.11  EPA identification number.
263.12  Transfer facility requirements.

    Subpart B--Compliance With the Manifest System and Recordkeeping

263.20  The manifest system.
263.21  Compliance with the manifest.
263.22  Recordkeeping.

                  Subpart C--Hazardous Waste Discharges

263.30  Immediate action.
263.31  Discharge clean up.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 6906, 6912, 6922-6925, 6937, and 6938.

    Source: 45 FR 33151, May 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 263.10  Scope.

    (a) These regulations establish standards which apply to persons 
transporting hazardous waste within the United States if the 
transportation requires a manifest under 40 CFR part 262.

    Note: The regulations set forth in parts 262 and 263 establish the 
responsibilities of generators and transporters of hazardous waste in 
the handling, transportation, and management of that waste. In these 
regulations, EPA has expressly adopted certain regulations of the 
Department of Transportation (DOT) governing the transportation of 
hazardous materials. These regulations concern, among other things, 
labeling, marking, placarding, using proper containers, and reporting 
discharges. EPA has expressly adopted these regulations in order to 
satisfy its statutory obligation to promulgate regulations which are 
necessary to protect human health and the environment in the 
transportation of hazardous waste. EPA's adoption of these DOT 
regulations ensures consistency with the requirements of DOT and thus 
avoids the establishment of duplicative or conflicting requirements with 
respect to these matters. These EPA regulations which apply to both 
interstate and intrastate transportation of hazardous waste are 
enforceable by EPA.
    DOT has revised its hazardous materials transportation regulations 
in order to encompass the transportation of hazardous waste and to 
regulate intrastate, as well as interstate, transportation of hazardous 
waste. Transporters of hazardous waste are cautioned that DOT's 
regulations are fully applicable to their activities and enforceable by 
DOT. These DOT regulations are codified in title 49, Code of Federal 
Regulations, subchapter C.
    EPA and DOT worked together to develop standards for transporters of 
hazardous waste in order to avoid conflicting requirements. Except for 
transporters of bulk shipments of hazardous waste by water, a 
transporter who meets all applicable requirements of 49 CFR parts 171 
through 179 and the requirements of 40 CFR 263.11 and 263.31 will be 
deemed in compliance with this part. Regardless of DOT's action, EPA 
retains its authority to enforce these regulations.


    (b) These regulations do not apply to on-site transportation of 
hazardous waste by generators or by owners or operators of permitted 
hazardous waste management facilities.
    (c) A transporter of hazardous waste must also comply with 40 CFR 
part 262, Standards Applicable to Generators of Hazardous Waste, if he:
    (1) Transports hazardous waste into the United States from abroad; 
or
    (2) Mixes hazardous wastes of different DOT shipping descriptions by 
placing them into a single container.
    (d) A transporter of hazardous waste subject to the Federal 
manifesting requirements of 40 CFR part 262, or subject to the waste 
management standards of 40 CFR part 273, or subject to State 
requirements analogous to 40 CFR part 273, that is being imported from 
or exported to any of the countries listed in 40 CFR 262.58(a)(1) for 
purposes of recovery is subject to this Subpart and to all other 
relevant requirements of subpart H of 40 CFR part 262, including, but 
not limited to, 40 CFR 262.84 for tracking documents.
    (e) The regulations in this part do not apply to transportation 
during an explosives or munitions emergency response, conducted in 
accordance with 40 CFR 264.1(g)(8)(i)(D) or (iv) or

[[Page 155]]

265.1(c)(11)(i)(D) or (iv), and 270.1(c)(3)(i)(D) or (iii).
    (f) Section 266.203 of this chapter identifies how the requirements 
of this part apply to military munitions classified as solid waste under 
40 CFR 266.202.
[45 FR 33151, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 86968, Dec. 31, 1980; 61 
FR 16314, Apr. 12, 1996; 62 FR 6651, Feb. 12, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 263.11  EPA identification number.

    (a) A transporter must not transport hazardous wastes without having 
received an EPA identification number from the Administrator.
    (b) A transporter who has not received an EPA identification number 
may obtain one by applying to the Administrator using EPA Form 8700-12. 
Upon receiving the request, the Administrator will assign an EPA 
identification number to the transporter.


<R05>
Sec. 263.12  Transfer facility requirements.

    A transporter who stores manifested shipments of hazardous waste in 
containers meeting the requirements of Sec. 262.30 at a transfer 
facility for a period of ten days or less is not subject to regulation 
under parts 270, 264, 265, and 268 of this chapter with respect to the 
storage of those wastes.
[45 FR 86968, Dec. 31, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 51 
FR 40637, Nov. 7, 1986]


<R04>
    Subpart B--Compliance With the Manifest System and Recordkeeping


<R05>
Sec. 263.20  The manifest system.

    (a) A transporter may not accept hazardous waste from a generator 
unless it is accompanied by a manifest signed in accordance with the 
provisions of 40 CFR 262.20. In the case of exports other than those 
subject to subpart H of 40 CFR part 262, a transporter may not accept 
such waste from a primary exporter or other person if he knows the 
shipment does not conform to the EPA Acknowledgement of Consent; and 
unless, in addition to a manifest signed in accordance with the 
provisions of 40 CFR 262.20, such waste is also accompanied by an EPA 
Acknowledgement of Consent which, except for shipment by rail, is 
attached to the manifest (or shipping paper for exports by water (bulk 
shipment)). For exports of hazardous waste subject to the requirements 
of subpart H of 40 CFR part 262, a transporter may not accept hazardous 
waste without a tracking document that includes all information required 
by 40 CFR 262.84.
    (b) Before transporting the hazardous waste, the transporter must 
sign and date the manifest acknowledging acceptance of the hazardous 
waste from the generator. The transporter must return a signed copy to 
the generator before leaving the generator's property.
    (c) The transporter must ensure that the manifest accompanies the 
hazardous waste. In the case of exports, the transporter must ensure 
that a copy of the EPA Acknowledgment of Consent also accompanies the 
hazardous waste.
    (d) A transporter who delivers a hazardous waste to another 
transporter or to the designated facility must:
    (1) Obtain the date of delivery and the handwritten signature of 
that transporter or of the owner or operator of the designated facility 
on the manifest; and
    (2) Retain one copy of the manifest in accordance with Sec. 263.22; 
and
    (3) Give the remaining copies of the manifest to the accepting 
transporter or designated facility.
    (e) The requirements of paragraphs (c), (d) and (f) of this section 
do not apply to water (bulk shipment) transporters if:
    (1) The hazardous waste is delivered by water (bulk shipment) to the 
designated facility; and
    (2) A shipping paper containing all the information required on the 
manifest (excluding the EPA identification numbers, generator 
certification, and signatures) and, for exports, an EPA Acknowledgment 
of Consent accompanies the hazardous waste; and
    (3) The delivering transporter obtains the date of delivery and 
handwritten signature of the owner or operator of the designated 
facility on either the manifest or the shipping paper; and
    (4) The person delivering the hazardous waste to the initial water 
(bulk shipment) transporter obtains the date of delivery and signature 
of the water

[[Page 156]]

(bulk shipment) transporter on the manifest and forwards it to the 
designated facility; and
    (5) A copy of the shipping paper or manifest is retained by each 
water (bulk shipment) transporter in accordance with Sec. 263.22.
    (f) For shipments involving rail transportation, the requirements of 
paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) do not apply and the following requirements 
do apply:
    (1) When accepting hazardous waste from a non-rail transporter, the 
initial rail transporter must:
    (i) Sign and date the manifest acknowledging acceptance of the 
hazardous waste;
    (ii) Return a signed copy of the manifest to the non-rail 
transporter;
    (iii) Forward at least three copies of the manifest to:
    (A) The next non-rail transporter, if any; or,
    (B) The designated facility, if the shipment is delivered to that 
facility by rail; or
    (C) The last rail transporter designated to handle the waste in the 
United States;
    (iv) Retain one copy of the manifest and rail shipping paper in 
accordance with Sec. 263.22.
    (2) Rail transporters must ensure that a shipping paper containing 
all the information required on the manifest (excluding the EPA 
identification numbers, generator certification, and signatures) and, 
for exports an EPA Acknowledgment of Consent accompanies the hazardous 
waste at all times.

    Note: Intermediate rail transporters are not required to sign either 
the manifest or shipping paper.


    (3) When delivering hazardous waste to the designated facility, a 
rail transporter must:
    (i) Obtain the date of delivery and handwritten signature of the 
owner or operator of the designated facility on the manifest or the 
shipping paper (if the manifest has not been received by the facility); 
and
    (ii) Retain a copy of the manifest or signed shipping paper in 
accordance with Sec. 263.22.
    (4) When delivering hazardous waste to a non-rail transporter a rail 
transporter must:
    (i) Obtain the date of delivery and the handwritten signature of the 
next non-rail transporter on the manifest; and
    (ii) Retain a copy of the manifest in accordance with Sec. 263.22.
    (5) Before accepting hazardous waste from a rail transporter, a non-
rail transporter must sign and date the manifest and provide a copy to 
the rail transporter.
    (g) Transporters who transport hazardous waste out of the United 
States must:
    (1) Indicate on the manifest the date the hazardous waste left the 
United States; and
    (2) Sign the manifest and retain one copy in accordance with 
Sec. 263.22(c); and
    (3) Return a signed copy of the manifest to the generator; and
    (4) Give a copy of the manifest to a U.S. Customs official at the 
point of departure from the United States.
    (h) A transporter transporting hazardous waste from a generator who 
generates greater than 100 kilograms but less than 1000 kilograms of 
hazardous waste in a calendar month need not comply with the 
requirements of this section or those of Sec. 263.22 provided that:
    (1) The waste is being transported pursuant to a reclamation 
agreement as provided for in Sec. 262.20(e);
    (2) The transporter records, on a log or shipping paper, the 
following information for each shipment:
    (i) The name, address, and U.S. EPA Identification Number of the 
generator of the waste;
    (ii) The quantity of waste accepted;
    (iii) All DOT-required shipping information;
    (iv) The date the waste is accepted; and
    (3) The transporter carries this record when transporting waste to 
the reclamation facility; and
    (4) The transporter retains these records for a period of at least 
three

[[Page 157]]

years after termination or expiration of the agreement.
[45 FR 33151, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 86973, Dec. 31, 1980; 51 
FR 10176, Mar. 24, 1986; 51 FR 28685, Aug. 8, 1986; 61 FR 16315, Apr. 
12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 263.21  Compliance with the manifest.

    (a) The transporter must deliver the entire quantity of hazardous 
waste which he has accepted from a generator or a transporter to:
    (1) The designated facility listed on the manifest; or
    (2) The alternate designated facility, if the hazardous waste cannot 
be delivered to the designated facility because an emergency prevents 
delivery; or
    (3) The next designated transporter; or
    (4) The place outside the United States designated by the generator.
    (b) If the hazardous waste cannot be delivered in accordance with 
paragraph (a) of this section, the transporter must contact the 
generator for further directions and must revise the manifest according 
to the generator's instructions.


<R05>
Sec. 263.22  Recordkeeping.

    (a) A transporter of hazardous waste must keep a copy of the 
manifest signed by the generator, himself, and the next designated 
transporter or the owner or operator of the designated facility for a 
period of three years from the date the hazardous waste was accepted by 
the initial transporter.
    (b) For shipments delivered to the designated facility by water 
(bulk shipment), each water (bulk shipment) transporter must retain a 
copy of the shipping paper containing all the information required in 
Sec. 263.20(e)(2) for a period of three years from the date the 
hazardous waste was accepted by the initial transporter.
    (c) For shipments of hazardous waste by rail within the United 
States:
    (1) The initial rail transporter must keep a copy of the manifest 
and shipping paper with all the information required in 
Sec. 263.20(f)(2) for a period of three years from the date the 
hazardous waste was accepted by the initial transporter; and
    (2) The final rail transporter must keep a copy of the signed 
manifest (or the shipping paper if signed by the designated facility in 
lieu of the manifest) for a period of three years from the date the 
hazardous waste was accepted by the initial transporter.

    Note: Intermediate rail transporters are not required to keep 
records pursuant to these regulations.


    (d) A transporter who transports hazardous waste out of the United 
States must keep a copy of the manifest indicating that the hazardous 
waste left the United States for a period of three years from the date 
the hazardous waste was accepted by the initial transporter.
    (e) The periods of retention referred to in this Section are 
extended automatically during the course of any unresolved enforcement 
action regarding the regulated activity or as requested by the 
Administrator.
[45 FR 33151, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 86973, Dec. 31, 1980]


<R04>
                  Subpart C--Hazardous Waste Discharges


<R05>
Sec. 263.30  Immediate action.

    (a) In the event of a discharge of hazardous waste during 
transportation, the transporter must take appropriate immediate action 
to protect human health and the environment (e.g., notify local 
authorities, dike the discharge area).
    (b) If a discharge of hazardous waste occurs during transportation 
and an official (State or local government or a Federal Agency) acting 
within the scope of his official responsibilities determines that 
immediate removal of the waste is necessary to protect human health or 
the environment, that official may authorize the removal of the waste by 
transporters who do not have EPA identification numbers and without the 
preparation of a manifest.
    (c) An air, rail, highway, or water transporter who has discharged 
hazardous waste must:
    (1) Give notice, if required by 49 CFR 171.15, to the National 
Response Center (800-424-8802 or 202-426-2675); and
    (2) Report in writing as required by 49 CFR 171.16 to the Director, 
Office of

[[Page 158]]

Hazardous Materials Regulations, Materials Transportation Bureau, 
Department of Transportation, Washington, DC 20590.
    (d) A water (bulk shipment) transporter who has discharged hazardous 
waste must give the same notice as required by 33 CFR 153.203 for oil 
and hazardous substances.


<R05>
Sec. 263.31  Discharge clean up.

    A transporter must clean up any hazardous waste discharge that 
occurs during transportation or take such action as may be required or 
approved by Federal, State, or local officials so that the hazardous 
waste discharge no longer presents a hazard to human health or the 
environment.


<R03>
PART 264--STANDARDS FOR OWNERS AND OPERATORS OF HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT, STORAGE, AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
264.1  Purpose, scope and applicability.
264.2  [Reserved]
264.3  Relationship to interim status standards.
264.4  Imminent hazard action.

                  Subpart B--General Facility Standards

264.10  Applicability.
264.11  Identification number.
264.12  Required notices.
264.13  General waste analysis.
264.14  Security.
264.15  General inspection requirements.
264.16  Personnel training.
264.17  General requirements for ignitable, reactive, or incompatible 
          wastes.
264.18  Location standards.
264.19  Construction quality assurance program.

                 Subpart C--Preparedness and Prevention

264.30  Applicability.
264.31  Design and operation of facility.
264.32  Required equipment.
264.33  Testing and maintenance of equipment.
264.34  Access to communications or alarm system.
264.35  Required aisle space.
264.36  [Reserved]
264.37  Arrangements with local authorities.

          Subpart D--Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures

264.50  Applicability.
264.51  Purpose and implementation of contingency plan.
264.52  Content of contingency plan.
264.53  Copies of contingency plan.
264.54  Amendment of contingency plan.
264.55  Emergency coordinator.
264.56  Emergency procedures.

        Subpart E--Manifest System, Recordkeeping, and Reporting

264.70  Applicability.
264.71  Use of manifest system.
264.72  Manifest discrepancies.
264.73  Operating record.
264.74  Availability, retention, and disposition of records.
264.75  Biennial report.
264.76  Unmanifested waste report.
264.77  Additional reports.

          Subpart F--Releases From Solid Waste Management Units

264.90  Applicability.
264.91  Required programs.
264.92  Ground-water protection standard.
264.93  Hazardous constituents.
264.94  Concentration limits.
264.95  Point of compliance.
264.96  Compliance period.
264.97  General ground-water monitoring requirements.
264.98  Detection monitoring program.
264.99  Compliance monitoring program.
264.100  Corrective action program.
264.101  Corrective action for solid waste management units.

                   Subpart G--Closure and Post-Closure

264.110  Applicability.
264.111  Closure performance standard.
264.112  Closure plan; amendment of plan.
264.113  Closure; time allowed for closure.
264.114  Disposal or decontamination of equipment, structures and soils.
264.115  Certification of closure.
264.116  Survey plat.
264.117  Post-closure care and use of property.
264.118  Post-closure plan; amendment of plan.
264.119  Post-closure notices.
264.120  Certification of completion of post-closure care.

                    Subpart H--Financial Requirements

264.140  Applicability.
264.141  Definitions of terms as used in this subpart.
264.142  Cost estimate for closure.
264.143  Financial assurance for closure.

[[Page 159]]

264.144  Cost estimate for post-closure care.
264.145  Financial assurance for post-closure care.
264.146  Use of a mechanism for financial assurance of both closure and 
          post-closure care.
264.147  Liability requirements.
264.148  Incapacity of owners or operators, guarantors, or financial 
          institutions.
264.149  Use of State-required mechanisms.
264.150  State assumption of responsibility.
264.151  Wording of the instruments.

               Subpart I--Use and Management of Containers

264.170  Applicability.
264.171  Condition of containers.
264.172  Compatibility of waste with containers.
264.173  Management of containers.
264.174  Inspections.
264.175  Containment.
264.176  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
264.177  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
264.178  Closure.
264.179  Air emission standards.

                         Subpart J--Tank Systems

264.190  Applicability.
264.191  Assessment of existing tank system's integrity.
264.192  Design and installation of new tank systems or components.
264.193  Containment and detection of releases.
264.194  General operating requirements.
264.195  Inspections.
264.196  Response to leaks or spills and disposition of leaking or 
          unfit-for-use tank systems.
264.197  Closure and post-closure care.
264.198  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive wastes.
264.199  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
264.200  Air emission standards.

                     Subpart K--Surface Impoundments

264.220  Applicability.
264.221  Design and operating requirements.
264.222  Action leakage rate.
264.223  Response actions.
264.224--264.225  [Reserved]
264.226  Monitoring and inspection.
264.227  Emergency repairs; contingency plans.
264.228  Closure and post-closure care.
264.229  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
264.230  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
264.231  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, 
          FO23, FO26, and FO27.
264.232  Air emission standards.

                         Subpart L--Waste Piles

264.250  Applicability.
264.251  Design and operating requirements.
264.252  Action leakage rate.
254.253  Response actions.
264.254  Monitoring and inspection.
264.255  [Reserved]
264.256  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
264.257  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
264.258  Closure and post-closure care.
264.259  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, 
          FO23, FO26, and FO27.

                        Subpart M--Land Treatment

264.270  Applicability.
264.271  Treatment program.
264.272  Treatment demonstration.
264.273  Design and operating requirements.
264.274--264.275  [Reserved]
264.276  Food-chain crops.
264.277  [Reserved]
264.278  Unsaturated zone monitoring.
264.279  Recordkeeping.
264.280  Closure and post-closure care.
264.281  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
264.282  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
264.283  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, 
          FO23, FO26, and FO27.

                          Subpart N--Landfills

264.300  Applicability.
264.301  Design and operating requirements.
264.302  Action leakage rate.
264.303  Monitoring and inspection.
264.304  Response actions.
264.305--264.308  [Reserved]
264.309  Surveying and recordkeeping.
264.310  Closure and post-closure care.
264.311  [Reserved]
264.312  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
264.313  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
264.314  Special requirements for bulk and containerized liquids.
264.315  Special requirements for containers.
264.316  Disposal of small containers of hazardous waste in overpacked 
          drums (lab packs).
264.317  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, 
          FO23, FO26, and FO27.

[[Page 160]]

                         Subpart O--Incinerators

264.340  Applicability.
264.341  Waste analysis.
264.342  Principal organic hazardous constituents (POHCs).
264.343  Performance standards.
264.344  Hazardous waste incinerator permits.
264.345  Operating requirements.
264.346  [Reserved]
264.347  Monitoring and inspections.
264.348--264.350  [Reserved]
264.351  Closure.

                        Subparts P-R  [Reserved]

      Subpart S--Corrective Action for Solid Waste Management Units

264.552  Corrective Action Management Units (CAMU).
264.553  Temporary Units (TU).

                        Subparts T-V  [Reserved]

                          Subpart W--Drip Pads

264.570  Applicability.
264.571  Assessment of existing drip pad integrity.
264.572  Design and installation of new drip pads.
264.573  Design and operating requirements.
264.574  Inspections.
264.575  Closure.

                     Subpart X--Miscellaneous Units

264.600  Applicability.
264.601  Environmental performance standards.
264.602  Monitoring, analysis, inspection, response, reporting, and 
          corrective action.
264.603  Post-closure care.

                        Subparts Y-Z  [Reserved]

          Subpart AA--Air Emission Standards for Process Vents

264.1030  Applicability.
264.1031  Definitions.
264.1032  Standards: Process vents.
264.1033  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.
264.1034  Test methods and procedures.
264.1035  Recordkeeping requirements.
264.1036  Reporting requirements.
264.1037--264.1049  [Reserved]

         Subpart BB--Air Emission Standards for Equipment Leaks

264.1050  Applicability.
264.1051  Definitions.
264.1052  Standards: Pumps in light liquid service.
264.1053  Standards: Compressors.
264.1054  Standards: Pressure relief devices in gas/vapor service.
264.1055  Standards: Sampling connection systems.
264.1056  Standards: Open-ended valves or lines.
264.1057  Standards: Valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid 
          service.
264.1058  Standards: Pumps and valves in heavy liquid service, pressure 
          relief devices in light liquid or heavy liquid service, and 
          flanges and other connectors.
264.1059  Standards: Delay of repair.
264.1060  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.
264.1061  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in 
          light liquid service: percentage of valves allowed to leak.
264.1062  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in 
          light liquid service: skip period leak detection and repair.
264.1063  Test methods and procedures.
264.1064  Recordkeeping requirements.
264.1065  Reporting requirements.
264.1066-264.1079  [Reserved]

Subpart CC--Air Emission Standards for Tanks, Surface Impoundments, and 
                               Containers

264.1080  Applicability.
264.1081  Definitions.
264.1082  Standards: General.
264.1083  Waste determination procedures.
264.1084  Standards: Tanks.
264.1085  Standards: Surface impoundments.
264.1086  Standards: Containers.
264.1087  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.
264.1088  Inspection and monitoring requirements.
264.1089  Recordkeeping requirements.
264.1090  Reporting requirements.
264.1091  [Reserved]

                    Subpart DD--Containment Buildings

264.1100  Applicability.
264.1101  Design and operating standards.
264.1102  Closure and post-closure care.
264.1103--264.1110  [Reserved]

      Subpart EE--Hazardous Waste Munitions and Explosives Storage

264.1200  Applicability.
264.1201  Design and operating standards.
264.1202  Closure and post-closure care.

                         Appendices to Part 264

Appendix I--Recordkeeping Instructions
Appendices II--III [Reserved]
Appendix IV--Cochran's Approximation to the Behrens-Fisher Students' T-
          test

[[Page 161]]

Appendix V--Examples of Potentially Incompatible Waste
Appendix VI--Political Jurisdictions in Which Compliance With 
          Sec. 264.18(a) Must Be Demonstrated
Appendices VII--VIII [Reserved]
Appendix IX--Ground-Water Monitoring List

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 6905, 6912(a), 6924, and 6925.

    Source: 45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 264.1  Purpose, scope and applicability.

    (a) The purpose of this part is to establish minimum national 
standards which define the acceptable management of hazardous waste.
    (b) The standards in this part apply to owners and operators of all 
facilities which treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste, except as 
specifically provided otherwise in this part or part 261 of this 
chapter.
    (c) The requirements of this part apply to a person disposing of 
hazardous waste by means of ocean disposal subject to a permit issued 
under the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act only to the 
extent they are included in a RCRA permit by rule granted to such a 
person under part 270 of this chapter.

[Comment: These part 264 regulations do apply to the treatment or 
storage of hazardous waste before it is loaded onto an ocean vessel for 
incineration or disposal at sea.]

    (d) The requirements of this part apply to a person disposing of 
hazardous waste by means of underground injection subject to a permit 
issued under an Underground Injection Control (UIC) program approved or 
promulgated under the Safe Drinking Water Act only to the extent they 
are required by Sec. 144.14 of this chapter.

[Comment: These part 264 regulations do apply to the above-ground 
treatment or storage of hazardous waste before it is injected 
underground.]

    (e) The requirements of this part apply to the owner or operator of 
a POTW which treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste only to the 
extent they are included in a RCRA permit by rule granted to such a 
person under part 270 of this chapter.
    (f) The requirements of this part do not apply to a person who 
treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste in a State with a RCRA 
hazardous waste program authorized under subpart A of part 271 of this 
chapter, or in a State authorized under subpart B of part 271 of this 
chapter for the component or components of Phase II interim 
authorization which correspond to the person's treatment, storage or 
disposal processes; except that this part will apply:
    (1) As stated in paragraph (d) of this section, if the authorized 
State RCRA program does not cover disposal of hazardous waste by means 
of underground injection; and
    (2) To a person who treats, stores or disposes of hazardous waste in 
a State authorized under subpart A of part 271 of this chapter, at a 
facility which was not covered by standards under this part when the 
State obtained authorization, and for which EPA promulgates standards 
under this part after the State is authorized. This paragraph will only 
apply until the State is authorized to permit such facilities under 
subpart A of part 271 of this chapter.
    (3) To a person who treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste 
in a State which is authorized under subpart A or B of part 271 of this 
chapter if the State has not been authorized to carry out the 
requirements and prohibitions applicable to the treatment, storage, or 
disposal of hazardous waste at his facility which are imposed pursuant 
to the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984. The requirements 
and prohibitions that are applicable until a State receives 
authorization to carry them out include all Federal program requirements 
identified in Sec. 271.1(j).
    (g) The requirements of this part do not apply to:
    (1) The owner or operator of a facility permitted, licensed, or 
registered by a State to manage municipal or industrial solid waste, if 
the only hazardous waste the facility treats, stores, or disposes of is 
excluded from regulation under this part by Sec. 261.5 of this chapter;

[[Page 162]]

    (2) The owner or operator of a facility managing recyclable 
materials described in Sec. 261.6 (a)(2), (3), and (4) of this chapter 
(except to the extent they are referred to in part 279 or subparts C, D, 
F, or G of part 266 of this chapter).
    (3) A generator accumulating waste on-site in compliance with 
Sec. 262.34 of this chapter;
    (4) A farmer disposing of waste pesticides from his own use in 
compliance with Sec. 262.70 of this chapter; or
    (5) The owner or operator of a totally enclosed treatment facility, 
as defined in Sec. 260.10.
    (6) The owner or operator of an elementary neutralization unit or a 
wastewater treatment unit as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter, 
provided that if the owner or operator is diluting hazardous ignitable 
(D001) wastes (other than the D001 High TOC Subcategory defined in 
Sec. 268.40 of this chapter, Table Treatment Standards for Hazardous 
Wastes), or reactive (D003) waste, to remove the characteristic before 
land disposal, the owner/operator must comply with the requirements set 
out in Sec. 264.17(b).
    (7) [Reserved]
    (8)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (g)(8)(ii) of this section, a 
person engaged in treatment or containment activities during immediate 
response to any of the following situations:
    (A) A discharge of a hazardous waste;
    (B) An imminent and substantial threat of a discharge of hazardous 
waste;
    (C) A discharge of a material which, when discharged, becomes a 
hazardous waste.
    (D) An immediate threat to human health, public safety, property, or 
the environment, from the known or suspected presence of military 
munitions, other explosive material, or an explosive device, as 
determined by an explosive or munitions emergency response specialist as 
defined in 40 CFR 260.10.
    (ii) An owner or operator of a facility otherwise regulated by this 
part must comply with all applicable requirements of subparts C and D.
    (iii) Any person who is covered by paragraph (g)(8)(i) of this 
section and who continues or initiates hazardous waste treatment or 
containment activities after the immediate response is over is subject 
to all applicable requirements of this part and parts 122 through 124 of 
this chapter for those activities.
    (iv) In the case of an explosives or munitions emergency response, 
if a Federal, State, Tribal or local official acting within the scope of 
his or her official responsibilities, or an explosives or munitions 
emergency response specialist, determines that immediate removal of the 
material or waste is necessary to protect human health or the 
environment, that official or specialist may authorize the removal of 
the material or waste by transporters who do not have EPA identification 
numbers and without the preparation of a manifest. In the case of 
emergencies involving military munitions, the responding military 
emergency response specialist's organizational unit must retain records 
for three years identifying the dates of the response, the responsible 
persons responding, the type and description of material addressed, and 
its disposition.
    (9) A transporter storing manifested shipments of hazardous waste in 
containers meeting the requirements of 40 CFR 262.30 at a transfer 
facility for a period of ten days or less.
    (10) The addition of absorbent material to waste in a container (as 
defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter) or the addition of waste to 
absorbent material in a container, provided that these actions occur at 
the time waste is first placed in the container; and Secs. 264.17(b), 
264.171, and 264.172 are complied with.
    (11) Universal waste handlers and universal waste transporters (as 
defined in 40 CFR 260.10) handling the wastes listed below. These 
handlers are subject to regulation under 40 CFR part 273, when handling 
the below listed universal wastes.
    (i) Batteries as described in 40 CFR 273.2;
    (ii) Pesticides as described in 40 CFR 273.3; and
    (iii) Thermostats as described in 40 CFR 273.4.
    (h) The requirements of this part apply to owners or operators of 
all facilities which treat, store, or dispose of hazardous wastes 
referred to in part 268.

[[Page 163]]

    (i) Section 266.205 of this chapter identifies when the requirements 
of this part apply to the storage of military munitions classified as 
solid waste under Sec. 266.202 of this chapter. The treatment and 
disposal of hazardous waste military munitions are subject to the 
applicable permitting, procedural, and technical standards in 40 CFR 
parts 260 through 270.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 76075, Nov. 17, 1980; 45 
FR 86968, Dec. 31, 1980; 46 FR 27480, May 20, 1981; 47 FR 8306, Feb. 25, 
1982; 47 FR 32384, July 26, 1982; 48 FR 2511, Jan. 19, 1983; 48 FR 
14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 FR 665, Jan. 4, 1985; 50 FR 28746, July 15, 
1985; 52 FR 21016, June 4, 1987; 53 FR 27165, July 19, 1988; 58 FR 
26424, May 3, 1993; 58 FR 29884, May 24, 1993; 59 FR 48042, Sept. 19, 
1994; 60 FR 25542, May 11, 1995; 62 FR 6651, Feb. 12, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.2  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.3  Relationship to interim status standards.

    A facility owner or operator who has fully complied with the 
requirements for interim status--as defined in section 3005(e) of RCRA 
and regulations under Sec. 270.70 of this chapter--must comply with the 
regulations specified in part 265 of this chapter in lieu of the 
regulations in this part, until final administrative disposition of his 
permit application is made, except as provided under 40 CFR part 264 
subpart S.

    [Comment: As stated in section 3005(a) of RCRA, after the effective 
date of regulations under that section, i.e., parts 270 and 124 of this 
chapter, the treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste is 
prohibited except in accordance with a permit. Section 3005(e) of RCRA 
provides for the continued operation of an existing facility which meets 
certain conditions until final administrative disposition of the owner's 
or operator's permit application is made.]

[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 58 
FR 8683, Feb. 16, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 264.4  Imminent hazard action.

    Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, 
enforcement actions may be brought purusant to section 7003 of RCRA.


<R04>
                  Subpart B--General Facility Standards


<R05>
Sec. 264.10  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
all hazardous waste facilities, except as provided in Sec. 264.1 and in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Section 264.18(b) applies only to facilities subject to 
regulation under subparts I through O and subpart X of this part.
[46 FR 2848, Jan. 12, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 46963, Dec. 10, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 264.11  Identification number.

    Every facility owner or operator must apply to EPA for an EPA 
identification number in accordance with the EPA notification procedures 
(45 FR 12746).
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.12  Required notices.

    (a)(1) The owner or operator of a facility that has arranged to 
receive hazardous waste from a foreign source must notify the Regional 
Administrator in writing at least four weeks in advance of the date the 
waste is expected to arrive at the facility. Notice of subsequent 
shipments of the same waste from the same foreign source is not 
required.
    (2) The owner or operator of a recovery facility that has arranged 
to receive hazardous waste subject to 40 CFR part 262, subpart H must 
provide a copy of the tracking document bearing all required signatures 
to the notifier, to the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, 
Office of Compliance, Enforcement Planning, Targeting and Data Division 
(2222A), Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 
20460; and to the competent authorities of all other concerned countries 
within three working days of receipt of the shipment. The original of 
the signed tracking document must be maintained at the facility for at 
least three years.
    (b) The owner or operator of a facility that receives hazardous 
waste from an off-site source (except where the

[[Page 164]]

owner or operator is also the generator) must inform the generator in 
writing that he has the appropriate permit(s) for, and will accept, the 
waste the generator is shipping. The owner or operator must keep a copy 
of this written notice as part of the operating record.
    (c) Before transferring ownership or operation of a facility during 
its operating life, or of a disposal facility during the post-closure 
care period, the owner or operator must notify the new owner or operator 
in writing of the requirements of this part and part 270 of this 
chapter.

[Comment: An owner's or operator's failure to notify the new owner or 
operator of the requirements of this part in no way relieves the new 
owner or operator of his obligation to comply with all applicable 
requirements.]

[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 61 FR 16315, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.13  General waste analysis.

    (a)(1) Before an owner or operator treats, stores, or disposes of 
any hazardous wastes, or nonhazardous wastes if applicable under 
Sec. 264.113(d), he must obtain a detailed chemical and physical 
analysis of a representative sample of the wastes. At a minimum, the 
analysis must contain all the information which must be known to treat, 
store, or dispose of the waste in accordance with this part and part 268 
of this chapter.
    (2) The analysis may include data developed under part 261 of this 
chapter, and existing published or documented data on the hazardous 
waste or on hazardous waste generated from similar processes.

    [1: For example, the facility's records of analyses performed on the 
waste before the effective date of these regulations, or studies 
conducted on hazardous waste generated from processes similar to that 
which generated the waste to be managed at the facility, may be included 
in the data base required to comply with paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section. The owner or operator of an off-site facility may arrange for 
the generator of the hazardous waste to supply part of the information 
required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section, except as otherwise 
specified in 40 CFR 268.7 (b) and (c). If the generator does not supply 
the information, and the owner or operator chooses to accept a hazardous 
waste, the owner or operator is responsible for obtaining the 
information required to comply with this section.]

    (3) The analysis must be repeated as necessary to ensure that it is 
accurate and up to date. At a minimum, the analysis must be repeated:
    (i) When the owner or operator is notified, or has reason to 
believe, that the process or operation generating the hazardous wastes, 
or non-hazardous wastes if applicable under Sec. 264.113(d), has 
changed; and
    (ii) For off-site facilities, when the results of the inspection 
required in paragraph (a)(4) of this section indicate that the hazardous 
waste received at the facility does not match the waste designated on 
the accompanying manifest or shipping paper.
    (4) The owner or operator of an off-site facility must inspect and, 
if necessary, analyze each hazardous waste movement received at the 
facility to determine whether it matches the identity of the waste 
specified on the accompanying manifest or shipping paper.
    (b) The owner or operator must develop and follow a written waste 
analysis plan which describes the procedures which he will carry out to 
comply with paragraph (a) of this section. He must keep this plan at the 
facility. At a minimum, the plan must specify:
    (1) The parameters for which each hazardous waste, or non-hazardous 
waste if applicable under Sec. 264.113(d), will be analyzed and the 
rationale for the selection of these parameters (i.e., how analysis for 
these parameters will provide sufficient information on the waste's 
properties to comply with paragraph (a) of this section);
    (2) The test methods which will be used to test for these 
parameters;
    (3) The sampling method which will be used to obtain a 
representative sample of the waste to be analyzed. A representative 
sample may be obtained using either:
    (i) One of the sampling methods described in appendix I of part 261 
of this chapter; or
    (ii) An equivalent sampling method.

[Comment: See Sec. 260.21 of this chapter for related discussion.]


[[Page 165]]


    (4) The frequency with which the initial analysis of the waste will 
be reviewed or repeated to ensure that the analysis is accurate and up 
to date; and
    (5) For off-site facilities, the waste analyses that hazardous waste 
generators have agreed to supply.
    (6) Where applicable, the methods that will be used to meet the 
additional waste analysis requirements for specific waste management 
methods as specified in Secs. 264.17, 264.314, 264.341, 264.1034(d), 
264.1063(d), 264.1083, and 268.7 of this chapter.
    (7) For surface impoundments exempted from land disposal 
restrictions under Sec. 268.4(a), the procedures and schedules for:
    (i) The sampling of impoundment contents;
    (ii) The analysis of test data; and,
    (iii) The annual removal of residues which are not delisted under 
Sec. 260.22 of this chapter or which exhibit a characteristic of 
hazardous waste and either:
    (A) Do not meet applicable treatment standards of part 268, subpart 
D; or
    (B) Where no treatment standards have been established;
    (1) Such residues are prohibited from land disposal under 
Sec. 268.32 or RCRA section 3004(d); or
    (2) Such residues are prohibited from land disposal under 
Sec. 268.33(f).
    (8) For owners and operators seeking an exemption to the air 
emission standards of subpart CC in accordance with Sec. 264.1082--
    (i) If direct measurement is used for the waste determination, the 
procedures and schedules for waste sampling and analysis, and the 
results of the analysis of test data to verify the exemption.
    (ii) If knowledge of the waste is used for the waste determination, 
any information prepared by the facility owner or operator or by the 
generator of the hazardous waste, if the waste is received from off-
site, that is used as the basis for knowledge of the waste.
    (c) For off-site facilities, the waste analysis plan required in 
paragraph (b) of this section must also specify the procedures which 
will be used to in-spect and, if necessary, analyze each movement of 
hazardous waste received at the facility to ensure that it matches the 
identity of the waste designated on the accompanying manifest or 
shipping paper. At a minimum, the plan must describe:
    (1) The procedures which will be used to determine the identity of 
each movement of waste managed at the facility; and
    (2) The sampling method which will be used to obtain a 
representative sample of the waste to be identified, if the 
identification method includes sampling.
    (3) The procedures that the owner or operator of an off-site 
landfill receiving containerized hazardous waste will use to determine 
whether a hazardous waste generator or treater has added a biodegradable 
sorbent to the waste in the container.

[Comment: Part 270 of this chapter requires that the waste analysis plan 
be submitted with part B of the permit application.]
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 2848, Jan. 12, 1981; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 51 FR 40637, Nov. 7, 1986; 53 FR 31211, Aug. 17, 
1988; 54 FR 33394, Aug. 14, 1989; 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990; 55 FR 
25494, June 21, 1990; 57 FR 8088, Mar. 6, 1992; 57 FR 54460, Nov. 18, 
1992; 59 FR 62926, Dec. 6, 1994; 61 FR 4911, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.14  Security.

    (a) The owner or operator must prevent the unknowing entry, and 
minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons or 
livestock onto the active portion of his facility, unless he can 
demonstrate to the Regional Administrator that:
    (1) Physical contact with the waste, structures, or equipment within 
the active portion of the facility will not injure unknowing or 
unauthorized persons or livestock which may enter the active portion of 
a facility; and
    (2) Disturbance of the waste or equipment, by the unknowing or 
unauthorized entry of persons or livestock onto the active portion of a 
facility, will not cause a violation of the requirements of this part.

[Comment: Part 270 of this chapter requires that an owner or operator 
who wishes to make the demonstration referred to above must do so with 
part B of the permit application.]

    (b) Unless the owner or operator has made a successful demonstration 
under

[[Page 166]]

paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of this section, a facility must have:
    (1) A 24-hour surveillance system (e.g., television monitoring or 
surveillance by guards or facility personnel) which continuously 
monitors and controls entry onto the active portion of the facility; or
    (2)(i) An artificial or natural barrier (e.g., a fence in good 
repair or a fence combined with a cliff), which completely surrounds the 
active portion of the facility; and
    (ii) A means to control entry, at all times, through the gates or 
other entrances to the active portion of the facility (e.g., an 
attendant, television monitors, locked entrance, or controlled roadway 
access to the facility).

[Comment: The requirements of paragraph (b) of this section are 
satisfied if the facility or plant within which the active portion is 
located itself has a surveillance system, or a barrier and a means to 
control entry, which complies with the requirements of paragraph (b) (1) 
or (2) of this section.]

    (c) Unless the owner or operator has made a successful demonstration 
under paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of this section, a sign with the 
legend, ``Danger--Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out'', must be posted at 
each entrance to the active portion of a facility, and at other 
locations, in sufficient numbers to be seen from any approach to this 
active portion. The legend must be written in English and in any other 
language predominant in the area surrounding the facility (e.g., 
facilities in counties bordering the Canadian province of Quebec must 
post signs in French; facilities in counties bordering Mexico must post 
signs in Spanish), and must be legible from a distance of at least 25 
feet. Existing signs with a legend other than ``Danger--Unauthorized 
Personnel Keep Out'' may be used if the legend on the sign indicates 
that only authorized personnel are allowed to enter the active portion, 
and that entry onto the active portion can be dangerous.

[Comment: See Sec. 264.117(b) for discussion of security requirements at 
disposal facilities during the post-closure care period.]
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 2848, Jan. 12, 1981; 48 
FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.15  General inspection requirements.

    (a) The owner or operator must inspect his facility for malfunctions 
and deterioration, operator errors, and discharges which may be 
causing--or may lead to--(1) release of hazardous waste constituents to 
the environment or (2) a threat to human health. The owner or operator 
must conduct these inspections often enough to identify problems in time 
to correct them before they harm human health or the environment.
    (b)(1) The owner or operator must develop and follow a written 
schedule for inspecting monitoring equipment, safety and emergency 
equipment, security devices, and operating and structural equipment 
(such as dikes and sump pumps) that are important to preventing, 
detecting, or responding to environmental or human health hazards.
    (2) He must keep this schedule at the facility.
    (3) The schedule must identify the types of problems (e.g., 
malfunctions or deterioration) which are to be looked for during the 
inspection (e.g., inoperative sump pump, leaking fitting, eroding dike, 
etc.).
    (4) The frequency of inspection may vary for the items on the 
schedule. However, the frequency should be based on the rate of 
deterioration of the equipment and the probability of an environmental 
or human health incident if the deterioration, malfunction, or any 
operator error goes undetected between inspections. Areas subject to 
spills, such as loading and unloading areas, must be inspected daily 
when in use. At a minimum, the inspection schedule must include the 
items and frequencies called for in Secs. 264.174, 264.193, 264.195, 
264.226, 264.254, 264.278, 264.303, 264.347, 264.602, 264.1033, 
264.1052, 264.1053, 264.1058, and 264.1083 through 264.1089 of this 
part, where applicable.

[Comment: Part 270 of this chapter requires the inspection schedule to 
be submitted with part B of the permit application. EPA will evaluate 
the schedule along with the rest of the application to ensure that it 
adequately protects human health and the environment. As part of this 
review, EPA may modify or amend the schedule as may be necessary.]

    (c) The owner or operator must remedy any deterioration or 
malfunction

[[Page 167]]

of equipment or structures which the inspection reveals on a schedule 
which ensures that the problem does not lead to an environmental or 
human health hazard. Where a hazard is imminent or has already occurred, 
remedial action must be taken immediately.
    (d) The owner or operator must record inspections in an inspection 
log or summary. He must keep these records for at least three years from 
the date of inspection. At a minimum, these records must include the 
date and time of the inspection, the name of the inspector, a notation 
of the observations made, and the date and nature of any repairs or 
other remedial actions.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 57 FR 3486, Jan. 29, 1992; 59 FR 62926, Dec. 6, 
1994; 62 FR 64656, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.16  Personnel training.

    (a)(1) Facility personnel must successfully complete a program of 
classroom instruction or on-the-job training that teaches them to 
perform their duties in a way that ensures the facility's compliance 
with the requirements of this part. The owner or operator must ensure 
that this program includes all the elements described in the document 
required under paragraph (d)(3) of this section.

[Comment: Part 270 of this chapter requires that owners and operators 
submit with part B of the RCRA permit application, an outline of the 
training program used (or to be used) at the facility and a brief 
description of how the training program is designed to meet actual job 
tasks.]

    (2) This program must be directed by a person trained in hazardous 
waste management procedures, and must include instruction which teaches 
facility personnel hazardous waste management procedures (including 
contingency plan implementation) relevant to the positions in which they 
are employed.
    (3) At a minimum, the training program must be designed to ensure 
that facility personnel are able to respond effectively to emergencies 
by familiarizing them with emergency procedures, emergency equipment, 
and emergency systems, including, where applicable:
    (i) Procedures for using, inspecting, repairing, and replacing 
facility emergency and monitoring equipment;
    (ii) Key parameters for automatic waste feed cut-off systems;
    (iii) Communications or alarm systems;
    (iv) Response to fires or explosions;
    (v) Response to ground-water contamination incidents; and
    (vi) Shutdown of operations.
    (b) Facility personnel must successfully complete the program 
required in paragraph (a) of this section within six months after the 
effective date of these regulations or six months after the date of 
their employment or assignment to a facility, or to a new position at a 
facility, whichever is later. Employees hired after the effective date 
of these regulations must not work in unsupervised positions until they 
have completed the training requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (c) Facility personnel must take part in an annual review of the 
initial training required in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (d) The owner or operator must maintain the following documents and 
records at the facility:
    (1) The job title for each position at the facility related to 
hazardous waste management, and the name of the employee filling each 
job;
    (2) A written job description for each position listed under 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section. This description may be consistent in 
its degree of specificity with descriptions for other similar positions 
in the same company location or bargaining unit, but must include the 
requisite skill, education, or other qualifications, and duties of 
employees assigned to each position;
    (3) A written description of the type and amount of both 
introductory and continuing training that will be given to each person 
filling a position listed under paragraph (d)(1) of this section;
    (4) Records that document that the training or job experience 
required under paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section has been 
given to, and completed by, facility personnel.
    (e) Training records on current personnel must be kept until closure 
of the facility; training records on former employees must be kept for 
at least

[[Page 168]]

three years from the date the employee last worked at the facility. 
Personnel training records may accompany personnel transferred within 
the same company.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 2848, Jan. 12, 1981; 48 
FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.17  General requirements for ignitable, reactive, or incompatible wastes.

    (a) The owner or operator must take precautions to prevent 
accidental ignition or reaction of ignitable or reactive waste. This 
waste must be separated and protected from sources of ignition or 
reaction including but not limited to: open flames, smoking, cutting and 
welding, hot surfaces, frictional heat, sparks (static, electrical, or 
mechanical), spontaneous ignition (e.g., from heat-producing chemical 
reactions), and radiant heat. While ignitable or reactive waste is being 
handled, the owner or operator must confine smoking and open flame to 
specially designated locations. ``No Smoking'' signs must be 
conspicuously placed wherever there is a hazard from ignitable or 
reactive waste.
    (b) Where specifically required by other sections of this part, the 
owner or operator of a facility that treats, stores or disposes 
ignitable or reactive waste, or mixes incompatible waste or incompatible 
wastes and other materials, must take precautions to prevent reactons 
which:
    (1) Generate extreme heat or pressure, fire or explosions, or 
violent reactions;
    (2) Produce uncontrolled toxic mists, fumes, dusts, or gases in 
sufficient quantities to threaten human health or the environment;
    (3) Produce uncontrolled flammable fumes or gases in sufficient 
quantities to pose a risk of fire or explosions;
    (4) Damage the structural integrity of the device or facility;
    (5) Through other like means threaten human health or the 
environment.
    (c) When required to comply with paragraph (a) or (b) of this 
section, the owner or operator must document that compliance. This 
documentation may be based on references to published scientific or 
engineering literature, data from trial tests (e.g., bench scale or 
pilot scale tests), waste analyses (as specified in Sec. 264.13), or the 
results of the treatment of similar wastes by similar treatment 
processes and under similar operating conditions.
[46 FR 2848, Jan. 12, 1981, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.18  Location standards.

    (a) Seismic considerations. (1) Portions of new facilities where 
treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste will be conducted 
must not be located within 61 meters (200 feet) of a fault which has had 
displacement in Holocene time.
    (2) As used in paragraph (a)(1) of this section:
    (i) ``Fault'' means a fracture along which rocks on one side have 
been displaced with respect to those on the other side.
    (ii) ``Displacement'' means the relative movement of any two sides 
of a fault measured in any direction.
    (iii) ``Holocene'' means the most recent epoch of the Quarternary 
period, extending from the end of the Pleistocene to the present.

[Comment: Procedures for demonstrating compliance with this standard in 
part B of the permit application are specified in Sec. 270.14(b)(11). 
Facilities which are located in political jurisdictions other than those 
listed in appendix VI of this part, are assumed to be in compliance with 
this requirement.]

    (b) Floodplains. (1) A facility located in a 100-year floodplain 
must be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to prevent 
washout or any hazardous waste by a 100-year flood, unless the owner or 
operator can demonstrate to the Regional Administrator's satisfaction 
that:
    (i) Procedures are in effect which will cause the waste to be 
removed safely, before flood waters can reach the facility, to a 
location where the wastes will not be vulnerable to flood waters; or
    (ii) For existing surface impoundments, waste piles, land treatment 
units, landfills, and miscellaneous units, no adverse effects on human 
health or the environment will result if washout occurs, considering:
    (A) The volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the 
waste in the facility;

[[Page 169]]

    (B) The concentration of hazardous constituents that would 
potentially affect surface waters as a result of washout;
    (C) The impact of such concentrations on the current or potential 
uses of and water quality standards established for the affected surface 
waters; and
    (D) The impact of hazardous constituents on the sediments of 
affected surface waters or the soils of the 100- year floodplain that 
could result from washout.

[Comment: The location where wastes are moved must be a facility which 
is either permitted by EPA under part 270 of this chapter, authorized to 
manage hazardous waste by a State with a hazardous waste management 
program authorized under part 271 of this chapter, or in interim status 
under parts 270 and 265 of this chapter.]

    (2) As used in paragraph (b)(1) of this section:
    (i) ``100-year floodplain'' means any land area which is subject to 
a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year from any 
source.
    (ii) ``Washout'' means the movement of hazardous waste from the 
active portion of the facility as a result of flooding.
    (iii) ``100-year flood'' means a flood that has a one percent chance 
of being equalled or exeeded in any given year.

[Comment: (1) Requirements pertaining to other Federal laws which affect 
the location and permitting of facilities are found in Sec. 270.3 of 
this chapter. For details relative to these laws, see EPA's manual for 
SEA (special environmental area) requirements for hazardous waste 
facility permits. Though EPA is responsible for complying with these 
requirements, applicants are advised to consider them in planning the 
location of a facility to help prevent subsequent project delays.]

    (c) Salt dome formations, salt bed formations, underground mines and 
caves. The placement of any noncontainerized or bulk liquid hazardous 
waste in any salt dome formation, salt bed formation, underground mine 
or cave is prohibited, except for the Department of Energy Waste 
Isolation Pilot Project in New Mexico.
[46 FR 2848, Jan. 12, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982; 48 
FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983; 48 FR 30115, June 30, 1983; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 
1985; 50 FR 28746, July 15, 1985; 52 FR 46963, Dec. 10, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 264.19  Construction quality assurance program.

    (a) CQA program. (1) A construction quality assurance (CQA) program 
is required for all surface impoundment, waste pile, and landfill units 
that are required to comply with Secs. 264.221 (c) and (d), 264.251 (c) 
and (d), and 264.301 (c) and (d). The program must ensure that the 
constructed unit meets or exceeds all design criteria and specifications 
in the permit. The program must be developed and implemented under the 
direction of a CQA officer who is a registered professional engineer.
    (2) The CQA program must address the following physical components, 
where applicable:
    (i) Foundations;
    (ii) Dikes;
    (iii) Low-permeability soil liners;
    (iv) Geomembranes (flexible membrane liners);
    (v) Leachate collection and removal systems and leak detection 
systems; and
    (vi) Final cover systems.
    (b) Written CQA plan. The owner or operator of units subject to the 
CQA program under paragraph (a) of this section must develop and 
implement a written CQA plan. The plan must identify steps that will be 
used to monitor and document the quality of materials and the condition 
and manner of their installation. The CQA plan must include:
    (1) Identification of applicable units, and a description of how 
they will be constructed.
    (2) Identification of key personnel in the development and 
implementation of the CQA plan, and CQA officer qualifications.
    (3) A description of inspection and sampling activities for all unit 
components identified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, including 
observations

[[Page 170]]

and tests that will be used before, during, and after construction to 
ensure that the construction materials and the installed unit components 
meet the design specifications. The description must cover: Sampling 
size and locations; frequency of testing; data evaluation procedures; 
acceptance and rejection criteria for construction materials; plans for 
implementing corrective measures; and data or other information to be 
recorded and retained in the operating record under Sec. 264.73.
    (c) Contents of program. (1) The CQA program must include 
observations, inspections, tests, and measurements sufficient to ensure:
    (i) Structural stability and integrity of all components of the unit 
identified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section;
    (ii) Proper construction of all components of the liners, leachate 
collection and removal system, leak detection system, and final cover 
system, according to permit specifications and good engineering 
practices, and proper installation of all components (e.g., pipes) 
according to design specifications;
    (iii) Conformity of all materials used with design and other 
material specifications under Secs. 264.221, 264.251, and 264.301.
    (2) The CQA program shall include test fills for compacted soil 
liners, using the same compaction methods as in the full scale unit, to 
ensure that the liners are constructed to meet the hydraulic 
conductivity requirements of Secs. 264.221(c)(1)(i)(B), 
264.251(c)(1)(i)(B), and 264.301(c)(1)(i)(B) in the field. Compliance 
with the hydraulic conductivity requirements must be verified by using 
in-situ testing on the constructed test fill. The Regional Administrator 
may accept an alternative demonstration, in lieu of a test fill, where 
data are sufficient to show that a constructed soil liner will meet the 
hydraulic conductivity requirements of Secs. 264.221(c)(1)(i)(B), 
264.251(c)(1)(i)(B), and 264.301(c)(1)(i)(B) in the field.
    (d) Certification. Waste shall not be received in a unit subject to 
Sec. 264.19 until the owner or operator has submitted to the Regional 
Administrator by certified mail or hand delivery a certification signed 
by the CQA officer that the approved CQA plan has been successfully 
carried out and that the unit meets the requirements of Secs. 264.221 
(c) or (d), 264.251 (c) or (d), or 264.301 (c) or (d); and the procedure 
in Sec. 270.30(l)(2)(ii) of this chapter has been completed. 
Documentation supporting the CQA officer's certification must be 
furnished to the Regional Administrator upon request.
[57 FR 3486, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R04>
                 Subpart C--Preparedness and Prevention


<R05>
Sec. 264.30  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of all 
hazardous waste facilities, except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 264.31  Design and operation of facility.

    Facilities must be designed, constructed, maintained, and operated 
to minimize the possibility of a fire, explosion, or any unplanned 
sudden or non-sudden release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste 
constituents to air, soil, or surface water which could threaten human 
health or the environment.


<R05>
Sec. 264.32  Required equipment.

    All facilities must be equipped with the following, unless it can be 
demonstrated to the Regional Administrator that none of the hazards 
posed by waste handled at the facility could require a particular kind 
of equipment specified below:
    (a) An internal communications or alarm system capable of providing 
immediate emergency instruction (voice or signal) to facility personnel;
    (b) A device, such as a telephone (immediately available at the 
scene of operations) or a hand-held two-way radio, capable of summoning 
emergency assistance from local police departments, fire departments, or 
State or local emergency response teams;
    (c) Portable fire extinguishers, fire control equipment (including 
special extinguishing equipment, such as that using foam, inert gas, or 
dry chemicals), spill control equipment, and decontamination equipment; 
and

[[Page 171]]

    (d) Water at adequate volume and pressure to supply water hose 
streams, or foam producing equipment, or automatic sprinklers, or water 
spray systems.

[Comment: Part 270 of this chapter requires that an owner or operator 
who wishes to make the demonstration referred to above must do so with 
part B of the permit application.]
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 264.33  Testing and maintenance of equipment.

    All facility communications or alarm systems, fire protection 
equipment, spill control equipment, and decontamination equipment, where 
required, must be tested and maintained as necessary to assure its 
proper operation in time of emergency.


<R05>
Sec. 264.34  Access to communications or alarm system.

    (a) Whenever hazardous waste is being poured, mixed, spread, or 
otherwise handled, all personnel involved in the operation must have 
immediate access to an internal alarm or emergency communication device, 
either directly or through visual or voice contact with another 
employee, unless the Regional Administrator has ruled that such a device 
is not required under Sec. 264.32.
    (b) If there is ever just one employee on the premises while the 
facility is operating, he must have immediate access to a device, such 
as a telephone (immediately available at the scene of operation) or a 
hand-held two-way radio, capable of summoning external emergency 
assistance, unless the Regional Administrator has ruled that such a 
device is not required under Sec. 264.32.


<R05>
Sec. 264.35  Required aisle space.

    The owner or operator must maintain aisle space to allow the 
unobstructed movement of personnel, fire protection equipment, spill 
control equipment, and decontamination equipment to any area of facility 
operation in an emergency, unless it can be demonstrated to the Regional 
Administrator that aisle space is not needed for any of these purposes.

[Comment: Part 270 of this chapter requires that an owner or operator 
who wishes to make the demonstration referred to above must do so with 
part B of the permit application.]
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 264.36  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.37  Arrangements with local authorities.

    (a) The owner or operator must attempt to make the following 
arrangements, as appropriate for the type of waste handled at his 
facility and the potential need for the services of these organizations:
    (1) Arrangements to familiarize police, fire departments, and 
emergency response teams with the layout of the facility, properties of 
hazardous waste handled at the facility and associated hazards, places 
where facility personnel would normally be working, entrances to and 
roads inside the facility, and possible evacuation routes;
    (2) Where more than one police and fire department might respond to 
an emergency, agreements designating primary emergency authority to a 
specific police and a specific fire department, and agreements with any 
others to provide support to the primary emergency authority;
    (3) Agreements with State emergency response teams, emergency 
response contractors, and equipment suppliers; and
    (4) Arrangements to familiarize local hospitals with the properties 
of hazardous waste handled at the facility and the types of injuries or 
illnesses which could result from fires, explosions, or releases at the 
facility.
    (b) Where State or local authorities decline to enter into such 
arrangements, the owner or operator must document the refusal in the 
operating record.


<R04>
          Subpart D--Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 264.50  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of all 
hazardous waste facilities, except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.

[[Page 172]]


<R05>
Sec. 264.51  Purpose and implementation of contingency plan.

    (a) Each owner or operator must have a contingency plan for his 
facility. The contingency plan must be designed to minimize hazards to 
human health or the environment from fires, explosions, or any unplanned 
sudden or non-sudden release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste 
constituents to air, soil, or surface water.
    (b) The provisions of the plan must be carried out immediately 
whenever there is a fire, explosion, or release of hazardous waste or 
hazardous waste constituents which could threaten human health or the 
environment.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.52  Content of contingency plan.

    (a) The contingency plan must describe the actions facility 
personnel must take to comply with Secs. 264.51 and 264.56 in response 
to fires, explosions, or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden release of 
hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents to air, soil, or surface 
water at the facility.
    (b) If the owner or operator has already prepared a Spill 
Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures (SPCC) Plan in accordance with 
part 112 of this chapter, or part 1510 of chapter V, or some other 
emergency or contingency plan, he need only amend that plan to 
incorporate hazardous waste management provisions that are sufficient to 
comply with the requirements of this part.
    (c) The plan must describe arrangements agreed to by local police 
departments, fire departments, hospitals, contractors, and State and 
local emergency response teams to coordinate emergency services, 
pursuant to Sec. 264.37.
    (d) The plan must list names, addresses, and phone numbers (office 
and home) of all persons qualified to act as emergency coordinator (see 
Sec. 264.55), and this list must be kept up to date. Where more than one 
person is listed, one must be named as primary emergency coordinator and 
others must be listed in the order in which they will assume 
responsibility as alternates. For new facilities, this information must 
be supplied to the Regional Administrator at the time of certification, 
rather than at the time of permit application.
    (e) The plan must include a list of all emergency equipment at the 
facility (such as fire extinguishing systems, spill control equipment, 
communications and alarm systems (internal and external), and 
decontamination equipment), where this equipment is required. This list 
must be kept up to date. In addition, the plan must include the location 
and a physical description of each item on the list, and a brief outline 
of its capabilities.
    (f) The plan must include an evacuation plan for facility personnel 
where there is a possibility that evacuation could be necessary. This 
plan must describe signal(s) to be used to begin evacuation, evacuation 
routes, and alternate evacuation routes (in cases where the primary 
routes could be blocked by releases of hazardous waste or fires).
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 27480, May 20, 1981; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.53  Copies of contingency plan.

    A copy of the contingency plan and all revisions to the plan must 
be:
    (a) Maintained at the facility; and
    (b) Submitted to all local police departments, fire departments, 
hospitals, and State and local emergency response teams that may be 
called upon to provide emergency services.

[Comment: The contingency plan must be submitted to the Regional 
Administrator with Part B of the permit application under part 270, of 
this chapter and, after modification or approval, will become a 
condition of any permit issued.]
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 30115, June 30, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.54  Amendment of contingency plan.

    The contingency plan must be reviewed, and immediately amended, if 
necessary, whenever:
    (a) The facility permit is revised;
    (b) The plan fails in an emergency;
    (c) The facility changes--in its design, construction, operation, 
maintenance, or other circumstances--in a

[[Page 173]]

way that materially increases the potential for fires, explosions, or 
releases of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents, or changes 
the response necessary in an emergency;
    (d) The list of emergency coordinators changes; or
    (e) The list of emergency equipment changes.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 53 
FR 37935, Sept. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.55  Emergency coordinator.

    At all times, there must be at least one employee either on the 
facility premises or on call (i.e., available to respond to an emergency 
by reaching the facility within a short period of time) with the 
responsibility for coordinating all emergency response measures. This 
emergency coordinator must be thoroughly familiar with all aspects of 
the facility's contingency plan, all operations and activities at the 
facility, the location and characteristics of waste handled, the 
location of all records within the facility, and the facility layout. In 
addition, this person must have the authority to commit the resources 
needed to carry out the contingency plan.

[Comment: The emergency coordinator's responsibilities are more fully 
spelled out in Sec. 264.56. Applicable responsibilities for the 
emergency coordinator vary, depending on factors such as type and 
variety of waste(s) handled by the facility, and type and complexity of 
the facility.]


<R05>
Sec. 264.56  Emergency procedures.

    (a) Whenever there is an imminent or actual emergency situation, the 
emergency coordinator (or his designee when the emergency coordinator is 
on call) must immediately:
    (1) Activate internal facility alarms or communication systems, 
where applicable, to notify all facility personnel; and
    (2) Notify appropriate State or local agencies with designated 
response roles if their help is needed.
    (b) Whenever there is a release, fire, or explosion, the emergency 
coordinator must immediately identify the character, exact source, 
amount, and areal extent of any released materials. He may do this by 
observation or review of facility records or manifests, and, if 
necessary, by chemical analysis.
    (c) Concurrently, the emergency coordinator must assess possible 
hazards to human health or the environment that may result from the 
release, fire, or explosion. This assessment must consider both direct 
and indirect effects of the release, fire, or explosion (e.g., the 
effects of any toxic, irritating, or asphyxiating gases that are 
generated, or the effects of any hazardous surface water run-off from 
water or chemical agents used to control fire and heat-induced 
explosions).
    (d) If the emergency coordinator determines that the facility has 
had a release, fire, or explosion which could threaten human health, or 
the environment, outside the facility, he must report his findings as 
follows:
    (1) If his assessment indicates that evacuation of local areas may 
be advisable, he must immediately notify appropriate local authorities. 
He must be available to help appropriate officials decide whether local 
areas should be evacuated; and
    (2) He must immediately notify either the government official 
designated as the on-scene coordinator for that geographical area, (in 
the applicable regional contingency plan under part 1510 of this title) 
or the National Response Center (using their 24-hour toll free number 
800/424-8802). The report must include:
    (i) Name and telephone number of reporter;
    (ii) Name and address of facility;
    (iii) Time and type of incident (e.g., release, fire);
    (iv) Name and quantity of material(s) involved, to the extent known;
    (v) The extent of injuries, if any; and
    (vi) The possible hazards to human health, or the environment, 
outside the facility.
    (e) During an emergency, the emergency coordinator must take all 
reasonable measures necessary to ensure that fires, explosions, and 
releases do not occur, recur, or spread to other hazardous waste at the 
facility. These measures must include, where applicable, stopping 
processes and operations, collecting and containing release waste, and 
removing or isolating containers.

[[Page 174]]

    (f) If the facility stops operations in response to a fire, 
explosion, or release, the emergency coordinator must monitor for leaks, 
pressure buildup, gas generation, or ruptures in valves, pipes, or other 
equipment, wherever this is appropriate.
    (g) Immediately after an emergency, the emergency coordinator must 
provide for treating, storing, or disposing of recovered waste, 
contaminated soil or surface water, or any other material that results 
from a release, fire, or explosion at the facility.

[Comment: Unless the owner or operator can demonstrate, in accordance 
with Sec. 261.3(c) or (d) of this chapter, that the recovered material 
is not a hazardous waste, the owner or operator becomes a generator of 
hazardous waste and must manage it in accordance with all applicable 
requirements of parts 262, 263, and 264 of this chapter.]

    (h) The emergency coordinator must ensure that, in the affected 
area(s) of the facility:
    (1) No waste that may be incompatible with the released material is 
treated, stored, or disposed of until cleanup procedures are completed; 
and
    (2) All emergency equipment listed in the contingency plan is 
cleaned and fit for its intended use before operations are resumed.
    (i) The owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator, 
and appropriate State and local authorities, that the facility is in 
compliance with paragraph (h) of this section before operations are 
resumed in the affected area(s) of the facility.
    (j) The owner or operator must note in the operating record the 
time, date, and details of any incident that requires implementing the 
contingency plan. Within 15 days after the incident, he must submit a 
written report on the incident to the Regional Administrator. The report 
must include:
    (1) Name, address, and telephone number of the owner or operator;
    (2) Name, address, and telephone number of the facility;
    (3) Date, time, and type of incident (e.g., fire, explosion);
    (4) Name and quantity of material(s) involved;
    (5) The extent of injuries, if any;
    (6) An assessment of actual or potential hazards to human health or 
the environment, where this is applicable; and
    (7) Estimated quantity and disposition of recovered material that 
resulted from the incident.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R04>
        Subpart E--Manifest System, Recordkeeping, and Reporting


<R05>
Sec. 264.70  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
both on-site and off-site facilities, except as Sec. 264.1 provides 
otherwise. Sections 264.71, 264.72, and 264.76 do not apply to owners 
and operators of on-site facilities that do not receive any hazardous 
waste from off-site sources, and to owners and operators of off-site 
facilities with respect to waste military munitions exempted from 
manifest requirements under 40 CFR 266.203(a). Section 264.73(b) only 
applies to permittees who treat, store, or dispose of hazardous wastes 
on-site where such wastes were generated.
[62 FR 6652, Feb. 12, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.71  Use of manifest system.

    (a) If a facility receives hazardous waste accompanied by a 
manifest, the owner or operator, or his agent, must:
    (1) Sign and date each copy of the manifest to certify that the 
hazardous waste covered by the manifest was received;
    (2) Note any significant discrepancies in the manifest (as defined 
in Sec. 264.72(a)) on each copy of the manifest;

[Comment: The Agency does not intend that the owner or operator of a 
facility whose procedures under Sec. 264.13(c) include waste analysis 
must perform that analysis before signing the manifest and giving it to 
the transporter. Section 264.72(b), however, requires reporting an 
unreconciled discrepancy discovered during later analysis.]

    (3) Immediately give the transporter at least one copy of the signed 
manifest;
    (4) Within 30 days after the delivery, send a copy of the manifest 
to the generator; and

[[Page 175]]

    (5) Retain at the facility a copy of each manifest for at least 
three years from the date of delivery.
    (b) If a facility receives, from a rail or water (bulk shipment) 
transporter, hazardous waste which is accompanied by a shipping paper 
containing all the information required on the manifest (excluding the 
EPA identification numbers, generator's certification, and signatures), 
the owner or operator, or his agent, must:
    (1) Sign and date each copy of the manifest or shipping paper (if 
the manifest has not been received) to certify that the hazardous waste 
covered by the manifest or shipping paper was received;
    (2) Note any significant discrepancies (as defined in 
Sec. 264.72(a)) in the manifest or shipping paper (if the manifest has 
not been received) on each copy of the manifest or shipping paper.

[Comment: The Agency does not intend that the owner or operator of a 
facility whose procedures under Sec. 264.13(c) include waste analysis 
must perform that analysis before signing the shipping paper and giving 
it to the transporter. Section 264.72(b), however, requires reporting an 
unreconciled discrepancy discovered during later analysis.]

    (3) Immediately give the rail or water (bulk shipment) transporter 
at least one copy of the manifest or shipping paper (if the manifest has 
not been received);
    (4) Within 30 days after the delivery, send a copy of the signed and 
dated manifest to the generator; however, if the manifest has not been 
received within 30 days after delivery, the owner or operator, or his 
agent, must send a copy of the shipping paper signed and dated to the 
generator; and


[Comment: Section 262.23(c) of this chapter requires the generator to 
send three copies of the manifest to the facility when hazardous waste 
is sent by rail or water (bulk shipment).]

    (5) Retain at the facility a copy of the manifest and shipping paper 
(if signed in lieu of the manifest at the time of delivery) for at least 
three years from the date of delivery.
    (c) Whenever a shipment of hazardous waste is initiated from a 
facility, the owner or operator of that facility must comply with the 
requirements of part 262 of this chapter.


[Comment: The provisions of Sec. 262.34 are applicable to the on-site 
accumulation of hazardous wastes by generators. Therefore, the 
provisions of Sec. 262.34 only apply to owners or operators who are 
shipping hazardous waste which they generated at that facility.]

    (d) Within three working days of the receipt of a shipment subject 
to 40 CFR part 262, subpart H, the owner or operator of the facility 
must provide a copy of the tracking document bearing all required 
signatures to the notifier, to the Office of Enforcement and Compliance 
Assurance, Office of Compliance, Enforcement Planning, Targeting and 
Data Division (2222A), Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., 
Washington, DC 20460, and to competent authorities of all other 
concerned countries. The original copy of the tracking document must be 
maintained at the facility for at least three years from the date of 
signature.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 86970, 86974, Dec. 31, 
1980; 61 FR 16315, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.72  Manifest discrepancies.

    (a) Manifest discrepancies are differences between the quantity or 
type of hazardous waste designated on the manifest or shipping paper, 
and the quantity or type of hazardous waste a facility actually 
receives. Significant discrepancies in quantity are:
    (1) For bulk waste, variations greater than 10 percent in weight, 
and (2) for batch waste, any variation in piece count, such as a 
discrepancy of one drum in a truckload. Significant discrepancies in 
type are obvious differences which can be discovered by inspection or 
waste analysis, such as waste solvent substituted for waste acid, or 
toxic constituents not reported on the manifest or shipping paper.
    (b) Upon discovering a significant discrepancy, the owner or 
operator must attempt to reconcile the discrepancy with the waste 
generator or transporter (e.g., with telephone conversations). If the 
discrepancy is not resolved within 15 days after receiving the waste, 
the owner or operator must immediately submit to the Regional 
Administrator a letter describing the

[[Page 176]]

discrepancy and attempts to reconcile it, and a copy of the manifest or 
shipping paper at issue.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.73  Operating record.

    (a) The owner or operator must keep a written operating record at 
his facility.
    (b) The following information must be recorded, as it becomes 
available, and maintained in the operating record until closure of the 
facility:
    (1) A description and the quantity of each hazardous waste received, 
and the method(s) and date(s) of its treatment, storage, or disposal at 
the facility as required by appendix I;
    (2) The location of each hazardous waste within the facility and the 
quantity at each location. For disposal facilities, the location and 
quantity of each hazardous waste must be recorded on a map or diagram of 
each cell or disposal area. For all facilities, this information must 
include cross-references to specific manifest document numbers, if the 
waste was accompanied by a manifest;


[Comment: See Sec. 264.119 for related requirements.]

    (3) Records and results of waste analyses and waste determinations 
performed as specified in Secs. 264.13, 264.17, 264.314, 264.341, 
264.1034, 264.1063, 264.1083, 268.4(a), and 268.7 of this chapter.
    (4) Summary reports and details of all incidents that require 
implementing the contingency plan as specified in Sec. 264.56(j);
    (5) Records and results of inspections as required by Sec. 264.15(d) 
(except these data need be kept only three years);
    (6) Monitoring, testing or analytical data, and corrective action 
where required by subpart F of this part and Secs. 264.19, 264.191, 
264.193, 264.195, 264.222, 264.223, 264.226, 264.252--264.254, 264.276, 
264.278, 264.280, 264.302--264.304, 264.309, 264.347, 264.602, 
264.1034(c)--264.1034(f), 264.1035, 264.1063(d)--264.1063(i), 264.1064, 
and 264.1082 through 264.1090 of this part.
    (7) For off-site facilities, notices to generators as specified in 
Sec. 264.12(b); and
    (8) All closure cost estimates under Sec. 264.142, and, for disposal 
facilities, all post-closure cost estimates under Sec. 264.144.
    (9) A certification by the permittee no less often than annually, 
that the permittee has a program in place to reduce the volume and 
toxicity of hazardous waste that he generates to the degree determined 
by the permittee to be economically practicable; and the proposed method 
of treatment, storage or disposal is that practicable method currently 
available to the permittee which minimizes the present and future threat 
to human health and the environment.
    (10) Records of the quantities (and date of placement) for each 
shipment of hazardous waste placed in land disposal units under an 
extension to the effective date of any land disposal restriction granted 
pursuant to Sec. 268.5, a petition pursuant to Sec. 268.6, or a 
certification under Sec. 268.8, and the applicable notice required by a 
generator under Sec. 268.7(a);
    (11) For an off-site treatment facility, a copy of the notice, and 
the certification and demonstration, if applicable, required by the 
generator or the owner or operator under Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8;
    (12) For an on-site treatment facility, the information contained in 
the notice (except the manifest number), and the certification and 
demonstration if applicable, required by the generator or the owner or 
operator under Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8;
    (13) For an off-site land disposal facility, a copy of the notice, 
and the certification and demonstration if applicable, required by the 
generator or the owner or operator of a treatment facility under 
Secs. 268.7 and 268.8, whichever is applicable; and
    (14) For an on-site land disposal facility, the information 
contained in the notice required by the generator or owner or operator 
of a treatment facility under Sec. 268.7, except for the manifest 
number, and the certification and demonstration if applicable, required 
under Sec. 268.8, whichever is applicable.
    (15) For an off-site storage facility, a copy of the notice, and the 
certification and demonstration if applicable,

[[Page 177]]

required by the generator or the owner or operator under Sec. 268.7 or 
Sec. 268.8; and
    (16) For an on-site storage facility, the information contained in 
the notice (except the manifest number), and the certification and 
demonstration if applicable, required by the generator or the owner or 
operator under Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 2849, Jan. 12, 1981; 46 
FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 50 FR 18374, Apr. 30, 
1985; 50 FR 28746, July 15, 1985; 51 FR 40637, Nov. 7, 1986; 52 FR 
21016, June 4, 1987; 53 FR 31211, Aug. 17, 1988; 54 FR 26647, June 23, 
1989; 55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990; 57 FR 3487, Jan. 29, 1992; 59 FR 
62926, Dec. 6, 1994; 62 FR 64656, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.74  Availability, retention, and disposition of records.

    (a) All records, including plans, required under this part must be 
furnished upon request, and made available at all reasonable times for 
inspection, by any officer, employee, or representative of EPA who is 
duly designated by the Administrator.
    (b) The retention period for all records required under this part is 
extended automatically during the course of any unresolved enforcement 
action regarding the facility or as requested by the Administrator.
    (c) A copy of records of waste disposal locations and quantities 
under Sec. 264.73(b)(2) must be submitted to the Regional Administrator 
and local land authority upon closure of the facility.


<R05>
Sec. 264.75  Biennial report.

    The owner or operator must prepare and submit a single copy of a 
biennial report to the Regional Administrator by March 1 of each even 
numbered year. The biennial report must be submitted on EPA form 8700-
13B. The report must cover facility activities during the previous 
calendar year and must include:
    (a) The EPA identification number, name, and address of the 
facility;
    (b) The calendar year covered by the report;
    (c) For off-site facilities, the EPA identification number of each 
hazardous waste generator from which the facility received a hazardous 
waste during the year; for imported shipments, the report must give the 
name and address of the foreign generator;
    (d) A description and the quantity of each hazardous waste the 
facility received during the year. For off-site facilities, this 
information must be listed by EPA identification number of each 
generator;
    (e) The method of treatment, storage, or disposal for each hazardous 
waste;
    (f) [Reserved]
    (g) The most recent closure cost estimate under Sec. 264.142, and, 
for disposal facilities, the most recent post-closure cost estimate 
under Sec. 264.144; and
    (h) For generators who treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste 
on-site, a description of the efforts undertaken during the year to 
reduce the volume and toxicity of waste generated.
    (i) For generators who treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste 
on-site, a description of the changes in volume and toxicity of waste 
actually achieved during the year in comparison to previous years to the 
extent such information is available for the years prior to 1984.
    (j) The certification signed by the owner or operator of the 
facility or his authorized representative.
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 2849, Jan. 12, 1981; 48 
FR 3982, Jan. 28, 1983; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 51 FR 28556, Aug. 8, 
1986]


<R05>
Sec. 264.76  Unmanifested waste report.

    If a facility accepts for treatment, storage, or disposal any 
hazardous waste from an off-site source without an accompanying 
manifest, or without an accompanying shipping paper as described in 
Sec. 263.20(e)(2) of this chapter, and if the waste is not excluded from 
the manifest requirement by Sec. 261.5 of this chapter, then the owner 
or operator must prepare and submit a single copy of a report to the 
Regional Administrator within fifteen days after receiving the waste. 
The unmanifested waste report must be submitted on EPA form 8700-13B. 
Such report must be designated `Unmanifested Waste Report' and include 
the following information:
    (a) The EPA identification number, name, and address of the 
facility;
    (b) The date the facility received the waste;

[[Page 178]]

    (c) The EPA identification number, name, and address of the 
generator and the transporter, if available;
    (d) A description and the quantity of each unmanifested hazardous 
waste and facility received;
    (e) The method of treatment, storage, or disposal for each hazardous 
waste;
    (f) The certification signed by the owner or operator of the 
facility or his authorized representative; and
    (g) A brief explanation of why the waste was unmanifested, if known.

[Comment: Small quantities of hazardous waste are excluded from 
regulation under this part and do not require a manifest. Where a 
facility receives unmanifested hazardous wastes, the Agency suggests 
that the owner or operator obtain from each generator a certification 
that the waste qualifies for exclusion. Otherwise, the Agency suggests 
that the owner or operator file an unmanifested waste report for the 
hazardous waste movement.]
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 3982, Jan. 28, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.77  Additional reports.

    In addition to submitting the biennial reports and unmanifested 
waste reports described in Secs. 264.75 and 264.76, the owner or 
operator must also report to the Regional Administrator:
    (a) Releases, fires, and explosions as specified in Sec. 264.56(j);
    (b) Facility closures specified in Sec. 264.115; and
    (c) As otherwise required by subparts F, K through N, AA, BB, and CC 
of this part.
[46 FR 2849, Jan. 12, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982; 48 
FR 3982, Jan. 28, 1983; 55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990; 59 FR 62926, Dec. 6, 
1994]


<R04>
          Subpart F--Releases From Solid Waste Management Units

    Source: 47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.90  Applicability.

    (a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
regulations in this subpart apply to owners or operators of facilities 
that treat, store or dispose of hazardous waste. The owner or operator 
must satisfy the requirements identified in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section for all wastes (or constituents thereof) contained in solid 
waste management units at the facility, regardless of the time at which 
waste was placed in such units.
    (2) All solid waste management units must comply with the 
requirements in Sec. 264.101. A surface impoundment, waste pile, and 
land treatment unit or landfill that receives hazardous waste after July 
26, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as a ``regulated unit'') must comply 
with the requirements of Secs. 264.91 through 264.100 in lieu of 
Sec. 264.101 for purposes of detecting, characterizing and responding to 
releases to the uppermost aquifer. The financial responsibility 
requirements of Sec. 264.101 apply to regulated units.
    (b) The owner or operator's regulated unit or units are not subject 
to regulation for releases into the uppermost aquifer under this subpart 
if:
    (1) The owner or operator is exempted under Sec. 264.1; or
    (2) He operates a unit which the Regional Administrator finds:
    (i) Is an engineered structure,
    (ii) Does not receive or contain liquid waste or waste containing 
free liquids,
    (iii) Is designed and operated to exclude liquid, precipitation, and 
other run-on and run-off,
    (iv) Has both inner and outer layers of containment enclosing the 
waste,
    (v) Has a leak detection system built into each containment layer,
    (vi) The owner or operator will provide continuing operation and 
maintenance of these leak detection systems during the active life of 
the unit and the closure and post-closure care periods, and
    (vii) To a reasonable degree of certainty, will not allow hazardous 
constituents to migrate beyond the outer containment layer prior to the 
end of the post-closure care period.
    (3) The Regional Administrator finds, pursuant to Sec. 264.280(d), 
that the treatment zone of a land treatment unit that qualifies as a 
regulated unit does not contain levels of hazardous constituents that 
are above background levels of those constituents by an

[[Page 179]]

amount that is statistically significant, and if an unsaturated zone 
monitoring program meeting the requirements of Sec. 264.278 has not 
shown a statistically significant increase in hazardous constituents 
below the treatment zone during the operating life of the unit. An 
exemption under this paragraph can only relieve an owner or operator of 
responsibility to meet the requirements of this subpart during the post-
closure care period; or
    (4) The Regional Administrator finds that there is no potential for 
migration of liquid from a regulated unit to the uppermost aquifer 
during the active life of the regulated unit (including the closure 
period) and the post-closure care period specified under Sec. 264.117. 
This demonstration must be certified by a qualified geologist or 
geotechnical engineer. In order to provide an adequate margin of safety 
in the prediction of potential migration of liquid, the owner or 
operator must base any predictions made under this paragraph on 
assumptions that maximize the rate of liquid migration.
    (5) He designs and operates a pile in compliance with 
Sec. 264.250(c).
    (c) The regulations under this subpart apply during the active life 
of the regulated unit (including the closure period). After closure of 
the regulated unit, the regulations in this subpart:
    (1) Do not apply if all waste, waste residues, contaminated 
containment system components, and contaminated subsoils are removed or 
decontaminated at closure;
    (2) Apply during the post-closure care period under Sec. 264.117 if 
the owner or operator is conducting a detection monitoring program under 
Sec. 264.98; or
    (3) Apply during the compliance period under Sec. 264.96 if the 
owner or operator is conducting a compliance monitoring program under 
Sec. 264.99 or a corrective action program under Sec. 264.100.
    (d) Regulations in this subpart may apply to miscellaneous units 
when necessary to comply with Secs. 264.601 through 264.603.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 28746, July 15, 1985; 
52 FR 46963, Dec. 10, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 264.91  Required programs.

    (a) Owners and operators subject to this subpart must conduct a 
monitoring and response program as follows:
    (1) Whenever hazardous constituents under Sec. 264.93 from a 
regulated unit are detected at a compliance point under Sec. 264.95, the 
owner or operator must institute a compliance monitoring program under 
Sec. 264.99. Detected is defined as statistically significant evidence 
of contamination as described in Sec. 264.98(f);
    (2) Whenever the ground-water protection standard under Sec. 264.92 
is exceeded, the owner or operator must institute a corrective action 
program under Sec. 264.100. Exceeded is defined as statistically 
significant evidence of increased contamination as described in 
Sec. 264.99(d);
    (3) Whenever hazardous constituents under Sec. 264.93 from a 
regulated unit exceed concentration limits under Sec. 264.94 in ground 
water between the compliance point under Sec. 264.95 and the 
downgradient facility property boundary, the owner or operator must 
institute a corrective action program under Sec. 264.100; or
    (4) In all other cases, the owner or operator must institute a 
detection monitoring program under Sec. 264.98.
    (b) The Regional Administrator will specify in the facility permit 
the specific elements of the monitoring and response program. The 
Regional Administrator may include one or more of the programs 
identified in paragraph (a) of this section in the facility permit as 
may be necessary to protect human health and the environment and will 
specify the circumstances under which each of the programs will be 
required. In deciding whether to require the owner or operator to be 
prepared to institute a particular program, the Regional Administrator 
will consider the potential adverse effects on human health and the 
environment that might occur before final administrative action on a 
permit modification application to incorporate such a program could be 
taken.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, as amended at 53 FR 39728, Oct. 11, 1988]

[[Page 180]]


<R05>
Sec. 264.92  Ground-water protection standard.

    The owner or operator must comply with conditions specified in the 
facility permit that are designed to ensure that hazardous constituents 
under Sec. 264.93 detected in the ground water from a regulated unit do 
not exceed the concentration limits under Sec. 264.94 in the uppermost 
aquifer underlying the waste management area beyond the point of 
compliance under Sec. 264.95 during the compliance period under 
Sec. 264.96. The Regional Administrator will establish this ground-water 
protection standard in the facility permit when hazardous constituents 
have been detected in the ground water.
[53 FR 39728, Oct. 11, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.93  Hazardous constituents.

    (a) The Regional Administrator will specify in the facility permit 
the hazardous constituents to which the ground-water protection standard 
of Sec. 264.92 applies. Hazardous constituents are constituents 
identified in appendix VIII of part 261 of this chapter that have been 
detected in ground water in the uppermost aquifer underlying a regulated 
unit and that are reasonably expected to be in or derived from waste 
contained in a regulated unit, unless the Regional Administrator has 
excluded them under paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) The Regional Administrator will exclude an appendix VIII 
constituent from the list of hazardous constituents specified in the 
facility permit if he finds that the constituent is not capable of 
posing a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the 
environment. In deciding whether to grant an exemption, the Regional 
Administrator will consider the following:
    (1) Potential adverse effects on ground-water quality, considering:
    (i) The physical and chemical characteristics of the waste in the 
regulated unit, including its potential for migration;
    (ii) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and 
surrounding land;
    (iii) The quantity of ground water and the direction of ground-water 
flow;
    (iv) The proximity and withdrawal rates of ground-water users;
    (v) The current and future uses of ground water in the area;
    (vi) The existing quality of ground water, including other sources 
of contamination and their cumulative impact on the ground-water 
quality;
    (vii) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to 
waste constituents;
    (viii) The potential damage to wildlife, crops, vegetation, and 
physical structures caused by exposure to waste constituents;
    (ix) The persistence and permanence of the potential adverse 
effects; and
    (2) Potential adverse effects on hydraulically-connected surface 
water quality, considering:
    (i) The volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the 
waste in the regulated unit;
    (ii) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and 
surrounding land;
    (iii) The quantity and quality of ground water, and the direction of 
ground-water flow;
    (iv) The patterns of rainfall in the region;
    (v) The proximity of the regulated unit to surface waters;
    (vi) The current and future uses of surface waters in the area and 
any water quality standards established for those surface waters;
    (vii) The existing quality of surface water, including other sources 
of contamination and the cumulative impact on surface-water quality;
    (viii) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to 
waste constituents;
    (ix) The potential damage to wildlife, crops, vegetation, and 
physical structures caused by exposure to waste constituents; and
    (x) The persistence and permanence of the potential adverse effects.
    (c) In making any determination under paragraph (b) of this section 
about the use of ground water in the area around the facility, the 
Regional Administrator will consider any identification of underground 
sources of

[[Page 181]]

drinking water and exempted aquifers made under Sec. 144.8 of this 
chapter.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 264.94  Concentration limits.

    (a) The Regional Administrator will specify in the facility permit 
concentration limits in the ground water for hazardous constituents 
established under Sec. 264.93. The concentration of a hazardous 
constituent:
    (1) Must not exceed the background level of that constituent in the 
ground water at the time that limit is specified in the permit; or
    (2) For any of the constituents listed in Table 1, must not exceed 
the respective value given in that table if the background level of the 
constituent is below the value given in Table 1; or

     Table 1--Maximum Concentration of Constituents for Ground-water
                               Protection
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Maximum
                     Constituent                       concentration \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arsenic..............................................        0.05
Barium...............................................        1.0
Cadmium..............................................        0.01
Chromium.............................................        0.05
Lead.................................................        0.05
Mercury..............................................        0.002
Selenium.............................................        0.01
Silver...............................................        0.05
Endrin (1,2,3,4,10,10-hexachloro-1,7-epoxy-
 1,4,4a,5,6,7,8,9a-octahydro-1, 4-endo, endo-5,8-
 dimethano naphthalene)..............................        0.0002
Lindane (1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachlorocyclohexane, gamma
 isomer).............................................        0.004
Methoxychlor (1,1,1-Trichloro-2,2-bis (p-
 methoxyphenylethane)................................        0.1
Toxaphene (C<INF>10H<INF>10Cl<INF>6, Technical chlorinated camphene,
 67-69 percent chlorine).............................        0.005
2,4-D (2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid)...............        0.1
2,4,5-TP Silvex (2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxypropionic
 acid)...............................................        0.01
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Milligrams per liter.

    (3) Must not exceed an alternate limit established by the Regional 
Administrator under paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) The Regional Administrator will establish an alternate 
concentration limit for a hazardous constituent if he finds that the 
constituent will not pose a substantial present or potential hazard to 
human health or the environment as long as the alternate concentration 
limit is not exceeded. In establishing alternate concentration limits, 
the Regional Administrator will consider the following factors:
    (1) Potential adverse effects on ground-water quality, considering:
    (i) The physical and chemical characteristics of the waste in the 
regulated unit, including its potential for migration;
    (ii) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and 
surrounding land;
    (iii) The quantity of ground water and the direction of ground-water 
flow;
    (iv) The proximity and withdrawal rates of ground-water users;
    (v) The current and future uses of ground water in the area;
    (vi) The existing quality of ground water, including other sources 
of contamination and their cumulative impact on the ground-water 
quality;
    (vii) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to 
waste constituents;
    (viii) The potential damage to wildlife, crops, vegetation, and 
physical structures caused by exposure to waste constituents;
    (ix) The persistence and permanence of the potential adverse 
effects; and
    (2) Potential adverse effects on hydraulically-connected surface-
water quality, considering:
    (i) The volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the 
waste in the regulated unit;
    (ii) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and 
surrounding land;
    (iii) The quantity and quality of ground water, and the direction of 
ground-water flow;
    (iv) The patterns of rainfall in the region;
    (v) The proximity of the regulated unit to surface waters;
    (vi) The current and future uses of surface waters in the area and 
any water quality standards established for those surface waters;
    (vii) The existing quality of surface water, including other sources 
of contamination and the cumulative impact on surface water quality;
    (viii) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to 
waste constituents;

[[Page 182]]

    (ix) The potential damage to wildlife, crops, vegetation, and 
physical structures caused by exposure to waste constituents; and
    (x) The persistence and permanence of the potential adverse effects.
    (c) In making any determination under paragraph (b) of this section 
about the use of ground water in the area around the facility the 
Regional Administrator will consider any identification of underground 
sources of drinking water and exempted aquifers made under Sec. 144.8 of 
this chapter.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 264.95  Point of compliance.

    (a) The Regional Administrator will specify in the facility permit 
the point of compliance at which the ground-water protection standard of 
Sec. 264.92 applies and at which monitoring must be conducted. The point 
of compliance is a vertical surface located at the hydraulically 
downgradient limit of the waste management area that extends down into 
the uppermost aquifer underlying the regulated units.
    (b) The waste management area is the limit projected in the 
horizontal plane of the area on which waste will be placed during the 
active life of a regulated unit.
    (1) The waste management area includes horizontal space taken up by 
any liner, dike, or other barrier designed to contain waste in a 
regulated unit.
    (2) If the facility contains more than one regulated unit, the waste 
management area is described by an imaginary line circumscribing the 
several regulated units.


<R05>
Sec. 264.96  Compliance period.

    (a) The Regional Administrator will specify in the facility permit 
the compliance period during which the ground-water protection standard 
of Sec. 264.92 applies. The compliance period is the number of years 
equal to the active life of the waste management area (including any 
waste management activity prior to permitting, and the closure period.)
    (b) The compliance period begins when the owner or operator 
initiates a compliance monitoring program meeting the requirements of 
Sec. 264.99.
    (c) If the owner or operator is engaged in a corrective action 
program at the end of the compliance period specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section, the compliance period is extended until the owner or 
operator can demonstrate that the ground-water protection standard of 
Sec. 264.92 has not been exceeded for a period of three consecutive 
years.


<R05>
Sec. 264.97  General ground-water monitoring requirements.

    The owner or operator must comply with the following requirements 
for any ground-water monitoring program developed to satisfy 
Sec. 264.98, Sec. 264.99, or Sec. 264.100:
    (a) The ground-water monitoring system must consist of a sufficient 
number of wells, installed at appropriate locations and depths to yield 
ground-water samples from the uppermost aquifer that:
    (1) Represent the quality of background water that has not been 
affected by leakage from a regulated unit;
    (i) A determination of background quality may include sampling of 
wells that are not hydraulically upgradient of the waste management area 
where:
    (A) Hydrogeologic conditions do not allow the owner or operator to 
determine what wells are hydraulically upgradient; and
    (B) Sampling at other wells will provide an indication of background 
ground-water quality that is representative or more representative than 
that provided by the upgradient wells; and
    (2) Represent the quality of ground water passing the point of 
compliance.
    (3) Allow for the detection of contamination when hazardous waste or 
hazardous constituents have migrated from the waste management area to 
the uppermost aquifer.
    (b) If a facility contains more than one regulated unit, separate 
ground-water monitoring systems are not required for each regulated unit 
provided that provisions for sampling the ground water in the uppermost 
aquifer will enable detection and measurement at the compliance point of 
hazardous constituents from the regulated units

[[Page 183]]

that have entered the ground water in the uppermost aquifer.
    (c) All monitoring wells must be cased in a manner that maintains 
the integrity of the monitoring-well bore hole. This casing must be 
screened or perforated and packed with gravel or sand, where necessary, 
to enable collection of ground-water samples. The annular space (i.e., 
the space between the bore hole and well casing) above the sampling 
depth must be sealed to prevent contamination of samples and the ground 
water.
    (d) The ground-water monitoring program must include consistent 
sampling and analysis procedures that are designed to ensure monitoring 
results that provide a reliable indication of ground-water quality below 
the waste management area. At a minimum the program must include 
procedures and techniques for:
    (1) Sample collection;
    (2) Sample preservation and shipment;
    (3) Analytical procedures; and
    (4) Chain of custody control.
    (e) The ground-water monitoring program must include sampling and 
analytical methods that are appropriate for ground-water sampling and 
that accurately measure hazardous constituents in ground-water samples.
    (f) The ground-water monitoring program must include a determination 
of the ground-water surface elevation each time ground water is sampled.
    (g) In detection monitoring or where appropriate in compliance 
monitoring, data on each hazardous constituent specified in the permit 
will be collected from background wells and wells at the compliance 
point(s). The number and kinds of samples collected to establish 
background shall be appropriate for the form of statistical test 
employed, following generally accepted statistical principles. The 
sample size shall be as large as necessary to ensure with reasonable 
confidence that a contaminant release to ground water from a facility 
will be detected. The owner or operator will determine an appropriate 
sampling procedure and interval for each hazardous constituent listed in 
the facility permit which shall be specified in the unit permit upon 
approval by the Regional Administrator. This sampling procedure shall 
be:
    (1) A sequence of at least four samples, taken at an interval that 
assures, to the greatest extent technically feasible, that an 
independent sample is obtained, by reference to the uppermost aquifer's 
effective porosity, hydraulic conductivity, and hydraulic gradient, and 
the fate and transport characteristics of the potential contaminants, or
    (2) an alternate sampling procedure proposed by the owner or 
operator and approved by the Regional Administrator.
    (h) The owner or operator will specify one of the following 
statistical methods to be used in evaluating ground-water monitoring 
data for each hazardous constituent which, upon approval by the Regional 
Administrator, will be specified in the unit permit. The statistical 
test chosen shall be conducted separately for each hazardous constituent 
in each well. Where practical quantification limits (pql's) are used in 
any of the following statistical procedures to comply with 
Sec. 264.97(i)(5), the pql must be proposed by the owner or operator and 
approved by the Regional Administrator. Use of any of the following 
statistical methods must be protective of human health and the 
environment and must comply with the performance standards outlined in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (1) A parametric analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by multiple 
comparisons procedures to identify statistically significant evidence of 
contamination. The method must include estimation and testing of the 
contrasts between each compliance well's mean and the background mean 
levels for each constituent.
    (2) An analysis of variance (ANOVA) based on ranks followed by 
multiple comparisons procedures to identify statistically significant 
evidence of contamination. The method must include estimation and 
testing of the contrasts between each compliance well's median and the 
background median levels for each constituent.
    (3) A tolerance or prediction interval procedure in which an 
interval for each constituent is established from the distribution of 
the background data, and the level of each constituent in each

[[Page 184]]

compliance well is compared to the upper tolerance or prediction limit.
    (4) A control chart approach that gives control limits for each 
constituent.
    (5) Another statistical test method submitted by the owner or 
operator and approved by the Regional Administrator.
    (i) Any statistical method chosen under Sec. 264.97(h) for 
specification in the unit permit shall comply with the following 
performance standards, as appropriate:
    (1) The statistical method used to evaluate ground-water monitoring 
data shall be appropriate for the distribution of chemical parameters or 
hazardous constituents. If the distribution of the chemical parameters 
or hazardous constituents is shown by the owner or operator to be 
inappropriate for a normal theory test, then the data should be 
transformed or a distribution-free theory test should be used. If the 
distributions for the constituents differ, more than one statistical 
method may be needed.
    (2) If an individual well comparison procedure is used to compare an 
individual compliance well constituent concentration with background 
constituent concentrations or a ground-water protection standard, the 
test shall be done at a Type I error level no less than 0.01 for each 
testing period. If a multiple comparisons procedure is used, the Type I 
experimentwise error rate for each testing period shall be no less than 
0.05; however, the Type I error of no less than 0.01 for individual well 
comparisons must be maintained. This performance standard does not apply 
to tolerance intervals, prediction intervals or control charts.
    (3) If a control chart approach is used to evaluate ground-water 
monitoring data, the specific type of control chart and its associated 
parameter values shall be proposed by the owner or operator and approved 
by the Regional Administrator if he or she finds it to be protective of 
human health and the environment.
    (4) If a tolerance interval or a prediction interval is used to 
evaluate groundwater monitoring data, the levels of confidence and, for 
tolerance intervals, the percentage of the population that the interval 
must contain, shall be proposed by the owner or operator and approved by 
the Regional Administrator if he or she finds these parameters to be 
protective of human health and the environment. These parameters will be 
determined after considering the number of samples in the background 
data base, the data distribution, and the range of the concentration 
values for each constituent of concern.
    (5) The statistical method shall account for data below the limit of 
detection with one or more statistical procedures that are protective of 
human health and the environment. Any practical quantification limit 
(pql) approved by the Regional Administrator under Sec. 264.97(h) that 
is used in the statistical method shall be the lowest concentration 
level tha can be reliably achieved within specified limits of precision 
and accuracy during routine laboratory operating conditions that are 
available to the facility.
    (6) If necessary, the statistical method shall include procedures to 
control or correct for seasonal and spatial variability as well as 
temporal correlation in the data.
    (j) Ground-water monitoring data collected in accordance with 
paragraph (g) of this section including actual levels of constituents 
must be maintained in the facility operating record. The Regional 
Administrator will specify in the permit when the data must be submitted 
for review.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 53 
FR 39728, Oct. 11, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.98  Detection monitoring program.

    An owner or operator required to establish a detection monitoring 
program under this subpart must, at a minimum, discharge the following 
responsibilities:
    (a) The owner or operator must monitor for indicator parameters 
(e.g., specific conductance, total organic carbon, or total organic 
halogen), waste constituents, or reaction products that provide a 
reliable indication of the presence of hazardous constituents in ground 
water. The Regional Administrator will specify the parameters or

[[Page 185]]

constituents to be monitored in the facility permit, after considering 
the following factors:
    (1) The types, quantities, and concentrations of constituents in 
wastes managed at the regulated unit;
    (2) The mobility, stability, and persistance of waste constituents 
or their reaction products in the unsaturated zone beneath the waste 
management area;
    (3) The detectability of indicator parameters, waste constituents, 
and reaction products in ground water; and
    (4) The concentrations or values and coefficients of variation of 
proposed monitoring parameters or constituents in the ground-water 
background.
    (b) The owner or operator must install a ground-water monitoring 
system at the compliance point as specified under Sec. 264.95. The 
ground-water monitoring system must comply with Sec. 264.97(a)(2), (b), 
and (c).
    (c) The owner or operator must conduct a ground-water monitoring 
program for each chemical parameter and hazardous constituent specified 
in the permit pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section in accordance 
with Sec. 264.97(g). The owner or operator must maintain a record of 
ground-water analytical data as measured and in a form necessary for the 
determination of statistical significance under Sec. 264.97(h).
    (d) The Regional Administrator will specify the frequencies for 
collecting samples and conducting statistical tests to determine whether 
there is statistically significant evidence of contamination for any 
parameter or hazardous constituent specified in the permit under 
paragraph (a) of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.97(g). A 
sequence of at least four samples from each well (background and 
compliance wells) must be collected at least semi-annually during 
detection monitoring.
    (e) The owner or operator must determine the ground-water flow rate 
and direction in the uppermost aquifer at least annually.
    (f) The owner or operator must determine whether there is 
statistically significant evidence of contamination for any chemical 
parameter of hazardous constituent specified in the permit pursuant to 
paragraph (a) of this section at a frequency specified under paragraph 
(d) of this section.
    (1) In determining whether statistically significant evidence of 
contamination exists, the owner or operator must use the method(s) 
specified in the permit under Sec. 264.97(h). These method(s) must 
compare data collected at the compliance point(s) to the background 
ground-water quality data.
    (2) The owner or operator must determine whether there is 
statistically significant evidence of contamination at each monitoring 
well as the compliance point within a reasonable period of time after 
completion of sampling. The Regional Administrator will specify in the 
facility permit what period of time is reasonable, after considering the 
complexity of the statistical test and the availability of laboratory 
facilities to perform the analysis of ground-water samples.
    (g) If the owner or operator determines pursuant to paragraph (f) of 
this section that there is statistically significant evidence of 
contamination for chemical parameters or hazardous constituents 
specified pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section at any monitoring 
well at the compliance point, he or she must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator of this finding in writing 
within seven days. The notification must indicate what chemical 
parameters or hazardous constituents have shown statistically 
significant evidence of contamination;
    (2) Immediately sample the ground water in all monitoring wells and 
determine whether constituents in the list of appendix IX of part 264 
are present, and if so, in what concentration.
    (3) For any appendix IX compounds found in the analysis pursuant to 
paragraph (g)(2) of this section, the owner or operator may resample 
within one month and repeat the analysis for those compounds detected. 
If the results of the second analysis confirm the initial results, then 
these constituents will form the basis for compliance monitoring. If the 
owner or operator does not resample for the compounds found pursuant to 
paragraph (g)(2) of this section, the hazardous constituents found 
during this initial appendix

[[Page 186]]

IX analysis will form the basis for compliance monitoring.
    (4) Within 90 days, submit to the Regional Administrator an 
application for a permit modification to establish a compliance 
monitoring program meeting the requirements of Sec. 264.99. The 
application must include the following information:
    (i) An identification of the concentration or any appendix IX 
constituent detected in the ground water at each monitoring well at the 
compliance point;
    (ii) Any proposed changes to the ground-water monitoring system at 
the facility necessary to meet the requirements of Sec. 264.99;
    (iii) Any proposed additions or changes to the monitoring frequency, 
sampling and analysis procedures or methods, or statistical methods used 
at the facility necessary to meet the requirements of Sec. 264.99;
    (iv) For each hazardous constituent detected at the compliance 
point, a proposed concentration limit under Sec. 264.94(a) (1) or (2), 
or a notice of intent to seek an alternate concentration limit under 
Sec. 264.94(b); and
    (5) Within 180 days, submit to the Regional Administrator:
    (i) All data necessary to justify an alternate concentration limit 
sought under Sec. 264.94(b); and
    (ii) An engineering feasibility plan for a corrective action program 
necessary to meet the requirement of Sec. 264.100, unless:
    (A) All hazardous constituents identified under paragraph (g)(2) of 
this section are listed in Table 1 of Sec. 264.94 and their 
concentrations do not exceed the respective values given in that Table; 
or
    (B) The owner or operator has sought an alternate concentration 
limit under Sec. 264.94(b) for every hazardous constituent identified 
under paragraph (g)(2) of this section.
    (6) If the owner or operator determines, pursuant to paragraph (f) 
of this section, that there is a statistically significant difference 
for chemical parameters or hazardous constituents specified pursuant to 
paragraph (a) of this section at any monitoring well at the compliance 
point, he or she may demonstrate that a source other than a regulated 
unit caused the contamination or that the detection is an artifact 
caused by an error in sampling, analysis, or statistical evaluation or 
natural variation in the ground water. The owner operator may make a 
demonstration under this paragraph in addition to, or in lieu of, 
submitting a permit modification application under paragraph (g)(4) of 
this section; however, the owner or operator is not relieved of the 
requirement to submit a permit modification application within the time 
specified in paragraph (g)(4) of this section unless the demonstration 
made under this paragraph successfully shows that a source other than a 
regulated unit caused the increase, or that the increase resulted from 
error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation. In making a demonstration 
under this paragraph, the owner or operator must:
    (i) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing within seven days 
of determining statistically significant evidence of contamination at 
the compliance point that he intends to make a demonstration under this 
paragraph;
    (ii) Within 90 days, submit a report to the Regional Administrator 
which demonstrates that a source other than a regulated unit caused the 
contamination or that the contamination resulted from error in sampling, 
analysis, or evaluation;
    (iii) Within 90 days, submit to the Regional Administrator an 
application for a permit modification to make any appropriate changes to 
the detection monitoring program facility; and
    (iv) Continue to monitor in accordance with the detection monitoring 
program established under this section.
    (h) If the owner or operator determines that the detection 
monitoring program no longer satisfies the requirements of this section, 
he or she must, within 90 days, submit an application for a permit 
modification to make any appropriate changes to the program.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 52 
FR 25946, July 9, 1987; 53 FR 39729, Oct. 11, 1988]


[[Page 187]]




<R05>
Sec. 264.99  Compliance monitoring program.

    An owner or operator required to establish a compliance monitoring 
program under this subpart must, at a minimum, discharge the following 
responsibilities:
    (a) The owner or operator must monitor the ground water to determine 
whether regulated units are in compliance with the ground-water 
protection standard under Sec. 264.92. The Regional Administrator will 
specify the ground-water protection standard in the facility permit, 
including:
    (1) A list of the hazardous constituents identified under 
Sec. 264.93;
    (2) Concentration limits under Sec. 264.94 for each of those 
hazardous constituents;
    (3) The compliance point under Sec. 264.95; and
    (4) The compliance period under Sec. 264.96.
    (b) The owner or operator must install a ground-water monitoring 
system at the compliance point as specified under Sec. 264.95. The 
ground-water monitoring system must comply with Sec. 264.97(a)(2), (b), 
and (c).
    (c) The Regional Administrator will specify the sampling procedures 
and statistical methods appropriate for the constituents and the 
facility, consistent with Sec. 264.97 (g) and (h).
    (1) The owner or operator must conduct a sampling program for each 
chemical parameter or hazardous constituent in accordance with 
Sec. 264.97(g).
    (2) The owner or operator must record ground-water analytical data 
as measured and in form necessary for the determination of statistical 
significance under Sec. 264.97(h) for the compliance period of the 
facility.
    (d) The owner or operator must determine whether there is 
statistically significant evidence of increased contamination for any 
chemical parameter or hazardous constituent specified in the permit, 
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, at a frequency specified 
under paragraph (f) under this section.
    (1) In determining whether statistically significant evidence of 
increased contamination exists, the owner or operator must use the 
method(s) specified in the permit under Sec. 264.97(h). The methods(s) 
must compare data collected at the compliance point(s) to a 
concentration limit developed in accordance with Sec. 264.94.
    (2) The owner or operator must determine whether there is 
statistically significant evidence of increased contamination at each 
monitoring well at the compliance point within a reasonable time period 
after completion of sampling. The Regional Administrator will specify 
that time period in the facility permit, after considering the 
complexity of the statistical test and the availability of laboratory 
facilities to perform the analysis of ground-water samples.
    (e) The owner or operator must determine the ground-water flow rate 
and direction in the uppermost aquifer at least annually.
    (f) The Regional Administrator will specify the frequencies for 
collecting samples and conducting statistical tests to determine 
statistically significant evidence of increased contamination in 
accordance with Sec. 264.97(g). A sequence of at least four samples from 
each well (background and compliance wells) must be collected at least 
semi-annually during the compliance period of the facility.
    (g) The owner or operator must analyze samples from all monitoring 
wells at the compliance point for all constituents contained in appendix 
IX of part 264 at least annually to determine whether additional 
hazardous constituents are present in the uppermost aquifer and, if so, 
at what concentration, pursuant to procedures in Sec. 264.98(f). If the 
owner or operator finds appendix IX constituents in the ground water 
that are not already identified in the permit as monitoring 
constituents, the owner or operator may resample within one month and 
repeat the appendix IX analysis. If the second analysis confirms the 
presence of new constituents, the owner or operator must report the 
concentration of these additional constituents to the Regional 
Administrator within seven days after the completion of the second 
analysis and add them to the monitoring list. If the owner or operator 
chooses not to resample, then he or she must report the

[[Page 188]]

concentrations of these additional constituents to the Regional 
Administrator within seven days after completion of the intiial analysis 
and add them to the monitoring list.
    (h) If the owner or operator determines pursuant to paragraph (d) of 
this section that any concentration limits under Sec. 264.94 are being 
exceeded at any monitoring well at the point of compliance he or she 
must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator of this finding in writing 
within seven days. The notification must indicate what concentration 
limits have been exceeded.
    (2) Submit to the Regional Administrator an application for a permit 
modification to establish a corrective action program meeting the 
requirements of Sec. 264.100 within 180 days, or within 90 days if an 
engineering feasibility study has been previously submitted to the 
Regional Administrator under Sec. 264.98(h)(5). The application must at 
a minimum include the following information:
    (i) A detailed description of corrective actions that will achieve 
compliance with the ground-water protection standard specified in the 
permit under paragraph (a) of this section; and
    (ii) A plan for a ground-water monitoring program that will 
demonstrate the effectiveness of the corrective action. Such a ground-
water monitoring program may be based on a compliance monitoring program 
developed to meet the requirements of this section.
    (i) If the owner or operator determines, pursuant to paragraph (d) 
of this section, that the ground-water concentration limits under this 
section are being exceeded at any monitoring well at the point of 
compliance, he or she may demonstrate that a source other than a 
regulated unit caused the contamination or that the detection is an 
artifact caused by an error in sampling, analysis, or statistical 
evaluation or natural variation in the ground water. In making a 
demonstration under this paragraph, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing within seven days 
that he intends to make a demonstration under this paragraph;
    (2) Within 90 days, submit a report to the Regional Administrator 
which demonstrates that a source other than a regulated unit caused the 
standard to be exceeded or that the apparent noncompliance with the 
standards resulted from error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation;
    (3) Within 90 days, submit to the Regional Administrator an 
application for a permit modification to make any appropriate changes to 
the compliance monitoring program at the facility; and
    (4) Continue to monitor in accord with the compliance monitoring 
program established under this section.
    (j) If the owner or operator determines that the compliance 
monitoring program no longer satisfies the requirements of this section, 
he must, within 90 days, submit an application for a permit modification 
to make any appropriate changes to the program.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 52 
FR 25946, July 9, 1987; 53 FR 39730, Oct. 11, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.100  Corrective action program.

    An owner or operator required to establish a corrective action 
program under this subpart must, at a minimum, discharge the following 
responsibilities:
    (a) The owner or operator must take corrective action to ensure that 
regulated units are in compliance with the ground-water protection 
standard under Sec. 264.92. The Regional Administrator will specify the 
ground-water protection standard in the facility permit, including:
    (1) A list of the hazardous constituents identified under 
Sec. 264.93;
    (2) Concentration limits under Sec. 264.94 for each of those 
hazardous constituents;
    (3) The compliance point under Sec. 264.95; and
    (4) The compliance period under Sec. 264.96.
    (b) The owner or operator must implement a corrective action program 
that prevents hazardous constituents from exceeding their respective 
concentration limits at the compliance point by removing the hazardous 
waste constituents or treating them in place.

[[Page 189]]

The permit will specify the specific measures that will be taken.
    (c) The owner or operator must begin corrective action within a 
reasonable time period after the ground-water protection standard is 
exceeded. The Regional Administrator will specify that time period in 
the facility permit. If a facility permit includes a corrective action 
program in addition to a compliance monitoring program, the permit will 
specify when the corrective action will begin and such a requirement 
will operate in lieu of Sec. 264.99(i)(2).
    (d) In conjunction with a corrective action program, the owner or 
operator must establish and implement a ground-water monitoring program 
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the corrective action program. Such 
a monitoring program may be based on the requirements for a compliance 
monitoring program under Sec. 264.99 and must be as effective as that 
program in determining compliance with the ground-water protection 
standard under Sec. 264.92 and in determining the success of a 
corrective action program under paragraph (e) of this section, where 
appropriate.
    (e) In addition to the other requirements of this section, the owner 
or operator must conduct a corrective action program to remove or treat 
in place any hazardous constituents under Sec. 264.93 that exceed 
concentration limits under Sec. 264.94 in groundwater:
    (1) Between the compliance point under Sec. 264.95 and the 
downgradient property boundary; and
    (2) Beyond the facility boundary, where necessary to protect human 
health and the environment, unless the owner or operator demonstrates to 
the satisfaction of the Regional Administrator that, despite the owner's 
or operator's best efforts, the owner or operator was unable to obtain 
the necessary permission to undertake such action. The owner/operator is 
not relieved of all responsibility to clean up a release that has 
migrated beyond the facility boundary where off-site access is denied. 
On-site measures to address such releases will be determined on a case-
by-case basis.
    (3) Corrective action measures under this paragraph must be 
initiated and completed within a reasonable period of time considering 
the extent of contamination.
    (4) Corrective action measures under this paragraph may be 
terminated once the concentration of hazardous constituents under 
Sec. 264.93 is reduced to levels below their respective concentration 
limits under Sec. 264.94.
    (f) The owner or operator must continue corrective action measures 
during the compliance period to the extent necessary to ensure that the 
ground-water protection standard is not exceeded. If the owner or 
operator is conducting corrective action at the end of the compliance 
period, he must continue that corrective action for as long as necessary 
to achieve compliance with the ground-water protection standard. The 
owner or operator may terminate corrective action measures taken beyond 
the period equal to the active life of the waste management area 
(including the closure period) if he can demonstrate, based on data from 
the ground-water monitoring program under paragraph (d) of this section, 
that the ground-water protection standard of Sec. 264.92 has not been 
exceeded for a period of three consecutive years.
    (g) The owner or operator must report in writing to the Regional 
Administrator on the effectiveness of the corrective action program. The 
owner or operator must submit these reports semi-annually.
    (h) If the owner or operator determines that the corrective action 
program no longer satisfies the requirements of this section, he must, 
within 90 days, submit an application for a permit modification to make 
any appropriate changes to the program.
[47 FR 32350, July 26, 1985, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 52 
FR 45798, Dec. 1, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 264.101  Corrective action for solid waste management units.

    (a) The owner or operator of a facility seeking a permit for the 
treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste must institute 
corrective action as necessary to protect human health and the 
environment for all releases of hazardous waste or constituents from any

[[Page 190]]

solid waste management unit at the facility, regardless of the time at 
which waste was placed in such unit.
    (b) Corrective action will be specified in the permit in accordance 
with this section and subpart S of this part. The permit will contain 
schedules of compliance for such corrective action (where such 
corrective action cannot be completed prior to issuance of the permit) 
and assurances of financial responsibility for completing such 
corrective action.
    (c) The owner or operator must implement corrective actions beyond 
the facility property boundary, where necessary to protect human health 
and the environment, unless the owner or operator demonstrates to the 
satisfaction of the Regional Administrator that, despite the owner's or 
operator's best efforts, the owner or operator was unable to obtain the 
necessary permission to undertake such actions. The owner/operator is 
not relieved of all responsibility to clean up a release that has 
migrated beyond the facility boundary where off-site access is denied. 
On-site measures to address such releases will be determined on a case-
by-case basis. Assurances of financial responsibility for such 
corrective action must be provided.
[50 FR 28747, July 15, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 45798, Dec. 1, 1987; 58 
FR 8683, Feb. 16, 1993]


<R04>
                   Subpart G--Closure and Post-Closure

    Source: 51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.110  Applicability.

    Except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise:
    (a) Sections 264.111 through 264.115 (which concern closure) apply 
to the owners and operators of all hazardous waste management 
facilities; and
    (b) Sections 264.116 through 264.120 (which concern post-closure 
care) apply to the owners and operators of:
    (1) All hazardous waste disposal facilities;
    (2) Waste piles and surface impoundments from which the owner or 
operator intends to remove the wastes at closure to the extent that 
these sections are made applicable to such facilities in Sec. 264.228 or 
Sec. 264.258;
    (3) Tank systems that are required under Sec. 264.197 to meet the 
requirements for landfills; and
    (4) Containment buildings that are required under Sec. 264.1102 to 
meet the requirement for landfills.
[51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, as amended at 51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 57 
FR 37264, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.111  Closure performance standard.

    The owner or operator must close the facility in a manner that:
    (a) Minimizes the need for further maintenance; and
    (b) Controls, minimizes or eliminates, to the extent necessary to 
protect human health and the environment, post-closure escape of 
hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, leachate, contaminated run-off, 
or hazardous waste decomposition products to the ground or surface 
waters or to the atmosphere; and
    (c) Complies with the closure requirements of this subpart, 
including, but not limited to, the requirements of Secs. 264.178, 
264.197, 264.228, 264.258, 264.280, 264.310, 264.351, 264.601 through 
264.603, and 264.1102.
[51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 46963, Dec. 10, 1987; 57 
FR 37265, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.112  Closure plan; amendment of plan.

    (a) Written plan. (1) The owner or operator of a hazardous waste 
management facility must have a written closure plan. In addition, 
certain surface impoundments and waste piles from which the owner or 
operator intends to remove or decontaminate the hazardous waste at 
partial or final closure are required by Secs. 264.228(c)(1)(i) and 
264.258(c)(1)(i) to have contingent closure plans. The plan must be 
submitted with the permit application, in accordance with 
Sec. 270.14(b)(13) of this chapter, and approved by the Regional 
Administrator as part of the permit issuance procedures under part 124 
of this chapter. In accordance with Sec. 270.32 of this chapter, the 
approved closure plan will become a condition of any RCRA permit.

[[Page 191]]

    (2) The Director's approval of the plan must ensure that the 
approved closure plan is consistent with Secs. 264.111 through 264.115 
and the applicable requirements of subpart F of this part, 
Secs. 264.178, 264.197, 264.228, 264.258, 264.280, 264.310, 264.351, 
264.601, and 264.1102. Until final closure is completed and certified in 
accordance with Sec. 264.115, a copy of the approved plan and all 
approved revisions must be furnished to the Director upon request, 
including requests by mail.
    (b) Content of plan. The plan must identify steps necessary to 
perform partial and/or final closure of the facility at any point during 
its active life. The closure plan must include, at least:
    (1) A description of how each hazardous waste management unit at the 
facility will be closed in accordance with Sec. 264.111;
    (2) A description of how final closure of the facility will be 
conducted in accordance with Sec. 264.111. The description must identify 
the maximum extent of the operations which will be unclosed during the 
active life of the facility; and
    (3) An estimate of the maximum inventory of hazardous wastes ever 
on-site over the active life of the facility and a detailed description 
of the methods to be used during partial closures and final closure, 
including, but not limited to, methods for removing, transporting, 
treating, storing, or disposing of all hazardous wastes, and 
identification of the type(s) of the off-site hazardous waste management 
units to be used, if applicable; and
    (4) A detailed description of the steps needed to remove or 
decontaminate all hazardous waste residues and contaminated containment 
system components, equipment, structures, and soils during partial and 
final closure, including, but not limited to, procedures for cleaning 
equipment and removing contaminated soils, methods for sampling and 
testing surrounding soils, and criteria for determining the extent of 
decontamination required to satisfy the closure performance standard; 
and
    (5) A detailed description of other activities necessary during the 
closure period to ensure that all partial closures and final closure 
satisfy the closure performance standards, including, but not limited 
to, ground-water monitoring, leachate collection, and run-on and run-off 
control; and
    (6) A schedule for closure of each hazardous waste management unit 
and for final closure of the facility. The schedule must include, at a 
minimum, the total time required to close each hazardous waste 
management unit and the time required for intervening closure activities 
which will allow tracking of the progress of partial and final closure. 
(For example, in the case of a landfill unit, estimates of the time 
required to treat or dispose of all hazardous waste inventory and of the 
time required to place a final cover must be included.)
    (7) For facilities that use trust funds to establish financial 
assurance under Sec. 264.143 or Sec. 264.145 and that are expected to 
close prior to the expiration of the permit, an estimate of the expected 
year of final closure.
    (c) Amendment of plan. The owner or operator must submit a written 
notification of or request for a permit modification to authorize a 
change in operating plans, facility design, or the approved closure plan 
in accordance with the applicable procedures in parts 124 and 270. The 
written notification or request must include a copy of the amended 
closure plan for review or approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (1) The owner or operator may submit a written notification or 
request to the Regional Administrator for a permit modification to amend 
the closure plan at any time prior to the notification of partial or 
final closure of the facility.
    (2) The owner or operator must submit a written notification of or 
request for a permit modification to authorize a change in the approved 
closure plan whenever:
    (i) Changes in operating plans or facility design affect the closure 
plan, or
    (ii) There is a change in the expected year of closure, if 
applicable, or
    (iii) In conducting partial or final closure activities, unexpected 
events require a modification of the approved closure plan.
    (3) The owner or operator must submit a written request for a permit 
modification including a copy of the amended closure plan for approval 
at

[[Page 192]]

least 60 days prior to the proposed change in facility design or 
operation, or no later than 60 days after an unexpected event has 
occurred which has affected the closure plan. If an unexpected event 
occurs during the partial or final closure period, the owner or operator 
must request a permit modification no later than 30 days after the 
unexpected event. An owner or operator of a surface impoundment or waste 
pile that intends to remove all hazardous waste at closure and is not 
otherwise required to prepare a contingent closure plan under 
Sec. 264.228(c)(1)(i) or Sec. 264.258(c)(1)(i), must submit an amended 
closure plan to the Regional Administrator no later than 60 days from 
the date that the owner or operator or Regional Administrator determines 
that the hazardous waste management unit must be closed as a landfill, 
subject to the requirements of Sec. 264.310, or no later than 30 days 
from that date if the determination is made during partial or final 
closure. The Regional Administrator will approve, disapprove, or modify 
this amended plan in accordance with the procedures in parts 124 and 
270. In accordance with Sec. 270.32 of this chapter, the approved 
closure plan will become a condition of any RCRA permit issued.
    (4) The Regional Administrator may request modifications to the plan 
under the conditions described in Sec. 264.112(c)(2). The owner or 
operator must submit the modified plan within 60 days of the Regional 
Administrator's request, or within 30 days if the change in facility 
conditions occurs during partial or final closure. Any modifications 
requested by the Regional Administrator will be approved in accordance 
with the procedures in parts 124 and 270.
    (d) Notification of partial closure and final closure. (1) The owner 
or operator must notify the Regional Administrator in writing at least 
60 days prior to the date on which he expects to begin closure of a 
surface impoundment, waste pile, land treatment or landfill unit, or 
final closure of a facility with such a unit. The owner or operator must 
notify the Regional Administrator in writing at least 45 days prior to 
the date on which he expects to begin final closure of a facility with 
only treatment or storage tanks, container storage, or incinerator units 
to be closed. The owner or operator must notify the Regional 
Administrator in writing at least 45 days prior to the date on which he 
expects to begin partial or final closure of a boiler or industrial 
furnace, whichever is earlier.
    (2) The date when he ``expects to begin closure'' must be either:
    (i) No later than 30 days after the date on which any hazardous 
waste management unit receives the known final volume of hazardous 
wastes, or if there is a reasonable possibility that the hazardous waste 
management unit will receive additional hazardous wastes, no later than 
one year after the date on which the unit received the most recent 
volume of hazardous wastes. If the owner or operator of a hazardous 
waste management unit can demonstrate to the Regional Administrator that 
the hazardous waste management unit or facility has the capacity to 
receive additional hazardous wastes and he has taken all steps to 
prevent threats to human health and the environment, including 
compliance with all applicable permit requirements, the Regional 
Administrator may approve an extension to this one-year limit; or
    (ii) For units meeting the requirements of Sec. 264.113(d), no later 
than 30 days after the date on which the hazardous waste management unit 
receives the known final volume of non-hazardous wastes, or if there is 
a reasonable possibility that the hazardous waste management unit will 
receive additional non-hazardous wastes, no later than one year after 
the date on which the unit received the most recent volume of non-
hazardous wastes. If the owner or operator can demonstrate to the 
Regional Administrator that the hazardous waste management unit has the 
capacity to receive additional non-hazardous wastes and he has taken, 
and will continue to take, all steps to prevent threats to human health 
and the environment, including compliance with all applicable permit 
requirements, the Regional Administrator may approve an extension to 
this one-year limit.

[[Page 193]]

    (3) If the facility's permit is terminated, or if the facility is 
otherwise ordered, by judicial decree or final order under section 3008 
of RCRA, to cease receiving hazardous wastes or to close, then the 
requirements of this paragraph do not apply. However, the owner or 
operator must close the facility in accordance with the deadlines 
established in Sec. 264.113.
    (e) Removal of wastes and decontamination or dismantling of 
equipment. Nothing in this section shall preclude the owner or operator 
from removing hazardous wastes and decontaminating or dismantling 
equipment in accordance with the approved partial or final closure plan 
at any time before or after notification of partial or final closure.
[51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 46963, Dec. 10, 1987; 53 
FR 37935, Sept. 28, 1988; 54 FR 33394, Aug. 14, 1989; 56 FR 7207, Feb. 
21, 1991; 57 FR 37265, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.113  Closure; time allowed for closure.

    (a) Within 90 days after receiving the final volume of hazardous 
wastes, or the final volume of non-hazardous wastes if the owner or 
operator complies with all applicable requirements in paragraphs (d) and 
(e) of this section, at a hazardous waste management unit or facility, 
the owner or operator must treat, remove from the unit or facility, or 
dispose of on-site, all hazardous wastes in accordance with the approved 
closure plan. The Regional Administrator may approve a longer period if 
the owner or operator complies with all applicable requirements for 
requesting a modification to the permit and demonstrates that:
    (1)(i) The activities required to comply with this paragraph will, 
of necessity, take longer than 90 days to complete; or
    (ii)(A) The hazardous waste management unit or facility has the 
capacity to receive additional hazardous wastes, or has the capacity to 
receive non-hazardous wastes if the owner or operator complies with 
paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section; and
    (B) There is a reasonable likelihood that he or another person will 
recommence operation of the hazardous waste management unit or the 
facility within one year; and
    (C) Closure of the hazardous waste management unit or facility would 
be incompatible with continued operation of the site; and
    (2) He has taken and will continue to take all steps to prevent 
threats to human health and the environment, including compliance with 
all applicable permit requirements.
    (b) The owner or operator must complete partial and final closure 
activities in accordance with the approved closure plan and within 180 
days after receiving the final volume of hazardous wastes, or the final 
volume of non-hazardous wastes if the owner or operator complies with 
all applicable requirements in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, 
at the hazardous waste management unit or facility. The Regional 
Administrator may approve an extension to the closure period if the 
owner or operator complies with all applicable requirements for 
requesting a modification to the permit and demonstrates that:
    (1)(i) The partial or final closure activities will, of necessity, 
take longer than 180 days to complete; or
    (ii)(A) The hazardous waste management unit or facility has the 
capacity to receive additional hazardous wastes, or has the capacity to 
receive non-hazardous wastes if the owner or operator complies with 
paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section; and
    (B) There is reasonable likelihood that he or another person will 
recommence operation of the hazardous waste management unit or the 
facility within one year; and
    (C) Closure of the hazardous waste management unit or facility would 
be incompatible with continued operation of the site; and
    (2) He has taken and will continue to take all steps to prevent 
threats to human health and the environment from the unclosed but not 
operating hazardous waste management unit or facility, including 
compliance with all applicable permit requirements.
    (c) The demonstrations referred to in paragraphs (a)(1) and (b)(1) 
of this section must be made as follows:
    (1) The demonstrations in paragraph (a)(1) of this section must be 
made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of

[[Page 194]]

the 90-day period in paragraph (a) of this section; and
    (2) The demonstration in paragraph (b)(1) of this section must be 
made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the 180-day period in 
paragraph (b) of this section, unless the owner or operator is otherwise 
subject to the deadlines in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) The Regional Administrator may allow an owner or operator to 
receive only non-hazardous wastes in a landfill, land treatment, or 
surface impoundment unit after the final receipt of hazardous wastes at 
that unit if:
    (1) The owner or operator requests a permit modification in 
compliance with all applicable requirements in parts 270 and 124 of this 
title and in the permit modification request demonstrates that:
    (i) The unit has the existing design capacity as indicated on the 
part A application to receive non-hazardous wastes; and
    (ii) There is a reasonable likelihood that the owner or operator or 
another person will receive non-hazardous wastes in the unit within one 
year after the final receipt of hazardous wastes; and
    (iii) The non-hazardous wastes will not be incompatible with any 
remaining wastes in the unit, or with the facility design and operating 
requirements of the unit or facility under this part; and
    (iv) Closure of the hazardous waste management unit would be 
incompatible with continued operation of the unit or facility; and
    (v) The owner or operator is operating and will continue to operate 
in compliance with all applicable permit requirements; and
    (2) The request to modify the permit includes an amended waste 
analysis plan, ground-water monitoring and response program, human 
exposure assessment required under RCRA section 3019, and closure and 
post-closure plans, and updated cost estimates and demonstrations of 
financial assurance for closure and post-closure care as necessary and 
appropriate, to reflect any changes due to the presence of hazardous 
constituents in the non-hazardous wastes, and changes in closure 
activities, including the expected year of closure if applicable under 
Sec. 264.112(b)(7), as a result of the receipt of non-hazardous wastes 
following the final receipt of hazardous wastes; and
    (3) The request to modify the permit includes revisions, as 
necessary and appropriate, to affected conditions of the permit to 
account for the receipt of non-hazardous wastes following receipt of the 
final volume of hazardous wastes; and
    (4) The request to modify the permit and the demonstrations referred 
to in paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section are submitted to the 
Regional Administrator no later than 120 days prior to the date on which 
the owner or operator of the facility receives the known final volume of 
hazardous wastes at the unit, or no later than 90 days after the 
effective date of this rule in the state in which the unit is located, 
whichever is later.
    (e) In addition to the requirements in paragraph (d) of this 
section, an owner or operator of a hazardous waste surface impoundment 
that is not in compliance with the liner and leachate collection system 
requirements in 42 U.S.C. 3004(o)(1) and 3005(j)(1) or 42 U.S.C. 3004(o) 
(2) or (3) or 3005(j) (2), (3), (4) or (13) must:
    (1) Submit with the request to modify the permit:
    (i) A contingent corrective measures plan, unless a corrective 
action plan has already been submitted under Sec. 264.99; and
    (ii) A plan for removing hazardous wastes in compliance with 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section; and
    (2) Remove all hazardous wastes from the unit by removing all 
hazardous liquids, and removing all hazardous sludges to the extent 
practicable without impairing the integrity of the liner(s), if any.
    (3) Removal of hazardous wastes must be completed no later than 90 
days after the final receipt of hazardous wastes. The Regional 
Administrator may approve an extension to this deadline if the owner or 
operator demonstrates that the removal of hazardous wastes will, of 
necessity, take longer than the allotted period to complete and that an 
extension will not pose a threat to human health and the environment.

[[Page 195]]

    (4) If a release that is a statistically significant increase (or 
decrease in the case of pH) over background values for detection 
monitoring parameters or constituents specified in the permit or that 
exceeds the facility's ground-water protection standard at the point of 
compliance, if applicable, is detected in accordance with the 
requirements in subpart F of this part, the owner or operator of the 
unit:
    (i) Must implement corrective measures in accordance with the 
approved contingent corrective measures plan required by paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section no later than one year after detection of the 
release, or approval of the contingent corrective measures plan, 
whichever is later;
    (ii) May continue to receive wastes at the unit following detection 
of the release only if the approved corrective measures plan includes a 
demonstration that continued receipt of wastes will not impede 
corrective action; and
    (iii) May be required by the Regional Administrator to implement 
corrective measures in less than one year or to cease the receipt of 
wastes until corrective measures have been implemented if necessary to 
protect human health and the environment.
    (5) During the period of corrective action, the owner or operator 
shall provide semi-annual reports to the Regional Administrator that 
describe the progress of the corrective action program, compile all 
ground-water monitoring data, and evaluate the effect of the continued 
receipt of non-hazardous wastes on the effectiveness of the corrective 
action.
    (6) The Regional Administrator may require the owner or operator to 
commence closure of the unit if the owner or operator fails to implement 
corrective action measures in accordance with the approved contingent 
corrective measures plan within one year as required in paragraph (e)(4) 
of this section, or fails to make substantial progress in implementing 
corrective action and achieving the facility's ground-water protection 
standard or background levels if the facility has not yet established a 
ground-water protection standard.
    (7) If the owner or operator fails to implement corrective measures 
as required in paragraph (e)(4) of this section, or if the Regional 
Administrator determines that substantial progress has not been made 
pursuant to paragraph (e)(6) of this section he shall:
    (i) Notify the owner or operator in writing that the owner or 
operator must begin closure in accordance with the deadlines in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section and provide a detailed statement 
of reasons for this determination, and
    (ii) Provide the owner or operator and the public, through a 
newspaper notice, the opportunity to submit written comments on the 
decision no later than 20 days after the date of the notice.
    (iii) If the Regional Administrator receives no written comments, 
the decision will become final five days after the close of the comment 
period. The Regional Administrator will notify the owner or operator 
that the decision is final, and that a revised closure plan, if 
necessary, must be submitted within 15 days of the final notice and that 
closure must begin in accordance with the deadlines in paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this section.
    (iv) If the Regional Administrator receives written comments on the 
decision, he shall make a final decision within 30 days after the end of 
the comment period, and provide the owner or operator in writing and the 
public through a newspaper notice, a detailed statement of reasons for 
the final decision. If the Regional Administrator determines that 
substantial progress has not been made, closure must be initiated in 
accordance with the deadlines in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
    (v) The final determinations made by the Regional Administrator 
under paragraphs (e)(7) (iii) and (iv) of this section are not subject 
to administrative appeal.
[51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 33394, Aug. 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 264.114  Disposal or decontamination of equipment, structures and soils.

    During the partial and final closure periods, all contaminated 
equipment, structures and soils must be properly disposed of or 
decontaminated unless otherwise specified in Secs. 264.197, 264.228,

[[Page 196]]

264.258, 264.280 or Sec. 264.310. By removing any hazardous wastes or 
hazardous constituents during partial and final closure, the owner or 
operator may become a generator of hazardous waste and must handle that 
waste in accordance with all applicable requirements of part 262 of this 
chapter.
[51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 46963, Dec. 10, 1987; 53 
FR 34086, Sept. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.115  Certification of closure.

    Within 60 days of completion of closure of each hazardous waste 
surface impoundment, waste pile, land treatment, and landfill unit, and 
within 60 days of the completion of final closure, the owner or operator 
must submit to the Regional Administrator, by registered mail, a 
certification that the hazardous waste management unit or facility, as 
applicable, has been closed in accordance with the specifications in the 
approved closure plan. The certification must be signed by the owner or 
operator and by an independent registered professional engineer. 
Documentation supporting the independent registered professional 
engineer's certification must be furnished to the Regional Administrator 
upon request until he releases the owner or operator from the financial 
assurance requirements for closure under Sec. 264.143(i).


<R05>
Sec. 264.116  Survey plat.

    No later than the submission of the certification of closure of each 
hazardous waste disposal unit, the owner or operator must submit to the 
local zoning authority, or the authority with jurisdiction over local 
land use, and to the Regional Administrator, a survey plat indicating 
the location and dimensions of landfills cells or other hazardous waste 
disposal units with respect to permanently surveyed benchmarks. This 
plat must be prepared and certified by a professional land surveyor. The 
plat filed with the local zoning authority, or the authority with 
jurisdiction over local land use, must contain a note, prominently 
displayed, which states the owner's or operator's obligation to restrict 
disturbance of the hazardous waste disposal unit in accordance with the 
applicable subpart G regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 264.117  Post-closure care and use of property.

    (a)(1) Post-closure care for each hazardous waste management unit 
subject to the requirements of Secs. 264.117 through 264.120 must begin 
after completion of closure of the unit and continue for 30 years after 
that date and must consist of at least the following:
    (i) Monitoring and reporting in accordance with the requirements of 
subparts F, K, L, M, N, and X of this part; and
    (ii) Maintenance and monitoring of waste containment systems in 
accordance with the requirements of subparts F, K, L, M, N, and X of 
this part.
    (2) Any time preceding partial closure of a hazardous waste 
management unit subject to post-closure care requirements or final 
closure, or any time during the post-closure period for a particular 
unit, the Regional Administrator may, in accordance with the permit 
modification procedures in parts 124 and 270:
    (i) Shorten the post-closure care period applicable to the hazardous 
waste management unit, or facility, if all disposal units have been 
closed, if he finds that the reduced period is sufficient to protect 
human health and the environment (e.g., leachate or ground-water 
monitoring results, characteristics of the hazardous wastes, application 
of advanced technology, or alternative disposal, treatment, or re-use 
techniques indicate that the hazardous waste management unit or facility 
is secure); or
    (ii) Extend the post-closure care period applicable to the hazardous 
waste management unit or facility if he finds that the extended period 
is necessary to protect human health and the environment (e.g., leachate 
or ground-water monitoring results indicate a potential for migration of 
hazardous wastes at levels which may be harmful to human health and the 
environment).
    (b) The Regional Administrator may require, at partial and final 
closure, continuation of any of the security requirements of Sec. 264.14 
during part or all of the post-closure period when:
    (1) Hazardous wastes may remain exposed after completion of partial 
or final closure; or

[[Page 197]]

    (2) Access by the public or domestic livestock may pose a hazard to 
human health.
    (c) Post-closure use of property on or in which hazardous wastes 
remain after partial or final closure must never be allowed to disturb 
the integrity of the final cover, liner(s), or any other components of 
the containment system, or the function of the facility's monitoring 
systems, unless the Regional Administrator finds that the disturbance:
    (1) Is necessary to the proposed use of the property, and will not 
increase the potential hazard to human health or the environment; or
    (2) Is necessary to reduce a threat to human health or the 
environment.
    (d) All post-closure care activities must be in accordance with the 
provisions of the approved post-closure plan as specified in 
Sec. 264.118.
[51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 46963, Dec. 10, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 264.118  Post-closure plan; amendment of plan.

    (a) Written Plan. The owner or operator of a hazardous waste 
disposal unit must have a written post-closure plan. In addition, 
certain surface impoundments and waste piles from which the owner or 
operator intends to remove or decontaminate the hazardous wastes at 
partial or final closure are required by Secs. 264.228(c)(1)(ii) and 
264.258(c)(1)(ii) to have contingent post-closure plans. Owners or 
operators of surface impoundments and waste piles not otherwise required 
to prepare contingent post-closure plans under Secs. 264.228(c)(1)(ii) 
and 264.258(c)(1)(ii) must submit a post-closure plan to the Regional 
Administrator within 90 days from the date that the owner or operator or 
Regional administrator determines that the hazardous waste management 
unit must be closed as a landfill, subject to the requirements of 
Secs. 264.117 through 264.120. The plan must be submitted with the 
permit application, in accordance with Sec. 270.14(b)(13) of this 
chapter, and approved by the Regional Administrator as part of the 
permit issuance procedures under part 124 of this chapter. In accordance 
with Sec. 270.32 of this chapter, the approved post-closure plan will 
become a condition of any RCRA permit issued.
    (b) For each hazardous waste management unit subject to the 
requirements of this section, the post-closure plan must identify the 
activities that will be carried on after closure of each disposal unit 
and the frequency of these activities, and include at least:
    (1) A description of the planned monitoring activities and 
frequencies at which they will be performed to comply with subparts F, 
K, L, M, N, and X of this part during the post-closure care period; and
    (2) A description of the planned maintenance activities, and 
frequencies at which they will be performed, to ensure:
    (i) The integrity of the cap and final cover or other containment 
systems in accordance with the requirements of subparts F, K, L, M, N, 
and X of this part; and
    (ii) The function of the monitoring equipment in accordance with the 
requirements of subparts, F, K, L, M, N, and X of this part; and
    (3) The name, address, and phone number of the person or office to 
contact about the hazardous waste disposal unit or facility during the 
post-closure care period.
    (c) Until final closure of the facility, a copy of the approved 
post-closure plan must be furnished to the Regional Administrator upon 
request, including request by mail. After final closure has been 
certified, the person or office specified in Sec. 264.188(b)(3) must 
keep the approved post-closure plan during the remainder of the post-
closure period.
    (d) Amendment of plan. The owner or operator must submit a written 
notification of or request for a permit modification to authorize a 
change in the approved post-closure plan in accordance with the 
applicable requirements in parts 124 and 270. The written notification 
or request must include a copy of the amended post-closure plan for 
review or approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (1) The owner or operator may submit a written notification or 
request to the Regional Administrator for a permit modification to amend 
the post-closure plan at any time during the active life of the facility 
or during the post-closure care period.

[[Page 198]]

    (2) The owner or operator must submit a written notification of or 
request for a permit modification to authorize a change in the approved 
post-closure plan whenever:
    (i) Changes in operating plans or facility design affect the 
approved post-closure plan, or
    (ii) There is a change in the expected year of final closure, if 
applicable, or
    (iii) Events which occur during the active life of the facility, 
including partial and final closures, affect the approved post-closure 
plan.
    (3) The owner or operator must submit a written request for a permit 
modification at least 60 days prior to the proposed change in facility 
design or operation, or no later than 60 days after an unexpected event 
has occurred which has affected the post-closure plan. An owner or 
operator of a surface impoundment or waste pile that intends to remove 
all hazardous waste at closure and is not otherwise required to submit a 
contingent post-closure plan under Secs. 264.228(c)(1)(ii) and 
264.258(c)(1)(ii) must submit a post-closure plan to the Regional 
Administrator no later than 90 days after the date that the owner or 
operator or Regional Administrator determines that the hazardous waste 
management unit must be closed as a landfill, subject to the 
requirements of Sec. 264.310. The Regional Administrator will approve, 
disapprove or modify this plan in accordance with the procedures in 
parts 124 and 270. In accordance with Sec. 270.32 of this chapter, the 
approved post-closure plan will become a permit condition.
    (4) The Regional Administrator may request modifications to the plan 
under the conditions described in Sec. 264.118(d)(2). The owner or 
operator must submit the modified plan no later than 60 days after the 
Regional Administrator's request, or no later than 90 days if the unit 
is a surface impoundment or waste pile not previously required to 
prepare a contingent post-closure plan. Any modifications requested by 
the Regional Administrator will be approved, disapproved, or modified in 
accordance with the procedures in parts 124 and 270.
[51 FR 16444, May 2, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 46964, Dec. 10, 1987; 53 
FR 37935, Sept. 28,1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.119  Post-closure notices.

    (a) No later than 60 days after certification of closure of each 
hazardous waste disposal unit, the owner or operator must submit to the 
local zoning authority, or the authority with jurisdiction over local 
land use, and to the Regional Administrator a record of the type, 
location, and quantity of hazardous wastes disposed of within each cell 
or other disposal unit of the facility. For hazardous wastes disposed of 
before January 12, 1981, the owner or operator must identify the type, 
location, and quantity of the hazardous wastes to the best of his 
knowledge and in accordance with any records he has kept.
    (b) Within 60 days of certification of closure of the first 
hazardous waste disposal unit and within 60 days of certification of 
closure of the last hazardous waste disposal unit, the owner or operator 
must:
    (1) Record, in accordance with State law, a notation on the deed to 
the facility property--or on some other instrument which is normally 
examined during title search--that will in perpetuity notify any 
potential purchaser of the property that:
    (i) The land has been used to manage hazardous wastes; and
    (ii) Its use is restricted under 40 CFR subpart G regulations; and
    (iii) The survey plat and record of the type, location, and quantity 
of hazardous wastes disposed of within each cell or other hazardous 
waste disposal unit of the facility required by Secs. 264.116 and 
264.119(a) have been filed with the local zoning authority or the 
authority with jurisdiction over local land use and with the Regional 
Administrator; and
    (2) Submit a certification, signed by the owner or operator, that he 
has recorded the notation specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, 
including a copy of the document in which the notation has been placed, 
to the Regional Administrator.
    (c) If the owner or operator or any subsequent owner or operator of 
the land upon which a hazardous waste disposal unit is located wishes to 
remove hazardous wastes and hazardous waste residues, the liner, if any, 
or contaminated soils, he must request a modification to the post-
closure permit in

[[Page 199]]

accordance with the applicable requirements in parts 124 and 270. The 
owner or operator must demonstrate that the removal of hazardous wastes 
will satisfy the criteria of Sec. 264.117(c). By removing hazardous 
waste, the owner or operator may become a generator of hazardous waste 
and must manage it in accordance with all applicable requirements of 
this chapter. If he is granted a permit modification or otherwise 
granted approval to conduct such removal activities, the owner or 
operator may request that the Regional Administrator approve either:
    (1) The removal of the notation on the deed to the facility property 
or other instrument normally examined during title search; or
    (2) The addition of a notation to the deed or instrument indicating 
the removal of the hazardous waste.


<R05>
Sec. 264.120  Certification of completion of post-closure care.

    No later than 60 days after completion of the established post-
closure care period for each hazardous waste disposal unit, the owner or 
operator must submit to the Regional Administrator, by registered mail, 
a certification that the post-closure care period for the hazardous 
waste disposal unit was performed in accordance with the specifications 
in the approved post-closure plan. The certification must be signed by 
the owner or operator and an independent registered professional 
engineer. Documentation supporting the independent registered 
professional engineer's certification must be furnished to the Regional 
Administrator upon request until he releases the owner or operator from 
the financial assurance requirements for post-closure care under 
Sec. 264.145(i).


<R04>
                    Subpart H--Financial Requirements

    Source: 47 FR 15047, Apr. 7, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.140  Applicability.

    (a) The requirements of Secs. 264.142, 264.143, and 264.147 through 
264.151 apply to owners and operators of all hazardous waste facilities, 
except as provided otherwise in this section or in Sec. 264.1.
    (b) The requirements of Secs. 264.144 and 264.145 apply only to 
owners and operators of:
    (1) Disposal facilities;
    (2) Piles, and surface impoundments from which the owner or operator 
intends to remove the wastes at closure, to the extent that these 
sections are made applicable to such facilities in Secs. 264.228 and 
264.258;
    (3) Tank systems that are required under Sec. 264.197 to meet the 
requirements for landfills; and
    (4) Containment buildings that are required under Sec. 264.1102 to 
meet the requirements for landfills.
    (c) States and the Federal government are exempt from the 
requirements of this subpart.
[47 FR 15047, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982; 51 
FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 57 FR 37265, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.141  Definitions of terms as used in this subpart.

    (a) Closure plan means the plan for closure prepared in accordance 
with the requirements of Sec. 264.112.
    (b) Current closure cost estimate means the most recent of the 
estimates prepared in accordance with Sec. 264.142 (a), (b), and (c).
    (c) Current post-closure cost estimate means the most recent of the 
estimates prepared in accordance with Sec. 264.144 (a), (b), and (c).
    (d) Parent corporation means a corporation which directly owns at 
least 50 percent of the voting stock of the corporation which is the 
facility owner or operator; the latter corporation is deemed a 
``subsidiary'' of the parent corporation.
    (e) Post-closure plan means the plan for post-closure care prepared 
in accordance with the requirements of Secs. 264.117 through 264.120.
    (f) The following terms are used in the specifications for the 
financial tests for closure, post-closure care, and liability coverage. 
The definitions are intended to assist in the understanding of these 
regulations and are not intended to limit the meanings of terms in a way 
that conflicts with generally accepted accounting practices.

[[Page 200]]

    Assets means all existing and all probable future economic benefits 
obtained or controlled by a particular entity.
    Current assets means cash or other assets or resources commonly 
identified as those which are reasonably expected to be realized in cash 
or sold or consumed during the normal operating cycle of the business.
    Current liabilities means obligations whose liquidation is 
reasonably expected to require the use of existing resources properly 
classifiable as current assets or the creation of other current 
liabilities.
    Current plugging and abandonment cost estimate means the most recent 
of the estimates prepared in accordance with Sec. 144.62(a), (b), and 
(c) of this title.
    Independently audited refers to an audit performed by an independent 
certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted 
auditing standards.
    Liabilities means probable future sacrifices of economic benefits 
arising from present obligations to transfer assets or provide services 
to other entities in the future as a result of past transactions or 
events.
    Net working capital means current assets minus current liabilities.
    Net worth means total assets minus total liabilities and is 
equivalent to owner's equity.
    Tangible net worth means the tangible assets that remain after 
deducting liabilities; such assets would not include intangibles such as 
goodwill and rights to patents or royalties.
    (g) In the liability insurance requirements the terms bodily injury 
and property damage shall have the meanings given these terms by 
applicable State law. However, these terms do not include those 
liabilities which, consistent with standard industry practices, are 
excluded from coverage in liability policies for bodily injury and 
property damage. The Agency intends the meanings of other terms used in 
the liability insurance requirements to be consistent with their common 
meanings within the insurance industry. The definitions given below of 
several of the terms are intended to assist in the understanding of 
these regulations and are not intended to limit their meanings in a way 
that conflicts with general insurance industry usage.
    Accidental occurrence means an accident, including continuous or 
repeated exposure to conditions, which results in bodily injury or 
property damage neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of the 
insured.
    Legal defense costs means any expenses that an insurer incurs in 
defending against claims of third parties brought under the terms and 
conditions of an insurance policy.
    Nonsudden accidental occurrence means an occurrence which takes 
place over time and involves continuous or repeated exposure.
    Sudden accidental occurrence means an occurrence which is not 
continuous or repeated in nature.
    (h) Substantial business relationship means the extent of a business 
relationship necessary under applicable State law to make a guarantee 
contract issued incident to that relationship valid and enforceable. A 
``substantial business relationship'' must arise from a pattern of 
recent or ongoing business transactions, in addition to the guarantee 
itself, such that a currently existing business relationship between the 
guarantor and the owner or operator is demonstrated to the satisfaction 
of the applicable EPA Regional Administrator.
[47 FR 16554, Apr. 16, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 16447, May 2, 1986; 53 
FR 33950, Sept. 1, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.142  Cost estimate for closure.

    (a) The owner or operator must have a detailed written estimate, in 
current dollars, of the cost of closing the facility in accordance with 
the requirements in Secs. 264.111 through 264.115 and applicable closure 
requirements in Secs. 264.178, 264.197, 264.228, 264.258, 264.280, 
264.310, 264.351, 264.601 through 264.603, and 264.1102.
    (1) The estimate must equal the cost of final closure at the point 
in the facility's active life when the extent and manner of its 
operation would make closure the most expensive, as indicated by its 
closure plan (see Sec. 264.112(b)); and
    (2) The closure cost estimate must be based on the costs to the 
owner or operator of hiring a third party to close

[[Page 201]]

the facility. A third party is a party who is neither a parent nor a 
subsidiary of the owner or operator. (See definition of parent 
corporation in Sec. 264.141(d).) The owner or operator may use costs for 
on-site disposal if he can demonstrate that on-site disposal capacity 
will exist at all times over the life of the facility.
    (3) The closure cost estimate may not incorporate any salvage value 
that may be realized with the sale of hazardous wastes, or non-hazardous 
wastes if applicable under Sec. 264.113(d), facility structures or 
equipment, land, or other assets associated with the facility at the 
time of partial or final closure.
    (4) The owner or operator may not incorporate a zero cost for 
hazardous wastes, or non-hazardous wastes if applicable under 
Sec. 264.113(d), that might have economic value.
    (b) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must adjust the closure cost estimate for inflation within 60 days prior 
to the anniversary date of the establishment of the financial 
instrument(s) used to comply with Sec. 264.143. For owners and operators 
using the financial test or corporate guarantee, the closure cost 
estimate must be updated for inflation within 30 days after the close of 
the firm's fiscal year and before submission of updated information to 
the Regional Administrator as specified in Sec. 264.143(f)(3). The 
adjustment may be made by recalculating the maximum costs of closure in 
current dollars, or by using an inflation factor derived from the most 
recent Implicit Price Deflator for Gross National Product published by 
the U.S. Department of Commerce in its Survey of Current Business, as 
specified in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section. The inflation 
factor is the result of dividing the latest published annual Deflator by 
the Deflator for the previous year.
    (1) The first adjustment is made by multiplying the closure cost 
estimate by the inflation factor. The result is the adjusted closure 
cost estimate.
    (2) Subsequent adjustments are made by mutliplying the latest 
adjusted closure cost estimate by the latest inflation factor.
    (c) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must revise the closure cost estimate no later than 30 days after the 
Regional Administrator has approved the request to modify the closure 
plan, if the change in the closure plan increases the cost of closure. 
The revised closure cost estimate must be adjusted for inflation as 
specified in Sec. 264.142(b).
    (d) The owner or operator must keep the following at the facility 
during the operating life of the facility: The latest closure cost 
estimate prepared in accordance with Sec. 264.142 (a) and (c) and, when 
this estimate has been adjusted in accordance with Sec. 264.142(b), the 
latest adjusted closure cost estimate.
[47 FR 15047, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 51 
FR 16447, May 2, 1986; 52 FR 46964, Dec. 10, 1987; 54 FR 33395, Aug. 14, 
1989; 57 FR 37265, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.143  Financial assurance for closure.

    An owner or operator of each facility must establish financial 
assurance for closure of the facility. He must choose from the options 
as specified in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this section.
    (a) Closure trust fund. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy the 
requirements of this section by establishing a closure trust fund which 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting an 
originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement to the Regional 
Administrator. An owner or operator of a new facility must submit the 
originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement to the Regional 
Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste 
is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal. The trustee must 
be an entity which has the authority to act as a trustee and whose trust 
operations are regulated and examined by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the trust agreement must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(a)(1), and the trust agreement must be 
accompanied by a formal certification of acknowledgment (for example, 
see Sec. 264.151(a)(2)). Schedule A of the trust agreement must be 
updated within 60 days after a change in the amount of the current 
closure cost estimate covered by the agreement.
    (3) Payments into the trust fund must be made annually by the owner 
or

[[Page 202]]

operator over the term of the initial RCRA permit or over the remaining 
operating life of the facility as estimated in the closure plan, 
whichever period is shorter; this period is hereafter referred to as the 
``pay-in period.'' The payments into the closure trust fund must be made 
as follows:
    (i) For a new facility, the first payment must be made before the 
initial receipt of hazardous waste for treatment, storage, or disposal. 
A receipt from the trustee for this payment must be submitted by the 
owner or operator to the Regional Administrator before this initial 
receipt of hazardous waste. The first payment must be at least equal to 
the current closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 264.143(g), divided by the number of years in the pay-in period. 
Subsequent payments must be made no later than 30 days after each 
anniversary date of the first payment. The amount of each subsequent 
payment must be determined by this formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.050


where CE is the current closure cost estimate, CV is the current value 
of the trust fund, and Y is the number of years remaining in the pay-in 
period.
    (ii) If an owner or operator establishes a trust fund as specified 
in Sec. 265.143(a) of this chapter, and the value of that trust fund is 
less than the current closure cost estimate when a permit is awarded for 
the facility, the amount of the current closure cost estimate still to 
be paid into the trust fund must be paid in over the pay-in period as 
defined in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. Payments must continue to 
be made no later than 30 days after each anniversary date of the first 
payment made pursuant to part 265 of this chapter. The amount of each 
payment must be determined by this formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.050


where CE is the current closure cost estimate, CV is the current value 
of the trust fund, and Y is the number of years remaining in the pay-in 
period.
    (4) The owner or operator may accelerate payments into the trust 
fund or he may deposit the full amount of the current closure cost 
estimate at the time the fund is established. However, he must maintain 
the value of the fund at no less than the value that the fund would have 
if annual payments were made as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section.
    (5) If the owner or operator establishes a closure trust fund after 
having used one or more alternate mechanisms specified in this section 
or in Sec. 265.143 of this chapter, his first payment must be in at 
least the amount that the fund would contain if the trust fund were 
established initially and annual payments made according to 
specifications of this paragraph and Sec. 265.143(a) of this chapter, as 
applicable.
    (6) After the pay-in period is completed, whenever the current 
closure cost estimate changes, the owner or operator must compare the 
new estimate with the trustee's most recent annual valuation of the 
trust fund. If the value of the fund is less than the amount of the new 
estimate, the owner or operator, within 60 days after the change in the 
cost estimate, must either deposit an amount into the fund so that its 
value after this deposit at least equals the amount of the current 
closure cost estimate, or obtain other financial assurance as specified 
in this section to cover the difference.
    (7) If the value of the trust fund is greater than the total amount 
of the current closure cost estimate, the owner or operator may submit a 
written request to the Regional Administrator for release of the amount 
in excess of the current closure cost estimate.
    (8) If an owner or operator substitutes other financial assurance as 
specified in this section for all or part of the trust fund, he may 
submit a written request to the Regional Administrator for release of 
the amount in excess of the current closure cost estimate covered by the 
trust fund.
    (9) Within 60 days after receiving a request from the owner or 
operator for release of funds as specified in paragraph (a) (7) or (8) 
of this section, the Regional Administrator will instruct

[[Page 203]]

the trustee to release to the owner or operator such funds as the 
Regional Administrator specifies in writing.
    (10) After beginning partial or final closure, an owner or operator 
or another person authorized to conduct partial or final closure may 
request reimbursements for partial or final closure expenditures by 
submitting itemized bills to the Regional Administrator. The owner or 
operator may request reimbursements for partial closure only if 
sufficient funds are remaining in the trust fund to cover the maximum 
costs of closing the facility over its remaining operating life. Within 
60 days after receiving bills for partial or final closure activities, 
the Regional Administrator will instruct the trustee to make 
reimbursements in those amounts as the Regional Administrator specifies 
in writing, if the Regional Administrator determines that the partial or 
final closure expenditures are in accordance with the approved closure 
plan, or otherwise justified. If the Regional Administrator has reason 
to believe that the maximum cost of closure over the remaining life of 
the facility will be significantly greater than the value of the trust 
fund, he may withhold reimbursements of such amounts as he deems prudent 
until he determines, in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i) that the owner 
or operator is no longer required to maintain financial assurance for 
final closure of the facility. If the Regional Administrator does not 
instruct the trustee to make such reimbursements, he will provide the 
owner or operator with a detailed written statement of reasons.
    (11) The Regional Administrator will agree to termination of the 
trust when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i).
    (b) Surety bond guaranteeing payment into a closure trust fund. (1) 
An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
obtaining a surety bond which conforms to the requirements of this 
paragraph and submitting the bond to the Regional Administrator. An 
owner or operator of a new facility must submit the bond to the Regional 
Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste 
is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal. The bond must be 
effective before this initial receipt of hazardous waste. The surety 
company issuing the bond must, at a minimum, be among those listed as 
acceptable sureties on Federal bonds in Circular 570 of the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury.
    (2) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(b).
    (3) The owner or operator who uses a surety bond to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the bond, all payments made thereunder will be 
deposited by the surety directly into the standby trust fund in 
accordance with instructions from the Regional Administrator. This 
standby trust fund must meet the requirements specified in 
Sec. 264.143(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the surety bond; and
    (ii) Until the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 264.143(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The bond must guarantee that the owner or operator will:
    (i) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
of the bond before the beginning of final closure of the facility; or
    (ii) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
within 15 days after an administrative order to begin final closure 
issued by the Regional Administrator becomes final, or within 15 days 
after an order to begin final closure is issued by a U.S. district court 
or other court of competent jurisdiction; or

[[Page 204]]

    (iii) Provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this 
section, and obtain the Regional Administrator's written approval of the 
assurance provided, within 90 days after receipt by both the owner or 
operator and the Regional Administrator of a notice of cancellation of 
the bond from the surety.
    (5) Under the terms of the bond, the surety will become liable on 
the bond obligation when the owner or operator fails to perform as 
guaranteed by the bond.
    (6) The penal sum of the bond must be in an amount at least equal to 
the current closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 264.143(g).
    (7) Whenever the current closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater then the penal sum, the owner or operator, within 60 days 
after the increase, must either cause the penal sum to be increased to 
an amount at least equal to the current closure cost estimate and submit 
evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or obtain other 
financial assurance as specified in this section to cover the increase. 
Whenever the current closure cost estimate decreases, the penal sum may 
be reduced to the amount of the current closure cost estimate following 
written approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) Under the terms of the bond, the surety may cancel the bond by 
sending notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidence by the return receipts.
    (9) The owner or operator may cancel the bond if the Regional 
Administrator has given prior written consent based on his receipt of 
evidence of alternate financial assurance as specified in this section.
    (c) Surety bond guaranteeing performance of closure. (1) An owner or 
operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by obtaining a 
surety bond which conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and 
submitting the bond to the Regional Administrator. An owner or operator 
of a new facility must submit the bond to the Regional Administrator at 
least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste is first received 
for treatment, storage, or disposal. The bond must be effective before 
this initial receipt of hazardous waste. The surety company issuing the 
bond must, at a minimum, be among those listed as acceptable sureties on 
Federal bonds in Circular 570 of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
    (2) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(c).
    (3) The owner or operator who uses a surety bond to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the bond, all payments made thereunder will be 
deposited by the surety directly into the standby trust fund in 
accordance with instructions from the Regional Administrator. This 
standby trust must meet the requirements specified in Sec. 264.143(a), 
except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the surety bond; and
    (ii) Unless the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 264.143(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The bond must guarantee that the owner or operator will:
    (i) Perform final closure in accordance with the closure plan and 
other requirements of the permit for the facility whenever required to 
do so; or
    (ii) Provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this 
section, and obtain the Regional Administrator's written approval of the 
assurance provided, within 90 days after receipt by both the owner or 
operator and the Regional Administrator of a notice of cancellation of 
the bond from the surety.

[[Page 205]]

    (5) Under the terms of the bond, the surety will become liable on 
the bond obligation when the owner or operator fails to perform as 
guaranteed by the bond. Following a final administrative determination 
pursuant to section 3008 of RCRA that the owner or operator has failed 
to perform final closure in accordance with the approved closure plan 
and other permit requirements when required to do so, under the terms of 
the bond the surety will perform final closure as guaranteed by the bond 
or will deposit the amount of the penal sum into the standby trust fund.
    (6) The penal sum of the bond must be in an amount at least equal to 
the current closure cost estimate.
    (7) Whenever the current closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the penal sum, the owner or operator, within 60 days 
after the increase, must either cause the penal sum to be increased to 
an amount at least equal to the current closure cost estimate and submit 
evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or obtain other 
financial assurance as specified in this section. Whenever the current 
closure cost estimate decreases, the penal sum may be reduced to the 
amount of the current closure cost estimate following written approval 
by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) Under the terms of the bond, the surety may cancel the bond by 
sending notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (9) The owner or operator may cancel the bond if the Regional 
Administrator has given prior written consent. The Regional 
Administrator will provide such written consent when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i).
    (10) The surety will not be liable for deficiencies in the 
performance of closure by the owner or operator after the Regional 
Administrator releases the owner or operator from the requirements of 
this section in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i).
    (d) Closure letter of credit. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy 
the requirements of this section by obtaining an irrevocable standby 
letter of credit which conforms to the requirements of this paragraph 
and submitting the letter to the Regional Administrator. An owner or 
operator of a new facility must submit the letter of credit to the 
Regional Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which 
hazardous waste is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal. 
The letter of credit must be effective before this initial receipt of 
hazardous waste. The issuing institution must be an entity which has the 
authority to issue letters of credit and whose letter-of-credit 
operations are regulated and examined by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the letter of credit must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(d).
    (3) An owner or operator who uses a letter of credit to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the letter of credit, all amounts paid pursuant to a 
draft by the Regional Administrator will be deposited by the issuing 
institution directly into the standby trust fund in accordance with 
instructions from the Regional Administrator. This standby trust fund 
must meet the requirements of the trust fund specified in 
Sec. 264.143(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the letter of credit; and
    (ii) Unless the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 264.143(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and

[[Page 206]]

    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The letter of credit must be accompanied by a letter from the 
owner or operator referring to the letter of credit by number, issuing 
institution, and date, and providing the following information: the EPA 
Identification Number, name, and address of the facility, and the amount 
of funds assured for closure of the facility by the letter of credit.
    (5) The letter of credit must be irrevocable and issued for a period 
of at least 1 year. The letter of credit must provide that the 
expiration date will be automatically extended for a period of at least 
1 year unless, at least 120 days before the current expiration date, the 
issuing institution notifies both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator by certified mail of a decision not to extend the 
expiration date. Under the terms of the letter of credit, the 120 days 
will begin on the date when both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator have received the notice, as evidenced by the return 
receipts.
    (6) The letter of credit must be issued in an amount at least equal 
to the current closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 264.143(g).
    (7) Whenever the current closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the amount of the credit, the owner or operator, 
within 60 days after the increase, must either cause the amount of the 
credit to be increased so that it at least equals the current closure 
cost estimate and submit evidence of such increase to the Regional 
Administrator, or obtain other financial assurance as specified in this 
section to cover the increase. Whenever the current closure cost 
estimate decreases, the amount of the credit may be reduced to the 
amount of the current closure cost estimate following written approval 
by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) Following a final administrative determination pursuant to 
section 3008 of RCRA that the owner or operator has failed to perform 
final closure in accordance with the closure plan and other permit 
requirements when required to do so, the Regional Administrator may draw 
on the letter of credit.
    (9) If the owner or operator does not establish alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain written approval of 
such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 days 
after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice from issuing institution that it has decided 
not to extend the letter of credit beyond the current expiration date, 
the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter of credit. The 
Regional Administrator may delay the drawing if the issuing institution 
grants an extension of the term of the credit. During the last 30 days 
of any such extension the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter 
of credit if the owner or operator has failed to provide alternate 
financial assurance as specified in this section and obtain written 
approval of such assurance from the Regional Administrator.
    (10) The Regional Administrator will return the letter of credit to 
the issuing institution for termination when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i).
    (e) Closure insurance. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy the 
requirements of this section by obtaining closure insurance which 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting a 
certificate of such insurance to the Regional Administrator. An owner or 
operator of a new facility must submit the certificate of insurance to 
the Regional Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which 
hazardous waste is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal. 
The insurance must be effective before this initial receipt of hazardous 
waste. At a minimum, the insurer must be licensed to transact the 
business of insurance, or eligible to provide insurance as an excess or 
surplus lines insurer, in one or more States.
    (2) The wording of the certificate of insurance must be identical to 
the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(e).

[[Page 207]]

    (3) The closure insurance policy must be issued for a face amount at 
least equal to the current closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 264.143(g). The term ``face amount'' means the total amount the 
insurer is obligated to pay under the policy. Actual payments by the 
insurer will not change the face amount, although the insurer's future 
liability will be lowered by the amount of the payments.
    (4) The closure insurance policy must guarantee that funds will be 
available to close the facility whenever final closure occurs. The 
policy must also guarantee that once final closure begins, the insurer 
will be responsible for paying out funds, up to an amount equal to the 
face amount of the policy, upon the direction of the Regional 
Administrator, to such party or parties as the Regional Administrator 
specifies.
    (5) After beginning partial or final closure, an owner or operator 
or any other person authorized to conduct closure may request 
reimbursements for closure expenditures by submitting itemized bills to 
the Regional Administrator. The owner or operator may request 
reimbursements for partial closure only if the remaining value of the 
policy is sufficient to cover the maximum costs of closing the facility 
over its remaining operating life. Within 60 days after receiving bills 
for closure activities, the Regional Administrator will instruct the 
insurer to make reimbursements in such amounts as the Regional 
Administrator specifies in writing, if the Regional Administrator 
determines that the partial or final closure expenditures are in 
accordance with the approved closure plan or otherwise justified. If the 
Regional Administrator has reason to believe that the maximum cost of 
closure over the remaining life of the facility will be signficantly 
greater than the face amount of the policy, he may withhold 
reimbursements of such amounts as he deems prudent until he determines, 
in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i), that the owner or operator is no 
longer required to maintain financial assurance for final closure of the 
facility. If the Regional Administrator does not instruct the insurer to 
make such reimbursements, he will provide the owner or operator with a 
detailed written statement of reasons.
    (6) The owner or operator must maintain the policy in full force and 
effect until the Regional Administrator consents to termination of the 
policy by the owner or operator as specified in paragraph (e)(10) of 
this section. Failure to pay the premium, without substitution of 
alternate financial assurance as specified in this section, will 
constitute a significant violation of these regulations, warranting such 
remedy as the Regional Administrator deems necessary. Such violation 
will be deemed to begin upon receipt by the Regional Administrator of a 
notice of future cancellation, termination, or failure to renew due to 
nonpayment of the premium, rather than upon the date of expiration.
    (7) Each policy must contain a provision allowing assignment of the 
policy to a successor owner or operator. Such assignment may be 
conditional upon consent of the insurer, provided such consent is not 
unreasonably refused.
    (8) The policy must provide that the insurer may not cancel, 
terminate, or fail to renew the policy except for failure to pay the 
premium. The automatic renewal of the policy must, at a minimum, provide 
the insured with the option of renewal at the face amount of the 
expiring policy. If there is a failure to pay the premium, the insurer 
may elect to cancel, terminate, or fail to renew the policy by sending 
notice by certified mail to the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator. Cancellation, termination, or failure to renew may not 
occur, however, during the 120 days beginning with the date of receipt 
of the notice by both the Regional Administrator and the owner or 
operator, as evidenced by the return receipts. Cancellation, 
termination, or failure to renew may not occur and the policy will 
remain in full force and effect in the event that on or before the date 
of expiration:
    (i) The Regional Administrator deems the facility abandoned; or
    (ii) The permit is terminated or revoked or a new permit is denied; 
or
    (iii) Closure is ordered by the Regional Administrator or a U.S. 
district court or other court of competent jurisdiction; or

[[Page 208]]

    (iv) The owner or operator is named as debtor in a voluntary or 
involuntary proceeding under Title 11 (Bankruptcy), U.S. Code; or
    (v) The premium due is paid.
    (9) Whenever the current closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the face amount of the policy, the owner or 
operator, within 60 days after the increase, must either cause the face 
amount to be increased to an amount at least equal to the current 
closure cost estimate and submit evidence of such increase to the 
Regional Administrator, or obtain other financial assurance as specified 
in this section to cover the increase. Whenever the current closure cost 
estimate decreases, the face amount may be reduced to the amount of the 
current closure cost estimate following written approval by the Regional 
Administrator.
    (10) The Regional Administrator will give written consent to the 
owner or operator that he may terminate the insurance policy when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i).
    (f) Financial test and corporate guarantee for closure. (1) An owner 
or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
demonstrating that he passes a financial test as specified in this 
paragraph. To pass this test the owner or operator must meet the 
criteria of either paragraph (f)(1)(i) or (ii) of this section:
    (i) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) Two of the following three ratios: a ratio of total liabilities 
to net worth less than 2.0; a ratio of the sum of net income plus 
depreciation, depletion, and amortization to total liabilities greater 
than 0.1; and a ratio of current assets to current liabilities greater 
than 1.5; and
    (B) Net working capital and tangible net worth each at least six 
times the sum of the current closure and post-closure cost estimates and 
the current plugging and abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets located in the United States amounting to at least 90 
percent of total assets or at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates.
    (ii) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) A current rating for his most recent bond issuance of AAA, AA, 
A, or BBB as issued by Standard and Poor's or Aaa, Aa, A, or Baa as 
issued by Moody's; and
    (B) Tangible net worth at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets located in the United States amounting to at least 90 
percent of total assets or at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates.
    (2) The phrase ``current closure and post-closure cost estimates'' 
as used in paragraph (f)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates 
required to be shown in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or 
operator's chief financial officer (Sec. 264.151(f)). The phrase 
``current plugging and abandonment cost estimates'' as used in paragraph 
(f)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates required to be shown 
in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or operator's chief 
financial officer (Sec. 144.70(f) of this title).
    (3) To demonstrate that he meets this test, the owner or operator 
must submit the following items to the Regional Administrator:
    (i) A letter signed by the owner's or operator's chief financial 
officer and worded as specified in Sec. 264.151(f); and
    (ii) A copy of the independent certified public accountant's report 
on examination of the owner's or operator's financial statements for the 
latest completed fiscal year; and
    (iii) A special report from the owner's or operator's independent 
certified public accountant to the owner or operator stating that:

[[Page 209]]

    (A) He has compared the data which the letter from the chief 
financial officer specifies as having been derived from the 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
fiscal year with the amounts in such financial statements; and
    (B) In connection with that procedure, no matters came to his 
attention which caused him to believe that the specified data should be 
adjusted.
    (4) An owner or operator of a new facility must submit the items 
specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section to the Regional 
Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste 
is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal.
    (5) After the initial submission of items specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must send updated 
information to the Regional Administrator within 90 days after the close 
of each succeeding fiscal year. This information must consist of all 
three items specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section.
    (6) If the owner or operator no longer meets the requirements of 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section, he must send notice to the Regional 
Administrator of intent to establish alternate financial assurance as 
specified in this section. The notice must be sent by certified mail 
within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year for which the year-end 
financial data show that the owner or operator no longer meets the 
requirements. The owner or operator must provide the alternate financial 
assurance within 120 days after the end of such fiscal year.
    (7) The Regional Administrator may, based on a reasonable belief 
that the owner or operator may no longer meet the requirements of 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section, require reports of financial condition 
at any time from the owner or operator in addition to those specified in 
paragraph (f)(3) of this section. If the Regional Administrator finds, 
on the basis of such reports or other information, that the owner or 
operator no longer meets the requirements of paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section, the owner or operator must provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section within 30 days after notification 
of such a finding.
    (8) The Regional Administrator may disallow use of this test on the 
basis of qualifications in the opinion expressed by the independent 
certified public accountant in his report on examination of the owner's 
or operator's financial statements (see paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this 
section). An adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion will be cause 
for disallowance. The Regional Administrator will evaluate other 
qualifications on an individual basis. The owner or operator must 
provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this section 
within 30 days after notification of the disallowance.
    (9) The owner or operator is no longer required to submit the items 
specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.143(i).
    (10) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a written guarantee. The guarantor must be the direct or 
higher-tier parent corporation of the owner or operator, a firm whose 
parent corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or 
operator, or a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with 
the owner or operator. The guarantor must meet the requirements for 
owners or operators in paragraphs (f)(1) through (8) of this section and 
must comply with the terms of the guarantee. The wording of the 
guarantee must be identical to the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(h). 
The certified copy of the guarantee must accompany the items sent to the 
Regional Administrator as specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section. 
One of these items must be the letter from the guarantor's chief 
financial officer. If the guarantor's parent corporation is also the 
parent corporation of the owner or operator, the letter must describe 
the value received in consideration of the guarantee. If the guarantor 
is a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with the owner or 
operator, this letter must describe

[[Page 210]]

this ``substantial business relationship'' and the value received in 
consideration of the guarantee. The terms of the guarantee must provide 
that:
    (i) If the owner or operator fails to perform final closure of a 
facility covered by the corporate guarantee in accordance with the 
closure plan and other permit requirements whenever required to do so, 
the guarantor will do so or establish a trust fund as specified in 
Sec. 264.143(a) in the name of the owner or operator.
    (ii) The corporate guarantee will remain in force unless the 
guarantor sends notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (iii) If the owner or operator fails to provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain the written approval 
of such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 
days after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice of cancellation of the corporate guarantee 
from the guarantor, the guarantor will provide such alternative 
financial assurance in the name of the owner or operator.
    (g) Use of multiple financial mechanisms. An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by establishing more than one 
financial mechanism per facility. These mechanisms are limited to trust 
funds, surety bonds guaranteeing payment into a trust fund, letters of 
credit, and insurance. The mechanisms must be as specified in paragraphs 
(a), (b), (d), and (e), respectively, of this section, except that it is 
the combination of mechanisms, rather than the single mechanism, which 
must provide financial assurance for an amount at least equal to the 
current closure cost estimate. If an owner or operator uses a trust fund 
in combination with a surety bond or a letter of credit, he may use the 
trust fund as the standby trust fund for the other mechanisms. A single 
standby trust fund may be established for two or more mechanisms. The 
Regional Administrator may use any or all of the mechanisms to provide 
for closure of the facility.
    (h) Use of a financial mechanism for multiple facilities. An owner 
or operator may use a financial assurance mechanism specified in this 
section to meet the requirements of this section for more than one 
facility. Evidence of financial assurance submitted to the Regional 
Administrator must include a list showing, for each facility, the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, and the amount of funds for 
closure assured by the mechanism. If the facilities covered by the 
mechanism are in more than one Region, identical evidence of financial 
assurance must be submitted to and maintained with the Regional 
Administrators of all such Regions. The amount of funds available 
through the mechanism must be no less than the sum of funds that would 
be available if a separate mechanism had been established and maintained 
for each facility. In directing funds available through the mechanism 
for closure of any of the facilities covered by the mechanism, the 
Regional Administrator may direct only the amount of funds designated 
for that facility, unless the owner or operator agrees to the use of 
additional funds available under the mechanism.
    (i) Release of the owner or operator from the requirements of this 
section. Within 60 days after receiving certifications from the owner or 
operator and an independent registered professional engineer that final 
closure has been completed in accordance with the approved closure plan, 
the Regional Administrator will notify the owner or operator in writing 
that he is no longer required by this section to maintain financial 
assurance for final closure of the facility, unless the Regional 
Administrator has reason to believe that final closure has not been in 
accordance with the approved closure plan. The Regional Administrator 
shall provide the owner or operator a detailed written statement of any 
such reason to believe that closure has not been in

[[Page 211]]

accordance with the approved closure plan.
[47 FR 15047, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 16448, May 2, 1986; 57 
FR 42835, Sept. 16, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.144  Cost estimate for post-closure care.

    (a) The owner or operator of a disposal surface impoundment, 
disposal miscellaneous unit, land treatment unit, or landfill unit, or 
of a surface impoundment or waste pile required under Secs. 264.228 and 
264.258 to prepare a contingent closure and post-closure plan, must have 
a detailed written estimate, in current dollars, of the annual cost of 
post-closure monitoring and maintenance of the facility in accordance 
with the applicable post-closure regulations in Secs. 264.117 through 
264.120, 264.228, 264.258, 264.280, 264.310, and 264.603.
    (1) The post-closure cost estimate must be based on the costs to the 
owner or operator of hiring a third party to conduct post-closure care 
activities. A third party is a party who is neither a parent nor a 
subsidiary of the owner or operator. (See definition of parent 
corporation in Sec. 264.141(d).)
    (2) The post-closure cost estimate is calculated by multiplying the 
annual post-closure cost estimate by the number of years of post-closure 
care required under Sec. 264.117.
    (b) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must adjust the post-closure cost estimate for inflation within 60 days 
prior to the anniversary date of the establishment of the financial 
instrument(s) used to comply with Sec. 264.145. For owners or operators 
using the financial test or corporate guarantee, the post-closure cost 
estimate must be updated for inflation within 30 days after the close of 
the firm's fiscal year and before the submission of updated information 
to the Regional Administrator as specified in Sec. 264.145(f)(5). The 
adjustment may be made by recalculating the post-closure cost estimate 
in current dollars or by using an inflation factor derived from the most 
recent Implicit Price Deflator for Gross National Product published by 
the U.S. Department of Commerce in its Survey of Current Business as 
specified in Sec. 264.145(b)(1) and (2). The inflation factor is the 
result of dividing the latest published annual Deflator by the Deflator 
for the previous year.
    (1) The first adjustment is made by multiplying the post-closure 
cost estimate by the inflation factor. The result is the adjusted post-
closure cost estimate.
    (2) Subsequent adjustments are made by multiplying the latest 
adjusted post-closure cost estimate by the latest inflation factor.
    (c) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must revise the post-closure cost estimate within 30 days after the 
Regional Administrator has approved the request to modify the post-
closure plan, if the change in the post-closure plan increases the cost 
of post-closure care. The revised post-closure cost estimate must be 
adjusted for inflation as specified in Sec. 264.144(b).
    (d) The owner or operator must keep the following at the facility 
during the operating life of the facility: The latest post-closure cost 
estimate prepared in accordance with Sec. 264.144 (a) and (c) and, when 
this estimate has been adjusted in accordance with Sec. 264.144(b), the 
latest adjusted post-closure cost estimate.
[47 FR 15047, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 51 FR 16449, May 2, 1986; 52 FR 46964, Dec. 10, 
1987]


<R05>
Sec. 264.145  Financial assurance for post-closure care.

    The owner or operator of a hazardous waste management unit subject 
to the requirements of Sec. 264.144 must establish financial assurance 
for post-closure care in accordance with the approved post-closure plan 
for the facility 60 days prior to the initial receipt of hazardous waste 
or the effective date of the regulation, whichever is later. He must 
choose from the following options:
    (a) Post-closure trust fund. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy 
the requirements of this section by establishing a post-closure trust 
fund which conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting 
an originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement to the Regional 
Administrator. An owner or operator of a new facility

[[Page 212]]

must submit the originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement to 
the Regional Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which 
hazardous waste is first received for disposal. The trustee must be an 
entity which has the authority to act as a trustee and whose trust 
operations are regulated and examined by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the trust agreement must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(a)(1), and the trust agreement must be 
accompanied by a formal certification of acknowledgment (for example, 
see Sec. 264.151(a)(2)). Schedule A of the trust agreement must be 
updated within 60 days after a change in the amount of the current post-
closure cost estimate covered by the agreement.
    (3) Payments into the trust fund must be made annually by the owner 
or operator over the term of the initial RCRA permit or over the 
remaining operating life of the facility as estimated in the closure 
plan, whichever period is shorter; this period is hereafter referred to 
as the ``pay-in period.'' The payments into the post-closure trust fund 
must be made as follows:
    (i) For a new facility, the first payment must be made before the 
initial receipt of hazardous waste for disposal. A receipt from the 
trustee for this payment must be submitted by the owner or operator to 
the Regional Administrator before this initial receipt of hazardous 
waste. The first payment must be at least equal to the current post-
closure cost estimate, except as provided in Sec. 264.145(g), divided by 
the number of years in the pay-in period. Subsequent payments must be 
made no later than 30 days after each anniversay date of the first 
payment. The amount of each subsequent payment must be determined by 
this formula:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.050


where CE is the current post-closure cost estimate, CV is the current 
value of the trust fund, and Y is the number of years remaining in the 
pay-in period.
    (ii) If an owner or operator establishes a trust fund as specified 
in Sec. 265.145(a) of this chapter, and the value of that trust fund is 
less than the current post-closure cost estimate when a permit is 
awarded for the facility, the amount of the current post-closure cost 
estimate still to be paid into the fund must be paid in over the pay-in 
period as defined in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. Payments must 
continue to be made no later than 30 days after each anniversary date of 
the first payment made pursuant to Part 265 of this chapter. The amount 
of each payment must be determined by this formula:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.050


where CE is the current post-closure cost estimate, CV is the current 
value of the trust fund, and Y is the number of years remaining in the 
pay-in period.
    (4) The owner or operator may accelerate payments into the trust 
fund or he may deposit the full amount of the current post-closure cost 
estimate at the time the fund is established. However, he must maintain 
the value of the fund at no less than the value that the fund would have 
if annual payments were made as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section.
    (5) If the owner or operator establishes a post-closure trust fund 
after having used one or more alternate mechanisms specified in this 
section or in Sec. 265.145 of this chapter, his first payment must be in 
at least the amount that the fund would contain if the trust fund were 
established initially and annual payments made according to 
specifications of this paragraph and Sec. 265.145(a) of this chapter, as 
applicable.
    (6) After the pay-in period is completed, whenever the current post-
closure cost estimate changes during the operating life of the facility, 
the owner or operator must compare the new estimate with the trustee's 
most recent annual valuation of the trust fund. If the value of the fund 
is less than the amount of the new estimate, the owner or operator, 
within 60 days after the change in the cost estimate, must either 
deposit an amount into the fund so that its value after this deposit at 
least equals the amount of the current

[[Page 213]]

post-closure cost estimate, or obtain other financial assurance as 
specified in this section to cover the difference.
    (7) During the operating life of the facility, if the value of the 
trust fund is greater than the total amount of the current post-closure 
cost estimate, the owner or operator may submit a written request to the 
Regional Administrator for release of the amount in excess of the 
current post-closure cost estimate.
    (8) If an owner or operator substitutes other financial assurance as 
specified in this section for all or part of the trust fund, he may 
submit a written request to the Regional Administrator for release of 
the amount in excess of the current post-closure cost estimate covered 
by the trust fund.
    (9) Within 60 days after receiving a request from the owner or 
operator for release of funds as specified in paragraph (a) (7) or (8) 
of this section, the Regional Administrator will instruct the trustee to 
release to the owner or operator such funds as the Regional 
Administrator specifies in writing.
    (10) During the period of post-closure care, the Regional 
Administrator may approve a release of funds if the owner or operator 
demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that the value of the trust 
fund exceeds the remaining cost of post-closure care.
    (11) An owner or operator or any other person authorized to conduct 
post-closure care may request reimbursements for post-closure care 
expenditures by submitting itemized bills to the Regional Administrator. 
Within 60 days after receiving bills for post-closure care activities, 
the Regional Administrator will instruct the trustee to make 
reimbursements in those amounts as the Regional Administrator specifies 
in writing, if the Regional Administrator determines that the post-
closure care expenditures are in accordance with the approved post-
closure plan or otherwise justified. If the Regional Administrator does 
not instruct the trustee to make such reimbursements, he will provide 
the owner or operator with a detailed written statement of reasons.
    (12) The Regional Administrator will agree to termination of the 
trust when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.145(i).
    (b) Surety bond guaranteeing payment into a post-closure trust fund. 
(1) An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
obtaining a surety bond which conforms to the requirements of this 
paragraph and submitting the bond to the Regional Administrator. An 
owner or operator of a new facility must submit the bond to the Regional 
Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste 
is first received for disposal. The bond must be effective before this 
initial receipt of hazardous waste. The surety company issuing the bond 
must, at a minimum, be among those listed as acceptable sureties on 
Federal bonds in Circular 570 of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
    (2) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(b).
    (3) The owner or operator who uses a surety bond to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the bond, all payments made thereunder will be 
deposited by the surety directly into the standby trust fund in 
accordance with instructions from the Regional Administrator. This 
standby trust fund must meet the requirements specified in 
Sec. 264.145(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the surety bond; and
    (ii) Until the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 264.145(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current post-closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.

[[Page 214]]

    (4) The bond must guarantee that the owner or operator will:
    (i) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
of the bond before the beginning of final closure of the facility; or
    (ii) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
within 15 days after an administrative order to begin final closure 
issued by the Regional Administrator becomes final, or within 15 days 
after an order to begin final closure is issued by a U.S. district court 
or other court of competent jurisdiction; or
    (iii) Provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this 
section, and obtain the Regional Administrator's written approval of the 
assurance provided, within 90 days after receipt by both the owner or 
operator and the Regional Administrator of a notice of cancellation of 
the bond from the surety.
    (5) Under the terms of the bond, the surety will become liable on 
the bond obligation when the owner or operator fails to perform as 
guaranteed by the bond.
    (6) The penal sum of the bond must be in an amount at least equal to 
the current post-closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 264.145(g).
    (7) Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the penal sum, the owner or operator, within 60 days 
after the increase, must either cause the penal sum to be increased to 
an amount at least equal to the current post-closure cost estimate and 
submit evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or 
obtain other financial assurance as specified in this section to cover 
the increase. Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate decreases, 
the penal sum may be reduced to the amount of the current post-closure 
cost estimate following written approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) Under the terms of the bond, the surety may cancel the bond by 
sending notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (9) The owner or operator may cancel the bond if the Regional 
Administrator has given prior written consent based on his receipt of 
evidence of alternate financial assurance as specified in this section.
    (c) Surety bond guaranteeing performance of post-closure care. (1) 
An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
obtaining a surety bond which conforms to the requirements of this 
paragraph and submitting the bond to the Regional Administrator. An 
owner or operator of a new facility must submit the bond to the Regional 
Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste 
is first received for disposal. The bond must be effective before this 
initial receipt of hazardous waste. The surety company issuing the bond 
must, at a minimum, be among those listed as acceptable sureties on 
Federal bonds in Circular 570 of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
    (2) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(c).
    (3) The owner or operator who uses a surety bond to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the bond, all payments made thereunder will be 
deposited by the surety directly into the standby trust fund in 
accordance with instructions from the Regional Administrator. This 
standby trust fund must meet the requirements specified in 
Sec. 264.145(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the surety bond; and
    (ii) Unless the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 264.145(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current post-closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and

[[Page 215]]

    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The bond must guarantee that the owner or operator will:
    (i) Perform post-closure care in accordance with the post-closure 
plan and other requirements of the permit for the facility; or
    (ii) Provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this 
section, and obtain the Regional Administrator's written approval of the 
assurance provided, within 90 days of receipt by both the owner or 
operator and the Regional Administrator of a notice of cancellation of 
the bond from the surety.
    (5) Under the terms of the bond, the surety will become liable on 
the bond obligation when the owner or operator fails to perform as 
guaranteed by the bond. Following a final administrative determination 
pursuant to section 3008 of RCRA that the owner or operator has failed 
to perform post-closure care in accordance with the approved post-
closure plan and other permit requirements, under the terms of the bond 
the surety will perform post-closure care in accordance with the post-
closure plan and other permit requirements or will deposit the amount of 
the penal sum into the standby trust fund.
    (6) The penal sum of the bond must be in an amount at least equal to 
the current post-closure cost estimate.
    (7) Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the penal sum during the operating life of the 
facility, the owner or operator, within 60 days after the increase, must 
either cause the penal sum to be increased to an amount at least equal 
to the current post-closure cost estimate and submit evidence of such 
increase to the Regional Administrator, or obtain other financial 
assurance as specified in this section. Whenever the current post-
closure cost estimate decreases during the operating life of the 
facility, the penal sum may be reduced to the amount of the current 
post-closure cost estimate following written approval by the Regional 
Administrator.
    (8) During the period of post-closure care, the Regional 
Administrator may approve a decrease in the penal sum if the owner or 
operator demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that the amount 
exceeds the remaining cost of post-closure care.
    (9) Under the terms of the bond, the surety may cancel the bond by 
sending notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (10) The owner or operator may cancel the bond if the Regional 
Administrator has given prior written consent. The Regional 
Administrator will provide such written consent when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.145(i).
    (11) The surety will not be liable for deficiencies in the 
performance of post-closure care by the owner or operator after the 
Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from the 
requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.145(i).
    (d) Post-closure letter of credit. (1) An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by obtaining an irrevocable 
standby letter of credit which conforms to the requirements of this 
paragraph and submitting the letter to the Regional Administrator. An 
owner or operator of a new facility must submit the letter of credit to 
the Regional Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which 
hazardous waste is first received for disposal. The letter of credit 
must be effective before this initial receipt of hazardous waste. The 
issuing institution must be an entity which has the authority to issue 
letters of credit and whose letter-of-credit operations are regulated 
and examined by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the letter of credit must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(d).
    (3) An owner or operator who uses a letter of credit to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the letter of credit, all

[[Page 216]]

amounts paid pursuant to a draft by the Regional Administrator will be 
deposited by the issuing institution directly into the standby trust 
fund in accordance with instructions from the Regional Administrator. 
This standby trust fund must meet the requirements of the trust fund 
specified in Sec. 264.145(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the letter of credit; and
    (ii) Unless the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 264.145(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current post-closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The letter of credit must be accompanied by a letter from the 
owner or operator referring to the letter of credit by number, issuing 
institution, and date, and providing the following information: the EPA 
Identification Number, name, and address of the facility, and the amount 
of funds assured for post-closure care of the facility by the letter of 
credit.
    (5) The letter of credit must be irrevocable and issued for a period 
of at least 1 year. The letter of credit must provide that the 
expiration date will be automatically extended for a period of at least 
1 year unless, at least 120 days before the current expiration date, the 
issuing institution notifies both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator by certified mail of a decision not to extend the 
expiration date. Under the terms of the letter of credit, the 120 days 
will begin on the date when both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator have received the notice, as evidenced by the return 
receipts.
    (6) The letter of credit must be issued in a amount at least equal 
to the current post-closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 264.145(g).
    (7) Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the amount of the credit during the operating life 
of the facility, the owner or operator, within 60 days after the 
increase, must either cause the amount of the credit to be increased so 
that it at least equals the current post-closure cost estimate and 
submit evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or 
obtain other financial assurance as specified in this section to cover 
the increase. Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate decreases 
during the operating life of the facility, the amount of the credit may 
be reduced to the amount of the current post-closure cost estimate 
following written approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) During the period of post-closure care, the Regional 
Administrator may approve a decrease in the amount of the letter of 
credit if the owner or operator demonstrates to the Regional 
Administrator that the amount exceeds the remaining cost of post-closure 
care.
    (9) Following a final administrative determination pursuant to 
section 3008 of RCRA that the owner or operator has failed to perform 
post-closure care in accordance with the approved post-closure plan and 
other permit requirements, the Regional Administrator may draw on the 
letter of credit.
    (10) If the owner or operator does not establish alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain written approval of 
such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 days 
after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice from the issuing institution that it has 
decided not to extend the letter of credit beyond the current expiration 
date, the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter of credit. The 
Regional Administrator may delay the drawing if the issuing institution 
grants an extension of the term of the credit. During the last 30 days 
of any such extension the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter 
of credit if the owner or operator has failed to provide alternate 
financial assurance as specified in this section and obtain written 
approval of

[[Page 217]]

such assurance from the Regional Administrator.
    (11) The Regional Administrator will return the letter of credit to 
the issuing institution for termination when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.145(i).
    (e) Post-closure insurance. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy the 
requirements of this section by obtaining post-closure insurance which 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting a 
certificate of such insurance to the Regional Administrator. An owner or 
operator of a new facility must submit the certificate of insurance to 
the Regional Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which 
hazardous waste is first received for disposal. The insurance must be 
effective before this initial receipt of hazardous waste. At a minimum, 
the insurer must be licensed to transact the business of insurance, or 
eligible to provide insurance as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in 
one or more States.
    (2) The wording of the certificate of insurance must be identical to 
the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(e).
    (3) The post-closure insurance policy must be issued for a face 
amount at least equal to the current post-closure cost estimate, except 
as provided in Sec. 264.145(g). The term ``face amount'' means the total 
amount the insurer is obligated to pay under the policy. Actual payments 
by the insurer will not change the face amount, although the insurer's 
future liability will be lowered by the amount of the payments.
    (4) The post-closure insurance policy must guarantee that funds will 
be available to provide post-closure care of the facility whenever the 
post-closure period begins. The policy must also guarantee that once 
post-closure care begins, the insurer will be responsible for paying out 
funds, up to an amount equal to the face amount of the policy, upon the 
direction of the Regional Administrator, to such party or parties as the 
Regional Administrator specifies.
    (5) An owner or operator or any other person authorized to conduct 
post-closure care may request reimbursements for post-closure care 
expenditures by submitting itemized bills to the Regional Administrator. 
Within 60 days after receiving bills for post-closure care activities, 
the Regional Administrator will instruct the insurer to make 
reimbursements in those amounts as the Regional Administrator specifies 
in writing, if the Regional Administrator determines that the post-
closure care expenditures are in accordance with the approved post-
closure plan or otherwise justified. If the Regional Administrator does 
not instruct the insurer to make such reimbursements, he will provide 
the owner or operator with a detailed written statement of reasons.
    (6) The owner or operator must maintain the policy in full force and 
effect until the Regional Administrator consents to termination of the 
policy by the owner or operator as specified in paragraph (e)(11) of 
this section. Failure to pay the premium, without substitution of 
alternate financial assurance as specified in this section, will 
constitute a significant violation of these regulations, warranting such 
remedy as the Regional Administrator deems necessary. Such violation 
will be deemed to begin upon receipt by the Regional Administrator of a 
notice of future cancellation, termination, or failure to renew due to 
nonpayment of the premium, rather than upon the date of expiration.
    (7) Each policy must contain a provision allowing assignment of the 
policy to a successor owner or operator. Such assignment may be 
conditional upon consent of the insurer, provided such consent is not 
unreasonably refused.
    (8) The policy must provide that the insurer may not cancel, 
terminate, or fail to renew the policy except for failure to pay the 
premium. The automatic renewal of the policy must, at a minimum, provide 
the insured with the option of renewal at the face amount of the 
expiring policy. If there is a failure to pay the premium, the insurer 
may elect to cancel, terminate, or fail to renew the policy by sending 
notice by

[[Page 218]]

certified mail to the owner or operator and the Regional Administrator. 
Cancellation, termination, or failure to renew may not occur, however, 
during the 120 days beginning with the date of receipt of the notice by 
both the Regional Administrator and the owner or operator, as evidenced 
by the return receipts. Cancellation, termination, or failure to renew 
may not occur and the policy will remain in full force and effect in the 
event that on or before the date of expiration:
    (i) The Regional Administrator deems the facility abandoned; or
    (ii) The permit is terminated or revoked or a new permit is denied; 
or
    (iii) Closure is ordered by the Regional Administrator or a U.S. 
district court or other court of competent jurisdiction; or
    (iv) The owner or operator is named as debtor in a voluntary or 
involuntary proceeding under Title 11 (Bankruptcy), U.S. Code; or
    (v) The premium due is paid.
    (9) Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the face amount of the policy during the operating 
life of the facility, the owner or operator, within 60 days after the 
increase, must either cause the face amount to be increased to an amount 
at least equal to the current post-closure cost estimate and submit 
evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or obtain other 
financial assurance as specified in this section to cover the increase. 
Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate decreases during the 
operating life of the facility, the face amount may be reduced to the 
amount of the current post-closure cost estimate following written 
approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (10) Commencing on the date that liability to make payments pursuant 
to the policy accrues, the insurer will thereafter annually increase the 
face amount of the policy. Such increase must be equivalent to the face 
amount of the policy, less any payments made, multiplied by an amount 
equivalent to 85 percent of the most recent investment rate or of the 
equivalent coupon-issue yield announced by the U.S. Treasury for 26-week 
Treasury securities.
    (11) The Regional Administrator will give written consent to the 
owner or operator that he may terminate the insurance policy when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.145(i).
    (f) Financial test and corporate guarantee for post-closure care. 
(1) An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
demonstrating that he passes a financial test as specified in this 
paragraph. To pass this test the owner or operator must meet the 
criteria of either paragraph (f)(1)(i) or (ii) of this section:
    (i) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) Two of the following three ratios: a ratio of total liabilities 
to net worth less than 2.0; a ratio of the sum of net income plus 
depreciation, depletion, and amortization to total liabilities greater 
than 0.1; and a ratio of current assets to current liabilities greater 
than 1.5; and
    (B) Net working capital and tangible net worth each at least six 
times the sum of the current closure and post-closure cost estimates and 
the current plugging and abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets in the United States amounting to at least 90 percent of 
his total assets or at least six times the sum of the current closure 
and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and abandonment 
cost estimates.
    (ii) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) A current rating for his most recent bond issuance of AAA, AA, 
A, or BBB as issued by Standard and Poor's or Aaa, Aa, A or Baa as 
issued by Moody's; and
    (B) Tangible net worth at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets located in the United States amounting to at least 90 
percent

[[Page 219]]

of his total assets or at least six times the sum of the current closure 
and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and abandonment 
cost estimates.
    (2) The phrase ``current closure and post-closure cost estimates'' 
as used in paragraph (f)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates 
required to be shown in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or 
operator's chief financial officer (Sec. 264.151(f)). The phrase 
``current plugging and abandonment cost estimates'' as used in paragraph 
(f)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates required to be shown 
in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or operator's chief 
financial officer (Sec. 144.70(f) of this title).
    (3) To demonstrate that he meets this test, the owner or operator 
must submit the following items to the Regional Administrator:
    (i) A letter signed by the owner's or operator's chief financial 
officer and worded as specified in Sec. 264.151(f); and
    (ii) A copy of the independent certified public accountant's report 
on examination of the owner's or operator's financial statements for the 
latest completed fiscal year; and
    (iii) A special report from the owner's or operator's independent 
certified public accountant to the owner or operator stating that:
    (A) He has compared the data which the letter from the chief 
financial officer specifies as having been derived from the 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
fiscal year with the amounts in such financial statements; and
    (B) In connection with that procedure, no matters came to his 
attention which caused him to believe that the specified data should be 
adjusted.
    (4) An owner or operator of a new facility must submit the items 
specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section to the Regional 
Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste 
is first received for disposal.
    (5) After the initial submission of items specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must send updated 
information to the Regional Administrator within 90 days after the close 
of each succeeding fiscal year. This information must consist of all 
three items specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section.
    (6) If the owner or operator no longer meets the requirements of 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section, he must send notice to the Regional 
Administrator of intent to establish alternate financial assurance as 
specified in this section. The notice must be sent by certified mail 
within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year for which the year-end 
financial data show that the owner or operator no longer meets the 
requirements. The owner or operator must provide the alternate financial 
assurance within 120 days after the end of such fiscal year.
    (7) The Regional Administrator may, based on a reasonable belief 
that the owner or operator may no longer meet the requirements of 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section, require reports of financial condition 
at any time from the owner or operator in addition to those specified in 
paragraph (f)(3) of this section. If the Regional Administrator finds, 
on the basis of such reports or other information, that the owner or 
operator no longer meets the requirements of paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section, the owner or operator must provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section within 30 days after notification 
of such a finding.
    (8) The Regional Administrator may disallow use of this test on the 
basis of qualifications in the opinion expressed by the independent 
certified public accountant in his report on examination of the owner's 
or operator's financial statements (see paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this 
section). An adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion will be cause 
for disallowance. The Regional Administrator will evaluate other 
qualifications on an individual basis. The owner or operator must 
provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this section 
within 30 days after notification of the disallowance.
    (9) During the period of post-closure care, the Regional 
Administrator may approve a decrease in the current post-closure cost 
estimate for which this test demonstrates financial assurance if the 
owner or operator demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that the 
amount of the cost estimate exceeds the remaining cost of post-closure 
care.

[[Page 220]]

    (10) The owner or operator is no longer required to submit the items 
specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 264.145(i).
    (11) An owner or operator may meet the requirements for this section 
by obtaining a written guarantee. The guarantor must be the direct of 
higher-tier parent corporation of the owner or operator, a firm whose 
parent corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or 
operator, or a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with 
the owner or operator. The guarantor must meet the requirements for 
owners or operators in paragraphs (f)(1) through (9) of this section and 
must comply with the terms of the guarantee. The wording of the 
guarantee must be identical to the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(h). 
A certified copy of the guarantee must accompany the items sent to the 
Regional Administrator as specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section. 
One of these items must be the letter from the guarantor's chief 
financial officer. If the guarantor's parent corporation is also the 
parent corporation of the owner or operator, the letter must describe 
the value received in consideration of the guarantee. If the guarantor 
is a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with the owner or 
operator, this letter must describe this ``substantial business 
relationship'' and the value received in consideration of the guarantee. 
The terms of the guarantee must provide that:
    (i) If the owner or operator fails to perform post-closure care of a 
facility covered by the corporate guarantee in accordance with the post-
closure plan and other permit requirements whenever required to do so, 
the guarantor will do so or establish a trust fund as specified in 
Sec. 264.145(a) in the name of the owner or operator.
    (ii) The corporate guarantee will remain in force unless the 
guarantor sends notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (iii) If the owner or operator fails to provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain the written approval 
of such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 
days after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice of cancellation of the corporate guarantee 
from the guarantor, the guarantor will provide such alternate financial 
assurance in the name of the owner or operator.
    (g) Use of multiple financial mechanisms. An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by establishing more than one 
financial mechanism per facility. These mechanisms are limited to trust 
funds, surety bonds guaranteeing payment into a trust fund, letters of 
credit, and insurance. The mechanisms must be as specified in paragraphs 
(a), (b), (d), and (e), respectively, of this section, except that it is 
the combination of mechanisms, rather than the single mechanism, which 
must provide financial assurance for an amount at least equal to the 
current post-closure cost estimate. If an owner or operator uses a trust 
fund in combination with a surety bond or a letter of credit, he may use 
the trust fund as the standby trust fund for the other mechanisms. A 
single standby trust fund may be established for two or more mechanisms. 
The Regional Administrator may use any or all of the mechanisms to 
provide for post-closure care of the facility.
    (h) Use of a financial mechanism for multiple facilities. An owner 
or operator may use a financial assurance mechanism specified in this 
section to meet the requirements of this section for more than one 
facility. Evidence of financial assurance submitted to the Regional 
Administrator must include a list showing, for each facility, the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, and the amount of funds for post-
closure care assured by the mechanism. If the facilities covered by the 
mechanism are in more than one Region,

[[Page 221]]

identical evidence of financial assurance must be submitted to and 
maintained with the Regional Administrators of all such Regions. The 
amount of funds available through the mechanism must be no less than the 
sum of funds that would be available if a separate mechanism had been 
established and maintained for each facility. In directing funds 
available through the mechanism for post-closure care of any of the 
facilities covered by the mechanism, the Regional Administrator may 
direct only the amount of funds designated for that facility, unless the 
owner or operator agrees to the use of additional funds available under 
the mechanism.
    (i) Release of the owner or operator from the requirements of this 
section. Within 60 days after receiving certifications from the owner or 
operator and an independent registered professional engineer that the 
post-closure care period has been completed for a hazardous waste 
disposal unit in accordance with the approved plan, the Regional 
Administrator will notify the owner or operator that he is no longer 
required to maintain financial assurance for post-closure care of that 
unit, unless the Regional Administrator has reason to believe that post-
closure care has not been in accordance with the approved post-closure 
plan. The Regional Administrator shall provide the owner or operator 
with a detailed written statement of any such reason to believe that 
post-closure care has not been in accordance with the approved post-
closure plan.
[47 FR 15047, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 16449, May 2, 1986; 57 
FR 42836, Sept. 16, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.146  Use of a mechanism for financial assurance of both closure and post-closure care.

    An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements for financial 
assurance for both closure and post-closure care for one or more 
facilities by using a trust fund, surety bond, letter of credit, 
insurance, financial test, or corporate guarantee that meets the 
specifications for the mechanism in both Secs. 264.143 and 264.145. The 
amount of funds available through the mechanism must be no less than the 
sum of funds that would be available if a separate mechanism had been 
established and maintained for financial assurance of closure and of 
post-closure care.


<R05>
Sec. 264.147  Liability requirements.

    (a) Coverage for sudden accidental occurrences. An owner or operator 
of a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility, or a 
group of such facilities, must demonstrate financial responsibility for 
bodily injury and property damage to third parties caused by sudden 
accidental occurrences arising from operations of the facility or group 
of facilities. The owner or operator must have and maintain liability 
coverage for sudden accidental occurrences in the amount of at least $1 
million per occurrence with an annual aggregate of at least $2 million, 
exclusive of legal defense costs. This liability coverage may be 
demonstrated as specified in paragraphs (a) (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or 
(6) of this section:
    (1) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage by having liability insurance as specified in this paragraph.
    (i) Each insurance policy must be amended by attachment of the 
Hazardous Waste Facility Liability Endorsement or evidenced by a 
Certificate of Liability Insurance. The wording of the endorsement must 
be identical to the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(i). The wording of 
the certificate of insurance must be identical to the wording specified 
in Sec. 264.151(j). The owner or operator must submit a signed duplicate 
original of the endorsement or the certificate of insurance to the 
Regional Administrator, or Regional Administrators if the facilities are 
located in more than one Region. If requested by a Regional 
Administrator, the owner or operator must provide a signed duplicate 
original of the insurance policy. An owner or operator of a new facility 
must submit the signed duplicate original of the Hazardous Waste 
Facility Liability Endorsement or the Certificate of Liability Insurance 
to the Regional Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which 
hazardous waste is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal. 
The insurance must be effective before this initial receipt of hazardous 
waste.

[[Page 222]]

    (ii) Each insurance policy must be issued by an insurer which, at a 
minimum, is licensed to transact the business of insurance, or eligible 
to provide insurance as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in one or 
more States.
    (2) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by passing a financial test or using the guarantee for liability 
coverage as specified in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section.
    (3) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a letter of credit for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (h) of this section.
    (4) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a surety bond for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (5) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a trust fund for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (6) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage through the use of combinations of insurance, financial test, 
guarantee, letter of credit, surety bond, and trust fund, except that 
the owner or operator may not combine a financial test covering part of 
the liability coverage requirement with a guarantee unless the financial 
statement of the owner or operator is not consolidated with the 
financial statement of the guarantor. The amounts of coverage 
demonstrated must total at least the minimum amounts required by this 
section. If the owner or operator demonstrates the required coverage 
through the use of a combination of financial assurances under this 
paragraph, the owner or operator shall specify at least one such 
assurance as ``primary'' coverage and shall specify other assurance as 
``excess'' coverage.
    (7) An owner or operator shall notify the Regional Administrator in 
writing within 30 days whenever:
    (i) A claim results in a reduction in the amount of financial 
assurance for liability coverage provided by a financial instrument 
authorized in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section; or
    (ii) A Certification of Valid Claim for bodily injury or property 
damages caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental occurrence arising 
from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal 
facility is entered between the owner or operator and third-party 
claimant for liability coverage under paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) 
of this section; or
    (iii) A final court order establishing a judgment for bodily injury 
or property damage caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental 
occurrence arising from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, 
storage, or disposal facility is issued against the owner or operator or 
an instrument that is providing financial assurance for liability 
coverage under paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section.
    (b) Coverage for nonsudden accidental occurrences. An owner or 
operator of a surface impoundment, landfill, land treatment facility, or 
disposal miscellaneous unit that is used to manage hazardous waste, or a 
group of such facilities, must demonstrate financial responsibility for 
bodily injury and property damage to third parties caused by nonsudden 
accidental occurrences arising from operations of the facility or group 
of facilities. The owner or operator must have and maintain liability 
coverage for nonsudden accidental occurrences in the amount of at least 
$3 million per occurrence with an annual aggregate of at least $6 
million, exclusive of legal defense costs. An owner or operator who must 
meet the requirements of this section may combine the required per-
occurrence coverage levels for sudden and nonsudden accidental 
occurrences into a single per-occurrence level, and combine the required 
annual aggregate coverage levels for sudden and nonsudden accidental 
occurrences into a single annual aggregate level. Owners or operators 
who combine coverage levels for sudden and nonsudden accidental 
occurrences must maintain liability coverage in the amount of at least 
$4 million per occurrence and $8 million annual aggregate. This 
liability coverage may be demonstrated as specified in paragraphs (b) 
(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6), of this section:

[[Page 223]]

    (1) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage by having liability insurance as specified in this paragraph.
    (i) Each insurance policy must be amended by attachment of the 
Hazardous Waste Facility Liability Endorsement or evidenced by a 
Certificate of Liability Insurance. The wording of the endorsement must 
be identical to the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(i). The wording of 
the certificate of insurance must be identical to the wording specified 
in Sec. 264.151(j). The owner or operator must submit a signed duplicate 
original of the endorsement or the certificate of insurance to the 
Regional Administrator, or Regional Administrators if the facilities are 
located in more than one Region. If requested by a Regional 
Administrator, the owner or operator must provide a signed duplicate 
original of the insurance policy. An owner or operator of a new facility 
must submit the signed duplicate original of the Hazardous Waste 
Facility Liability Endorsement or the Certificate of Liability Insurance 
to the Regional Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which 
hazardous waste is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal. 
The insurance must be effective before this initial receipt of hazardous 
waste.
    (ii) Each insurance policy must be issued by an insurer which, at a 
minimum, is licensed to transact the business of insurance, or eligible 
to provide insurance as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in one or 
more States.
    (2) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by passing a financial test or using the guarantee for liability 
coverage as specified in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section.
    (3) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a letter of credit for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (h) of this section.
    (4) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a surety bond for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (5) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a trust fund for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (6) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage through the use of combinations of insurance, financial test, 
guarantee, letter of credit, surety bond, and trust fund, except that 
the owner or operator may not combine a financial test covering part of 
the liability coverage requirement with a guarantee unless the financial 
statement of the owner or operator is not consolidated with the 
financial statement of the guarantor. The amounts of coverage 
demonstrated must total at least the minimum amount required by this 
section. If the owner or operator demonstrates the required coverage 
through the use of a combination of financial assurances under this 
paragraph, the owner or operator shall specify at least one such 
assurance as ``primary'' coverage and shall specify other assurance as 
``excess'' coverage.
    (7) An owner or operator shall notify the Regional Administrator in 
writing within 30 days whenever:
    (i) A Claim results in a reduction in the amount of financial 
assurance for liability coverage provided by a financial instrument 
authorized in paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(6) of this section; or
    (ii) A Certification of Valid Claim for bodily injury or property 
damages caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental occurrence arising 
from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal 
facility is entered between the owner or operator and third-party 
claimant for liability coverage under paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(6) 
of this section; or
    (iii) A final court order establishing a judgment for bodily injury 
or property damage caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental 
occurrence arising from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, 
storage, or disposal facility is issued against the owner or operator or 
an instrument that is providing financial assurance for liability 
coverage under paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(6) of this section.
    (c) Request for variance. If an owner or operator can demonstrate to 
the satisfaction of the Regional Administrator

[[Page 224]]

that the levels of financial responsibility required by paragraph (a) or 
(b) of this section are not consistent with the degree and duration of 
risk associated with treatment, storage, or disposal at the facility or 
group of facilities, the owner or operator may obtain a variance from 
the Regional Administrator. The request for a variance must be submitted 
to the Regional Administrator as part of the application under 
Sec. 270.14 of this chapter for a facility that does not have a permit, 
or pursuant to the procedures for permit modification under Sec. 124.5 
of this chapter for a facility that has a permit. If granted, the 
variance will take the form of an adjusted level of required liability 
coverage, such level to be based on the Regional Administrator's 
assessment of the degree and duration of risk associated with the 
ownership or operation of the facility or group of facilities. The 
Regional Administrator may require an owner or operator who requests a 
variance to provide such technical and engineering information as is 
deemed necessary by the Regional Administrator to determine a level of 
financial responsibility other than that required by paragraph (a) or 
(b) of this section. Any request for a variance for a permitted facility 
will be treated as a request for a permit modification under 
Secs. 270.41(a)(5) and 124.5 of this chapter.
    (d) Adjustments by the Regional Administrator. If the Regional 
Administrator determines that the levels of financial responsibility 
required by paragraph (a) or (b) of this section are not consistent with 
the degree and duration of risk associated with treatment, storage, or 
disposal at the facility or group of facilities, the Regional 
Administrator may adjust the level of financial responsibility required 
under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section as may be necessary to 
protect human health and the environment. This adjusted level will be 
based on the Regional Administrator's assessment of the degree and 
duration of risk associated with the ownership or operation of the 
facility or group of facilities. In addition, if the Regional 
Administrator determines that there is a significant risk to human 
health and the environment from nonsudden accidental occurrences 
resulting from the operations of a facility that is not a surface 
impoundment, landfill, or land treatment facility, he may require that 
an owner or operator of the facility comply with paragraph (b) of this 
section. An owner or operator must furnish to the Regional 
Administrator, within a reasonable time, any information which the 
Regional Administrator requests to determine whether cause exists for 
such adjustments of level or type of coverage. Any adjustment of the 
level or type of coverage for a facility that has a permit will be 
treated as a permit modification under Secs. 270.41(a)(5) and 124.5 of 
this chapter.
    (e) Period of coverage. Within 60 days after receiving 
certifications from the owner or operator and an independent registered 
professional engineer that final closure has been completed in 
accordance with the approved closure plan, the Regional Administrator 
will notify the owner or operator in writing that he is no longer 
required by this section to maintain liability coverage for that 
facility, unless the Regional Administrator has reason to believe that 
closure has not been in accordance with the approved closure plan.
    (f) Financial test for liability coverage. (1) An owner or operator 
may satisfy the requirements of this section by demonstrating that he 
passes a financial test as specified in this paragraph. To pass this 
test the owner or operator must meet the criteria of paragraph (f)(1)(i) 
or (ii):
    (i) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) Net working capital and tangible net worth each at least six 
times the amount of liability coverage to be demonstrated by this test; 
and
    (B) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (C) Assets in the United States amounting to either: (1) At least 90 
percent of his total assets; or (2) at least six times the amount of 
liability coverage to be demonstrated by this test.
    (ii) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) A current rating for his most recent bond issuance of AAA, AA, 
A, or BBB as issued by Standard and Poor's, or Aaa, Aa, A, or Baa as 
issued by Moody's; and
    (B) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and

[[Page 225]]

    (C) Tangible net worth at least six times the amount of liability 
coverage to be demonstrated by this test; and
    (D) Assets in the United States amounting to either: (1) At least 90 
percent of his total assets; or (2) at least six times the amount of 
liability coverage to be demonstrated by this test.
    (2) The phrase ``amount of liability coverage'' as used in paragraph 
(f)(1) of this section refers to the annual aggregate amounts for which 
coverage is required under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
    (3) To demonstrate that he meets this test, the owner or operator 
must submit the following three items to the Regional Administrator:
    (i) A letter signed by the owner's or operator's chief financial 
officer and worded as specified in Sec. 264.151(g). If an owner or 
operator is using the financial test to demonstrate both assurance for 
closure or post-closure care, as specified by Secs. 264.143(f), 
264.145(f), 265.143(e), and 265.145(e), and liability coverage, he must 
submit the letter specified in Sec. 264.151(g) to cover both forms of 
financial responsibility; a separate letter as specified in 
Sec. 264.151(f) is not required.
    (ii) A copy of the independent certified public accountant's report 
on examination of the owner's or operator's financial statements for the 
latest completed fiscal year.
    (iii) A special report from the owner's or operator's independent 
certified public accountant to the owner or operator stating that:
    (A) He has compared the data which the letter from the chief 
financial officer specifies as having been derived from the 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
fiscal year with the amounts in such financial statements; and
    (B) In connection with that procedure, no matters came to his 
attention which caused him to believe that the specified data should be 
adjusted.
    (4) An owner or operator of a new facility must submit the items 
specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section to the Regional 
Administrator at least 60 days before the date on which hazardous waste 
is first received for treatment, storage, or disposal.
    (5) After the initial submission of items specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must send updated 
information to the Regional Administrator within 90 days after the close 
of each succeeding fiscal year. This information must consist of all 
three items specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section.
    (6) If the owner or operator no longer meets the requirements of 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section, he must obtain insurance, a letter of 
credit, a surety bond, a trust fund, or a guarantee for the entire 
amount of required liability coverage as specified in this section. 
Evidence of liability coverage must be submitted to the Regional 
Administrator within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year for which 
the year-end financial data show that the owner or operator no longer 
meets the test requirements.
    (7) The Regional Administrator may disallow use of this test on the 
basis of qualifications in the opinion expressed by the independent 
certified public accountant in his report on examination of the owner's 
or operator's financial statements (see paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this 
section). An adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion will be cause 
for disallowance. The Regional Administrator will evaluate other 
qualifications on an individual basis. The owner or operator must 
provide evidence of insurance for the entire amount of required 
liability coverage as specified in this section within 30 days after 
notification of disallowance.
    (g) Guarantee for liability coverage. (1) Subject to paragraph 
(g)(2) of this section, an owner or operator may meet the requirements 
of this section by obtaining a written guarantee, hereinafter referred 
to as ``guarantee.'' The guarantor must be the direct or higher-tier 
parent corporation of the owner or operator, a firm whose parent 
corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or operator, or 
a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with the owner or 
operator. The guarantor must meet the requirements for owners or 
operators in paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(6) of this section. The 
wording of the guarantee must be identical to the wording specified in 
Sec. 264.151(h)(2) of this part. A certified copy of the guarantee must 
accompany

[[Page 226]]

the items sent to the Regional Administrator as specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section. One of these items must be the letter from the 
guarantor's chief financial officer. If the guarantor's parent 
corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or operator, 
this letter must describe the value received in consideration of the 
guarantee. If the guarantor is a firm with a ``substantial business 
relationship'' with the owner or operator, this letter must describe 
this ``substantial business relationship'' and the value received in 
consideration of the guarantee.
    (i) If the owner or operator fails to satisfy a judgment based on a 
determination of liability for bodily injury or property damage to third 
parties caused by sudden or nonsudden accidental occurrences (or both as 
the case may be), arising from the operation of facilities covered by 
this corporate guarantee, or fails to pay an amount agreed to in 
settlement of claims arising from or alleged to arise from such injury 
or damage, the guarantor will do so up to the limits of coverage.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (2)(i) In the case of corporations incorporated in the United 
States, a guarantee may be used to satisfy the requirements of this 
section only if the Attorneys General or Insurance Commissioners of (A) 
the State in which the guarantor is incorporated, and (B) each State in 
which a facility covered by the guarantee is located have submitted a 
written statement to EPA that a guarantee executed as described in this 
section and Sec. 264.151(h)(2) is a legally valid and enforceable 
obligation in that State.
    (ii) In the case of corporations incorporated outside the United 
States, a guarantee may be used to satisfy the requirements of this 
section only if (A) the non-U.S. corporation has identified a registered 
agent for service of process in each State in which a facility covered 
by the guarantee is located and in the State in which it has its 
principal place of business, and (B) the Attorney General or Insurance 
Commissioner of each State in which a facility covered by the guarantee 
is located and the State in which the guarantor corporation has its 
principal place of business, has submitted a written statement to EPA 
that a guarantee executed as described in this section and 
Sec. 264.151(h)(2) is a legally valid and enforceable obligation in that 
State.
    (h) Letter of credit for liability coverage. (1) An owner or 
operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by obtaining an 
irrevocable standby letter or credit that conforms to the requirements 
of this paragraph and submitting a copy of the letter of credit to the 
Regional Administrator.
    (2) The financial institution issuing the letter of credit must be 
an entity that has the authority to issue letters of credit and whose 
letter of credit operations are regulated and examined by a Federal or 
State agency.
    (3) The wording of the letter of credit must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(k) of this part.
    (4) An owner or operator who uses a letter of credit to satisfy the 
requirements of this section may also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of such a letter of credit, all amounts paid pursuant to 
a draft by the trustee of the standby trust will be deposited by the 
issuing institution into the standby trust in accordance with 
instructions from the trustee. The trustee of the standby trust fund 
must be an entity which has the authority to act as a trustee and whose 
trust operations are regulated and examined by a Federal or State 
agency.
    (5) The wording of the standby trust fund must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(n).
    (i) Surety bond for liability coverage. (1) An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by obtaining a surety bond that 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting a copy of 
the bond to the Regional Administrator.
    (2) The surety company issuing the bond must be among those listed 
as acceptable sureties on Federal bonds in the most recent Circular 570 
of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
    (3) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(l) of this part.
    (4) A surety bond may be used to satisfy the requirements of this 
section only if the Attorneys General or Insurance Commissioners of (i) 
the State in which the surety is incorporated, and

[[Page 227]]

(ii) each State in which a facility covered by the surety bond is 
located have submitted a written statement to EPA that a surety bond 
executed as described in this section and Sec. 264.151(l) of this part 
is a legally valid and enforceable obligation in that State.
    (j) Trust fund for liability coverage. (1) An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by establishing a trust fund 
that conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting an 
originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement to the Regional 
Administrator.
    (2) The trustee must be an entity which has the authority to act as 
a trustee and whose trust operations are regulated and examined by a 
Federal or State agency.
    (3) The trust fund for liability coverage must be funded for the 
full amount of the liability coverage to be provided by the trust fund 
before it may be relied upon to satisfy the requirements of this 
section. If at any time after the trust fund is created the amount of 
funds in the trust fund is reduced below the full amount of the 
liability coverage to be provided, the owner or operator, by the 
anniversary date of the establishment of the fund, must either add 
sufficient funds to the trust fund to cause its value to equal the full 
amount of liability coverage to be provided, or obtain other financial 
assurance as specified in this section to cover the difference. For 
purposes of this paragraph, ``the full amount of the liability coverage 
to be provided'' means the amount of coverage for sudden and/or 
nonsudden occurrences required to be provided by the owner or operator 
by this section, less the amount of financial assurance for liability 
coverage that is being provided by other financial assurance mechanisms 
being used to demonstrate financial assurance by the owner or operator.
    (4) The wording of the trust fund must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(m) of this part.
    (k) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, an owner or 
operator using liability insurance to satisfy the requirements of this 
section may use, until October 16, 1982, a Hazardous Waste Facility 
Liability Endorsement or Certificate of Liability Insurance that does 
not certify that the insurer is licensed to transact the business of 
insurance, or eligible as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in one or 
more States.

[47 FR 16554, Apr. 16, 1982, as amended at 47 FR 28627, July 1, 1982; 47 
FR 30447, July 13, 1982; 48 FR 30115, June 30, 1983; 51 FR 16450, May 2, 
1986; 51 FR 25354, July 11, 1986; 52 FR 44320, Nov. 18, 1987; 52 FR 
46964, Dec. 10, 1987; 53 FR 33950, Sept. 1, 1988; 56 FR 30200, July 1, 
1991; 57 FR 42836, Sept. 16, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.148  Incapacity of owners or operators, guarantors, or financial institutions.

    (a) An owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator by 
certified mail of the commencement of a voluntary or involuntary 
proceeding under Title 11 (Bankruptcy), U.S. Code, naming the owner or 
operator as debtor, within 10 days after commencement of the proceeding. 
A guarantor of a corporate guarantee as specified in Secs. 264.143(f) 
and 264.145(f) must make such a notification if he is named as debtor, 
as required under the terms of the corporate guarantee 
(Sec. 264.151(h)).
    (b) An owner or operator who fulfills the requirements of 
Sec. 264.143, Sec. 264.145, or Sec. 264.147 by obtaining a trust fund, 
surety bond, letter of credit, or insurance policy will be deemed to be 
without the required financial assurance or liability coverage in the 
event of bankruptcy of the trustee or issuing institution, or a 
suspension or revocation of the authority of the trustee institution to 
act as trustee or of the institution issuing the surety bond, letter of 
credit, or insurance policy to issue such instruments. The owner or 
operator must establish other financial assurance or liability coverage 
within 60 days after such an event.


<R05>
Sec. 264.149  Use of State-required mechanisms.

    (a) For a facility located in a State where EPA is administering the 
requirements of this subpart but where the State has hazardous waste 
regulations that include requirements for financial assurance of closure 
or post-closure care or liability coverage, an owner or operator may use 
State-required financial mechanisms to meet

[[Page 228]]

the requirements of Sec. 264.143, Sec. 264.145, or Sec. 264.147, if the 
Regional Administrator determines that the State mechanisms are at least 
equivalent to the financial mechanism specified in this subpart. The 
Regional Administrator will evaluate the equivalency of the mechanisms 
principally in terms of (1) certainty of the availability of funds for 
the required closure or post-closure care activities or liability 
coverage and (2) the amount of funds that will be made available. The 
Regional Administrator may also consider other factors as he deems 
appropriate. The owner or operator must submit to the Regional 
Administrator evidence of the establishment of the mechanism together 
with a letter requesting that the State-required mechanism be considered 
acceptable for meeting the requirements of this subpart. The submission 
must include the following information: The facility's EPA 
Identification Number, name, and address, and the amount of funds for 
closure or post-closure care or liability coverage assured by the 
mechanism. The Regional Administrator will notify the owner or operator 
of his determination regarding the mechanism's acceptability in lieu of 
financial mechanisms specified in this subpart. The Regional 
Administrator may require the owner or operator to submit additional 
information as is deemed necessary to make this determination. Pending 
this determination, the owner or operator will be deemed to be in 
compliance with the requirements of Sec. 264.143, Sec. 264.145, or 
Sec. 264.147, as applicable.
    (b) If a State-required mechanism is found acceptable as specified 
in paragraph (a) of this section except for the amount of funds 
available, the owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this 
subpart by increasing the funds available through the State-required 
mechanism or using additional financial mechanisms as specified in this 
subpart. The amount of funds available through the State and Federal 
mechanisms must at least equal the amount required by this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 264.150  State assumption of responsibility.

    (a) If a State either assumes legal responsibility for an owner's or 
operator's compliance with the closure, post-closure care, or liability 
requirements of this part or assures that funds will be available from 
State sources to cover those requirements, the owner or operator will be 
in compliance with the requirements of Sec. 264.143, Sec. 264.145, or 
Sec. 264.147 if the Regional Administrator determines that the State's 
assumption of responsibility is at least equivalent to the financial 
mechanisms specified in this subpart. The Regional Administrator will 
evaluate the equivalency of State guarantees principally in terms of (1) 
certainty of the availability of funds for the required closure or post-
closure care activities or liability coverage and (2) the amount of 
funds that will be made available. The Regional Administrator may also 
consider other factors as he deems appropriate. The owner or operator 
must submit to the Regional Administrator a letter from the State 
describing the nature of the State's assumption of responsibility 
together with a letter from the owner or operator requesting that the 
State's assumption of responsibility be considered acceptable for 
meeting the requirements of this subpart. The letter from the State must 
include, or have attached to it, the following information: the 
facility's EPA Identification Number, name, and address, and the amount 
of funds for closure or post-closure care or liability coverage that are 
guaranteed by the State. The Regional Administrator will notify the 
owner or operator of his determination regarding the acceptability of 
the State's guarantee in lieu of financial mechanisms specified in this 
subpart. The Regional Administrator may require the owner or operator to 
submit additional information as is deemed necessary to make this 
determination. Pending this determination, the owner or operator will be 
deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Sec. 264.143, 
Sec. 264.145, or Sec. 264.147, as applicable.
    (b) If a State's assumption of responsibility is found acceptable as 
specified in paragraph (a) of this section except for the amount of 
funds available, the owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of 
this subpart by use of

[[Page 229]]

both the State's assurance and additional financial mechanisms as 
specified in this subpart. The amount of funds available through the 
State and Federal mechanisms must at least equal the amount required by 
this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 264.151  Wording of the instruments.

    (a)(1) A trust agreement for a trust fund, as specified in 
Sec. 264.143(a) or Sec. 264.145(a) or Sec. 265.143(a) or Sec. 265.145(a) 
of this chapter, must be worded as follows, except that instructions in 
brackets are to be replaced with the relevant information and the 
brackets deleted:

                             Trust Agreement

    Trust Agreement, the ``Agreement,'' entered into as of [date] by and 
between [name of the owner or operator], a [name of State] [insert 
``corporation,'' ``partnership,'' ``association,'' or 
``proprietorship''], the ``Grantor,'' and [name of corporate trustee], 
[insert ``incorporated in the State of ----'' or ``a national bank''], 
the ``Trustee.''
    Whereas, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, ``EPA,'' 
an agency of the United States Government, has established certain 
regulations applicable to the Grantor, requiring that an owner or 
operator of a hazardous waste management facility shall provide 
assurance that funds will be available when needed for closure and/or 
post-closure care of the facility,
    Whereas, the Grantor has elected to establish a trust to provide all 
or part of such financial assurance for the facilities identified 
herein,
    Whereas, the Grantor, acting through its duly authorized officers, 
has selected the Trustee to be the trustee under this agreement, and the 
Trustee is willing to act as trustee,
    Now, Therefore, the Grantor and the Trustee agree as follows:
    Section 1. Definitions. As used in this Agreement:
    (a) The term ``Grantor'' means the owner or operator who enters into 
this Agreement and any successors or assigns of the Grantor.
    (b) The term ``Trustee'' means the Trustee who enters into this 
Agreement and any successor Trustee.
    Section 2. Identification of Facilities and Cost Estimates. This 
Agreement pertains to the facilities and cost estimates identified on 
attached Schedule A [on Schedule A, for each facility list the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, and the current closure and/or 
post-closure cost estimates, or portions thereof, for which financial 
assurance is demonstrated by this Agreement].
    Section 3. Establishment of Fund. The Grantor and the Trustee hereby 
establish a trust fund, the ``Fund,'' for the benefit of EPA. The 
Grantor and the Trustee intend that no third party have access to the 
Fund except as herein provided. The Fund is established initially as 
consisting of the property, which is acceptable to the Trustee, 
described in Schedule B attached hereto. Such property and any other 
property subsequently transferred to the Trustee is referred to as the 
Fund, together with all earnings and profits thereon, less any payments 
or distributions made by the Trustee pursuant to this Agreement. The 
Fund shall be held by the Trustee, IN TRUST, as hereinafter provided. 
The Trustee shall not be responsible nor shall it undertake any 
responsibility for the amount or adequacy of, nor any duty to collect 
from the Grantor, any payments necessary to discharge any liabilities of 
the Grantor established by EPA.
    Section 4. Payment for Closure and Post-Closure Care. The Trustee 
shall make payments from the Fund as the EPA Regional Administrator 
shall direct, in writing, to provide for the payment of the costs of 
closure and/or post-closure care of the facilities covered by this 
Agreement. The Trustee shall reimburse the Grantor or other persons as 
specified by the EPA Regional Administrator from the Fund for closure 
and post-closure expenditures in such amounts as the EPA Regional 
Administrator shall direct in writing. In addition, the Trustee shall 
refund to the Grantor such amounts as the EPA Regional Administrator 
specifies in writing. Upon refund, such funds shall no longer constitute 
part of the Fund as defined herein.
    Section 5. Payments Comprising the Fund. Payments made to the 
Trustee for the Fund shall consist of cash or securities acceptable to 
the Trustee.
    Section 6. Trustee Management. The Trustee shall invest and reinvest 
the principal and income of the Fund and keep the Fund invested as a 
single fund, without distinction between principal and income, in 
accordance with general investment policies and guidelines which the 
Grantor may communicate in writing to the Trustee from time to time, 
subject, however, to the provisions of this section. In investing, 
reinvesting, exchanging, selling, and managing the Fund, the Trustee 
shall discharge his duties with respect to the trust fund solely in the 
interest of the beneficiary and with the care, skill, prudence, and 
diligence under the circumstances then prevailing which persons of 
prudence, acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters, 
would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with 
like aims; except that:
    (i) Securities or other obligations of the Grantor, or any other 
owner or operator of the facilities, or any of their affiliates as 
defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940,

[[Page 230]]

as amended, 15 U.S.C. 80a-2.(a), shall not be acquired or held, unless 
they are securities or other obligations of the Federal or a State 
government;
    (ii) The Trustee is authorized to invest the Fund in time or demand 
deposits of the Trustee, to the extent insured by an agency of the 
Federal or State government; and
    (iii) The Trustee is authorized to hold cash awaiting investment or 
distribution uninvested for a reasonable time and without liability for 
the payment of interest thereon.
    Section 7. Commingling and Investment. The Trustee is expressly 
authorized in its discretion:
    (a) To transfer from time to time any or all of the assets of the 
Fund to any common, commingled, or collective trust fund created by the 
Trustee in which the Fund is eligible to participate, subject to all of 
the provisions thereof, to be commingled with the assets of other trusts 
participating therein; and
    (b) To purchase shares in any investment company registered under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq., including 
one which may be created, managed, underwritten, or to which investment 
advice is rendered or the shares of which are sold by the Trustee. The 
Trustee may vote such shares in its discretion.
    Section 8. Express Powers of Trustee. Without in any way limiting 
the powers and discretions conferred upon the Trustee by the other 
provisions of this Agreement or by law, the Trustee is expressly 
authorized and empowered:
    (a) To sell, exchange, convey, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any 
property held by it, by public or private sale. No person dealing with 
the Trustee shall be bound to see to the application of the purchase 
money or to inquire into the validity or expediency of any such sale or 
other disposition;
    (b) To make, execute, acknowledge, and deliver any and all documents 
of transfer and conveyance and any and all other instruments that may be 
necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers herein granted;
    (c) To register any securities held in the Fund in its own name or 
in the name of a nominee and to hold any security in bearer form or in 
book entry, or to combine certificates representing such securities with 
certificates of the same issue held by the Trustee in other fiduciary 
capacities, or to deposit or arrange for the deposit of such securities 
in a qualified central depositary even though, when so deposited, such 
securities may be merged and held in bulk in the name of the nominee of 
such depositary with other securities deposited therein by another 
person, or to deposit or arrange for the deposit of any securities 
issued by the United States Government, or any agency or instrumentality 
thereof, with a Federal Reserve bank, but the books and records of the 
Trustee shall at all times show that all such securities are part of the 
Fund;
    (d) To deposit any cash in the Fund in interest-bearing accounts 
maintained or savings certificates issued by the Trustee, in its 
separate corporate capacity, or in any other banking institution 
affiliated with the Trustee, to the extent insured by an agency of the 
Federal or State government; and
    (e) To compromise or otherwise adjust all claims in favor of or 
against the Fund.
    Section 9. Taxes and Expenses. All taxes of any kind that may be 
assessed or levied against or in respect of the Fund and all brokerage 
commissions incurred by the Fund shall be paid from the Fund. All other 
expenses incurred by the Trustee in connection with the administration 
of this Trust, including fees for legal services rendered to the 
Trustee, the compensation of the Trustee to the extent not paid directly 
by the Grantor, and all other proper charges and disbursements of the 
Trustee shall be paid from the Fund.
    Section 10. Annual Valuation. The Trustee shall annually, at least 
30 days prior to the anniversary date of establishment of the Fund, 
furnish to the Grantor and to the appropriate EPA Regional Administrator 
a statement confirming the value of the Trust. Any securities in the 
Fund shall be valued at market value as of no more than 60 days prior to 
the anniversary date of establishment of the Fund. The failure of the 
Grantor to object in writing to the Trustee within 90 days after the 
statement has been furnished to the Grantor and the EPA Regional 
Administrator shall constitute a conclusively binding assent by the 
Grantor, barring the Grantor from asserting any claim or liability 
against the Trustee with respect to matters disclosed in the statement.
    Section 11. Advice of Counsel. The Trustee may from time to time 
consult with counsel, who may be counsel to the Grantor, with respect to 
any question arising as to the construction of this Agreement or any 
action to be taken hereunder. The Trustee shall be fully protected, to 
the extent permitted by law, in acting upon the advice of counsel.
    Section 12. Trustee Compensation. The Trustee shall be entitled to 
reasonable compensation for its services as agreed upon in writing from 
time to time with the Grantor.
    Section 13. Successor Trustee. The Trustee may resign or the Grantor 
may replace the Trustee, but such resignation or replacement shall not 
be effective until the Grantor has appointed a successor trustee and 
this successor accepts the appointment. The successor trustee shall have 
the same powers and duties as those conferred upon the Trustee 
hereunder. Upon the successor trustee's acceptance of the appointment, 
the Trustee shall assign, transfer, and pay over to the successor 
trustee the funds and properties

[[Page 231]]

then constituting the Fund. If for any reason the Grantor cannot or does 
not act in the event of the resignation of the Trustee, the Trustee may 
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a 
successor trustee or for instructions. The successor trustee shall 
specify the date on which it assumes administration of the trust in a 
writing sent to the Grantor, the EPA Regional Administrator, and the 
present Trustee by certified mail 10 days before such change becomes 
effective. Any expenses incurred by the Trustee as a result of any of 
the acts contemplated by this Section shall be paid as provided in 
Section 9.
    Section 14. Instructions to the Trustee. All orders, requests, and 
instructions by the Grantor to the Trustee shall be in writing, signed 
by such persons as are designated in the attached Exhibit A or such 
other designees as the Grantor may designate by amendment to Exhibit A. 
The Trustee shall be fully protected in acting without inquiry in 
accordance with the Grantor's orders, requests, and instructions. All 
orders, requests, and instructions by the EPA Regional Administrator to 
the Trustee shall be in writing, signed by the EPA Regional 
Administrators of the Regions in which the facilities are located, or 
their designees, and the Trustee shall act and shall be fully protected 
in acting in accordance with such orders, requests, and instructions. 
The Trustee shall have the right to assume, in the absence of written 
notice to the contrary, that no event constituting a change or a 
termination of the authority of any person to act on behalf of the 
Grantor or EPA hereunder has occurred. The Trustee shall have no duty to 
act in the absence of such orders, requests, and instructions from the 
Grantor and/or EPA, except as provided for herein.
    Section 15. Notice of Nonpayment. The Trustee shall notify the 
Grantor and the appropriate EPA Regional Administrator, by certified 
mail within 10 days following the expiration of the 30-day period after 
the anniversary of the establishment of the Trust, if no payment is 
received from the Grantor during that period. After the pay-in period is 
completed, the Trustee shall not be required to send a notice of 
nonpayment.
    Section 16. Amendment of Agreement. This Agreement may be amended by 
an instrument in writing executed by the Grantor, the Trustee, and the 
appropriate EPA Regional Administrator, or by the Trustee and the 
appropriate EPA Regional Administrator if the Grantor ceases to exist.
    Section 17. Irrevocability and Termination. Subject to the right of 
the parties to amend this Agreement as provided in Section 16, this 
Trust shall be irrevocable and shall continue until terminated at the 
written agreement of the Grantor, the Trustee, and the EPA Regional 
Administrator, or by the Trustee and the EPA Regional Administrator, if 
the Grantor ceases to exist. Upon termination of the Trust, all 
remaining trust property, less final trust administration expenses, 
shall be delivered to the Grantor.
    Section 18. Immunity and Indemnification. The Trustee shall not 
incur personal liability of any nature in connection with any act or 
omission, made in good faith, in the administration of this Trust, or in 
carrying out any directions by the Grantor or the EPA Regional 
Administrator issued in accordance with this Agreement. The Trustee 
shall be indemnified and saved harmless by the Grantor or from the Trust 
Fund, or both, from and against any personal liability to which the 
Trustee may be subjected by reason of any act or conduct in its official 
capacity, including all expenses reasonably incurred in its defense in 
the event the Grantor fails to provide such defense.
    Section 19. Choice of Law. This Agreement shall be administered, 
construed, and enforced according to the laws of the State of [insert 
name of State].
    Section 20. Interpretation. As used in this Agreement, words in the 
singular include the plural and words in the plural include the 
singular. The descriptive headings for each Section of this Agreement 
shall not affect the interpretation or the legal efficacy of this 
Agreement.
    In Witness Whereof the parties have caused this Agreement to be 
executed by their respective officers duly authorized and their 
corporate seals to be hereunto affixed and attested as of the date first 
above written: The parties below certify that the wording of this 
Agreement is identical to the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(a)(1) 
as such regulations were constituted on the date first above written.
      [Signature of Grantor]
        [Title]
Attest:
    [Title]
    [Seal]
      [Signature of Trustee]
Attest:
    [Title]
    [Seal]

    (2) The following is an example of the certification of 
acknowledgment which must accompany the trust agreement for a trust fund 
as specified in Secs. 264.143(a) and 264.145(a) or Secs. 265.143(a) or 
265.145(a) of this chapter. State requirements may differ on the proper 
content of this acknowledgment.

 State of_______________________________________________________________
 County of______________________________________________________________
    On this [date], before me personally came [owner or operator] to me 
known, who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say that she/he 
resides at [address], that she/he is

[[Page 232]]

[title] of [corporation], the corporation described in and which 
executed the above instrument; that she/he knows the seal of said 
corporation; that the seal affixed to such instrument is such corporate 
seal; that it was so affixed by order of the Board of Directors of said 
corporation, and that she/he signed her/his name thereto by like order.

      [Signature of Notary Public]

    (b) A surety bond guaranteeing payment into a trust fund, as 
specified in Sec. 264.143(b) or Sec. 264.145(b) or Sec. 265.143(b) or 
Sec. 265.145(b) of this chapter, must be worded as follows, except that 
instructions in brackets are to be replaced with the relevant 
information and the brackets deleted:

                        Financial Guarantee Bond

Date bond executed:
Effective date:
Principal: [legal name and business address of owner or operator]
Type of Organization: [insert ``individual,'' ``joint venture,'' 
``partnership,'' or ``corporation'']
 State of incorporation:________________________________________________
Surety(ies): [name(s) and business address(es)]
EPA Identification Number, name, address and closure and/or post-closure 
amount(s) for each facility guaranteed by this bond [indicate closure 
and post-closure
   amounts separately]:_________________________________________________
Total penal sum of
 bond:  $_______________________________________________________________
 Surety's bond number:__________________________________________________
    Know All Persons By These Presents, That we, the Principal and 
Surety(ies) hereto are firmly bound to the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (hereinafter called EPA), in the above penal sum for the payment 
of which we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators, 
successors, and assigns jointly and severally; provided that, where the 
Surety(ies) are corporations acting as co-sureties, we, the Sureties, 
bind ourselves in such sum ``jointly and severally'' only for the 
purpose of allowing a joint action or actions against any or all of us, 
and for all other purposes each Surety binds itself, jointly and 
severally with the Principal, for the payment of such sum only as is set 
forth opposite the name of such Surety, but if no limit of liability is 
indicated, the limit of liability shall be the full amount of the penal 
sum.
    Whereas said Principal is required, under the Resource Conservation 
and Recovery Act as amended (RCRA), to have a permit or interim status 
in order to own or operate each hazardous waste management facility 
identified above, and
    Whereas said Principal is required to provide financial assurance 
for closure, or closure and post-closure care, as a condition of the 
permit or interim status, and
    Whereas said Principal shall establish a standby trust fund as is 
required when a surety bond is used to provide such financial assurance;
    Now, Therefore, the conditions of the obligation are such that if 
the Principal shall faithfully, before the beginning of final closure of 
each facility identified above, fund the standby trust fund in the 
amount(s) identified above for the facility,
    Or, if the Principal shall fund the standby trust fund in such 
amount(s) within 15 days after a final order to begin closure is issued 
by an EPA Regional Administrator or a U.S. district court or other court 
of competent jurisdiction,
    Or, if the Principal shall provide alternate financial assurance, as 
specified in subpart H of 40 CFR part 264 or 265, as applicable, and 
obtain the EPA Regional Administrator's written approval of such 
assurance, within 90 days after the date notice of cancellation is 
received by both the Principal and the EPA Regional Administrator(s) 
from the Surety(ies), then this obligation shall be null and void; 
otherwise it is to remain in full force and effect.
    The Surety(ies) shall become liable on this bond obligation only 
when the Principal has failed to fulfill the conditions described above. 
Upon notification by an EPA Regional Administrator that the Principal 
has failed to perform as guaranteed by this bond, the Surety(ies) shall 
place funds in the amount guaranteed for the facility(ies) into the 
standby trust fund as directed by the EPA Regional Administrator.
    The liability of the Surety(ies) shall not be discharged by any 
payment or succession of payments hereunder, unless and until such 
payment or payments shall amount in the aggregate to the penal sum of 
the bond, but in no event shall the obligation of the Surety(ies) 
hereunder exceed the amount of said penal sum.
    The Surety(ies) may cancel the bond by sending notice of 
cancellation by certified mail to the Principal and to the EPA Regional 
Administrator(s) for the Region(s) in which the facility(ies) is (are) 
located, provided, however, that cancellation shall not occur during the 
120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the notice of cancellation 
by both the Principal and the EPA Regional Administrator(s), as 
evidenced by the return receipts.
    The Principal may terminate this bond by sending written notice to 
the Surety(ies), provided, however, that no such notice shall become 
effective until the Surety(ies) receive(s) written authorization for 
termination of the bond by the EPA Regional Administrator(s) of the EPA 
Region(s) in which the bonded facility(ies) is (are) located.

[[Page 233]]

    [The following paragraph is an optional rider that may be included 
but is not required.]
    Principal and Surety(ies) hereby agree to adjust the penal sum of 
the bond yearly so that it guarantees a new closure and/or post-closure 
amount, provided that the penal sum does not increase by more than 20 
percent in any one year, and no decrease in the penal sum takes place 
without the written permission of the EPA Regional Administrator(s).
    In Witness Whereof, the Principal and Surety(ies) have executed this 
Financial Guarantee Bond and have affixed their seals on the date set 
forth above.
    The persons whose signatures appear below hereby certify that they 
are authorized to execute this surety bond on behalf of the Principal 
and Surety(ies) and that the wording of this surety bond is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(b) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date this bond was executed.

                                Principal

 [Signature(s)]_________________________________________________________

 [Name(s)]______________________________________________________________

 [Title(s)]_____________________________________________________________

 [Corporate seal]_______________________________________________________

                          Corporate Surety(ies)

[Name and address]
 State of incorporation:]_______________________________________________

 Liability limit: $_____________________________________________________

[Signature(s)]
[Name(s) and title(s)]
[Corporate seal]
[For every co-surety, provide signature(s), corporate seal, and other 
information in the same manner as for Surety above.]
 Bond premium: $________________________________________________________

    (c) A surety bond guaranteeing performance of closure and/or post-
closure care, as specified in Sec. 264.143(c) or Sec. 264.145(c), must 
be worded as follows, except that the instructions in brackets are to be 
replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

                            Performance Bond

 Date bond executed:____________________________________________________

 Effective date:________________________________________________________

Principal: [legal name and business address of owner or operator]

Type of organization: [insert ``individual,'' ``joint venture,'' 
``partnership,'' or ``corporation'']
 State of incorporation:________________________________________________

 Surety(ies): [name(s) and business address(es)]________________________

EPA Identification Number, name, address, and closure and/or post-
closure amount(s) for each facility guaranteed by this bond [indicate 
closure and post-closure amounts separately]:------
 Total penal sum of bond: $_____________________________________________
 Surety's bond number:__________________________________________________
    Know All Persons By These Presents, That we, the Principal and 
Surety(ies) hereto are firmly bound to the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (hereinafter called EPA), in the above penal sum for the payment 
of which we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators, 
successors, and assigns jointly and severally; provided that, where the 
Surety(ies) are corporations acting as co-sureties, we, the Sureties, 
bind ourselves in such sum ``jointly and severally'' only for the 
purpose of allowing a joint action or actions against any or all of us, 
and for all other purposes each Surety binds itself, jointly and 
severally with the Principal, for the payment of such sum only as is set 
forth opposite the name of such Surety, but if no limit of liability is 
indicated, the limit of liability shall be the full amount of the penal 
sum.
    Whereas said Principal is required, under the Resource Conservation 
and Recovery Act as amended (RCRA), to have a permit in order to own or 
operate each hazardous waste management facility identified above, and
    Whereas said Principal is required to provide financial assurance 
for closure, or closure and post-closure care, as a condition of the 
permit, and
    Whereas said Principal shall establish a standby trust fund as is 
required when a surety bond is used to provide such financial assurance;
    Now, Therefore, the conditions of this obligation are such that if 
the Principal shall faithfully perform closure, whenever required to do 
so, of each facility for which this bond guarantees closure, in 
accordance with the closure plan and other requirements of the permit as 
such plan and permit may be amended, pursuant to all applicable laws, 
statutes, rules, and regulations, as such laws, statutes, rules, and 
regulations may be amended,
    And, if the Principal shall faithfully perform post-closure care of 
each facility for which this bond guarantees post-closure care, in 
accordance with the post-closure plan and other requirements of the 
permit, as such plan and permit may be amended, pursuant to all 
applicable laws, statutes, rules, and regulations, as such laws, 
statutes, rules, and regulations may be amended,
    Or, if the Principal shall provide alternate financial assurance as 
specified in subpart H of 40 CFR part 264, and obtain the EPA Regional 
Administrator's written approval of such assurance, within 90 days after 
the date notice of cancellation is received by both the

[[Page 234]]

Principal and the EPA Regional Administrator(s) from the Surety(ies), 
then this obligation shall be null and void, otherwise it is to remain 
in full force and effect.
    The Surety(ies) shall become liable on this bond obligation only 
when the Principal has failed to fulfill the conditions described above.
    Upon notification by an EPA Regional Administrator that the 
Principal has been found in violation of the closure requirements of 40 
CFR part 264, for a facility for which this bond guarantees performance 
of closure, the Surety(ies) shall either perform closure in accordance 
with the closure plan and other permit requirements or place the closure 
amount guaranteed for the facility into the standby trust fund as 
directed by the EPA Regional Administrator.
    Upon notification by an EPA Regional Administrator that the 
Principal has been found in violation of the post-closure requirements 
of 40 CFR part 264 for a facility for which this bond guarantees 
performance of post-closure care, the Surety(ies) shall either perform 
post-closure care in accordance with the post-closure plan and other 
permit requirements or place the post-closure amount guaranteed for the 
facility into the standby trust fund as directed by the EPA Regional 
Administrator.
    Upon notification by an EPA Regional Administrator that the 
Principal has failed to provide alternate financial assurance as 
specified in subpart H of 40 CFR part 264, and obtain written approval 
of such assurance from the EPA Regional Administrator(s) during the 90 
days following receipt by both the Principal and the EPA Regional 
Administrator(s) of a notice of cancellation of the bond, the 
Surety(ies) shall place funds in the amount guaranteed for the 
facility(ies) into the standby trust fund as directed by the EPA 
Regional Administrator.
    The surety(ies) hereby waive(s) notification of amendments to 
closure plans, permits, applicable laws, statutes, rules, and 
regulations and agrees that no such amendment shall in any way alleviate 
its (their) obligation on this bond.
    The liability of the Surety(ies) shall not be discharged by any 
payment or succession of payments hereunder, unless and until such 
payment or payments shall amount in the aggregate to the penal sum of 
the bond, but in no event shall the obligation of the Surety(ies) 
hereunder exceed the amount of said penal sum.
    The Surety(ies) may cancel the bond by sending notice of 
cancellation by certified mail to the owner or operator and to the EPA 
Regional Administrator(s) for the Region(s) in which the facility(ies) 
is (are) located, provided, however, that cancellation shall not occur 
during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the notice of 
cancellation by both the Principal and the EPA Regional 
Administrator(s), as evidenced by the return receipts.
    The principal may terminate this bond by sending written notice to 
the Surety(ies), provided, however, that no such notice shall become 
effective until the Surety(ies) receive(s) written authorization for 
termination of the bond by the EPA Regional Administrator(s) of the EPA 
Region(s) in which the bonded facility(ies) is (are) located.
    [The following paragraph is an optional rider that may be included 
but is not required.]
    Principal and Surety(ies) hereby agree to adjust the penal sum of 
the bond yearly so that it guarantees a new closure and/or post-closure 
amount, provided that the penal sum does not increase by more than 20 
percent in any one year, and no decrease in the penal sum takes place 
without the written permission of the EPA Regional Administrator(s).
    In Witness Whereof, The Principal and Surety(ies) have executed this 
Performance Bond and have affixed their seals on the date set forth 
above.
    The persons whose signatures appear below hereby certify that they 
are authorized to execute this surety bond on behalf of the Principal 
and Surety(ies) and that the wording of this surety bond is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(c) as such regulation was 
constituted on the date this bond was executed.

                                Principal

[Signature(s)]

[Name(s)]

[Title(s)]

[Corporate seal]

                          Corporate Surety(ies)

[Name and address]

 State of incorporation:________________________________________________

 Liability limit: $_____________________________________________________
[Signature(s)]

[Name(s) and title(s)]

[Corporate seal]

[For every co-surety, provide signature(s), corporate seal, and other 
information in the same manner as for Surety above.]

 Bond premium: $________________________________________________________

    (d) A letter of credit, as specified in Sec. 264.143(d) or 
Sec. 264.145(d) or Sec. 265.143(c) or Sec. 265.145(c) of this chapter, 
must be worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets are to 
be replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

                  Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit

Regional Administrator(s)
 Region(s) _____________________________________________________________

[[Page 235]]

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

    Dear Sir or Madam: We hereby establish our Irrevocable Standby 
Letter of Credit No. ______ in your favor, at the request and for the 
account of [owner's or operator's name and address] up to the aggregate 
amount of [in words] U.S. dollars $______, available upon presentation 
[insert, if more than one Regional Administrator is a beneficiary, ``by 
any one of you''] of
    (1) your sight draft, bearing reference to this letter of credit No. 
______, and
    (2) your signed statement reading as follows: ``I certify that the 
amount of the draft is payable pursuant to regulations issued under 
authority of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 as 
amended.''
    This letter of credit is effective as of [date] and shall expire on 
[date at least 1 year later], but such expiration date shall be 
automatically extended for a period of [at least 1 year] on [date] and 
on each successive expiration date, unless, at least 120 days before the 
current expiration date, we notify both you and [owner's or operator's 
name] by certified mail that we have decided not to extend this letter 
of credit beyond the current expiration date. In the event you are so 
notified, any unused portion of the credit shall be available upon 
presentation of your sight draft for 120 days after the date of receipt 
by both you and [owner's or operator's name], as shown on the signed 
return receipts.
    Whenever this letter of credit is drawn on under and in compliance 
with the terms of this credit, we shall duly honor such draft upon 
presentation to us, and we shall deposit the amount of the draft 
directly into the standby trust fund of [owner's or operator's name] in 
accordance with your instructions.
    We certify that the wording of this letter of credit is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(d) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date shown immediately below.

[Signature(s) and title(s) of official(s) of issuing institution] [Date]

    This credit is subject to [insert ``the most recent edition of the 
Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits, published and 
copyrighted by the International Chamber of Commerce,'' or ``the Uniform 
Commercial Code''].

    (e) A certificate of insurance, as specified in Sec. 264.143(e) or 
Sec. 264.145(e) or Sec. 265.143(d) or Sec. 265.145(d) of this chapter, 
must be worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets are to 
be replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

        Certificate of Insurance for Closure or Post-Closure Care

Name and Address of Insurer
 (herein called the ``Insurer''): ______________________________________
Name and Address of Insured
 (herein called the ``Insured''): ______________________________________
Facilities Covered: [List for each facility: The EPA Identification 
Number, name, address, and the amount of insurance for closure and/or 
the amount for post-closure care (these amounts for all facilities 
covered must total the face amount shown below).]
 Face Amount: __________________________________________________________
Policy Number: _________________________________________________________
Effective Date: ________________________________________________________
    The Insurer hereby certifies that it has issued to the Insured the 
policy of insurance identified above to provide financial assurance for 
[insert ``closure'' or ``closure and post-closure care'' or ``post-
closure care''] for the facilities identified above. The Insurer further 
warrants that such policy conforms in all respects with the requirements 
of 40 CFR 264.143(e), 264.145(e), 265.143(d), and 265.145(d), as 
applicable and as such regulations were constituted on the date shown 
immediately below. It is agreed that any provision of the policy 
inconsistent with such regulations is hereby amended to eliminate such 
inconsistency.
    Whenever requested by the EPA Regional Administrator(s) of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Insurer agrees to furnish to the 
EPA Regional Administrator(s) a duplicate original of the policy listed 
above, including all endorsements thereon.
    I hereby certify that the wording of this certificate is identical 
to the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(e) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date shown immediately below.

[Authorized signature for Insurer]
[Name of person signing]
[Title of person signing]
 Signature of witness or notary: _______________________________________
[Date]

    (f) A letter from the chief financial officer, as specified in 
Sec. 264.143(f) or 264.145(f), or Sec. 265.143(e) or 265.143(e) of this 
chapter, must be worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets 
are to be replaced with the relevant information and the brackets 
deleted:

                   Letter From Chief Financial Officer

[Address to Regional Administrator of every Region in which facilities 
for which financial responsibility is to be demonstrated through the 
financial test are located].

    I am the chief financial officer of [name and address of firm]. This 
letter is in support of this firm's use of the financial test to

[[Page 236]]

demonstrate financial assurance for closure and/or post-closure costs, 
as specified in subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265.

[Fill out the following five paragraphs regarding facilities and 
associated cost estimates. If your firm has no facilities that belong in 
a particular paragraph, write ``None'' in the space indicated. For each 
facility, include its EPA Identification Number, name, address, and 
current closure and/or post-closure cost estimates. Identify each cost 
estimate as to whether it is for closure or post-closure care].

    1. This firm is the owner or operator of the following facilities 
for which financial assurance for closure or post-closure care is 
demonstrated through the financial test specified in subpart H of 40 CFR 
parts 264 and 265. The current closure and/or post-closure cost 
estimates covered by the test are shown for each facility: ________.
    2. This firm guarantees, through the guarantee specified in subpart 
H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265, the closure or post-closure care of the 
following facilities owned or operated by the guaranteed party. The 
current cost estimates for the closure or post-closure care so 
guaranteed are shown for each facility: ________. The firm identified 
above is [insert one or more: (1) The direct or higher-tier parent 
corporation of the owner or operator; (2) owned by the same parent 
corporation as the parent corporation of the owner or operator, and 
receiving the following value in consideration of this guarantee 
________; or (3) engaged in the following substantial business 
relationship with the owner or operator ________, and receiving the 
following value in consideration of this guarantee ________]. [Attach a 
written description of the business relationship or a copy of the 
contract establishing such relationship to this letter].
    3. In States where EPA is not administering the financial 
requirements of subpart H of 40 CFR part 264 or 265, this firm, as owner 
or operator or guarantor, is demonstrating financial assurance for the 
closure or post-closure care of the following facilities through the use 
of a test equivalent or substantially equivalent to the financial test 
specified in subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265. The current closure 
and/or post-closure cost estimates covered by such a test are shown for 
each facility: ________.
    4. This firm is the owner or operator of the following hazardous 
waste management facilities for which financial assurance for closure 
or, if a disposal facility, post-closure care, is not demonstrated 
either to EPA or a State through the financial test or any other 
financial assurance mechanism specified in subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 
and 265 or equivalent or substantially equivalent State mechanisms. The 
current closure and/or post-closure cost estimates not covered by such 
financial assurance are shown for each facility: ________.
    5. This firm is the owner or operator of the following UIC 
facilities for which financial assurance for plugging and abandonment is 
required under part 144. The current closure cost estimates as required 
by 40 CFR 144.62 are shown for each facility: ________.
    This firm [insert ``is required'' or ``is not required''] to file a 
Form 10K with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for the 
latest fiscal year.
    The fiscal year of this firm ends on [month, day]. The figures for 
the following items marked with an asterisk are derived from this firm's 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
completed fiscal year, ended [date].

[Fill in Alternative I if the criteria of paragraph (f)(1)(i) of 
Sec. 264.143 or Sec. 264.145, or of paragraph (e)(1)(i) of Sec. 265.143 
or Sec. 265.145 of this chapter are used. Fill in Alternative II if the 
criteria of paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of Sec. 264.143 or Sec. 264.145, or of 
paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of Sec. 265.143 or Sec. 265.145 of this chapter are 
used.]

                              Alternative I

    1. Sum of current closure and post-closure cost estimate [total of 
all cost estimates shown in the five paragraphs above] $________
    *2. Total liabilities [if any portion of the closure or post-closure 
cost estimates is included in total liabilities, you may deduct the 
amount of that portion from this line and add that amount to lines 3 and 
4]$________
    *3. Tangible net worth $________
    *4. Net worth $________
    *5. Current assets $________
    *6. Current liabilities $________
    7. Net working capital [line 5 minus line 6] $________
    *8. The sum of net income plus depreciation, depletion, and 
amortization $________
    *9. Total assets in U.S. (required only if less than 90% of firm's 
assets are located in the U.S.) $________
    10. Is line 3 at least $10 million? (Yes/No) ________
    11. Is line 3 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________
    12. Is line 7 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________
    *13. Are at least 90% of firm's assets located in the U.S.? If not, 
complete line 14 (Yes/No) ________
    14. Is line 9 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________
    15. Is line 2 divided by line 4 less than 2.0? (Yes/No) ________
    16. Is line 8 divided by line 2 greater than 0.1? (Yes/No) ________
    17. Is line 5 divided by line 6 greater than 1.5? (Yes/No) ________

[[Page 237]]

                             Alternative II

    1. Sum of current closure and post-closure cost estimates [total of 
all cost estimates shown in the five paragraphs above] $________
    2. Current bond rating of most recent issuance of this firm and name 
of rating service ________
    3. Date of issuance of bond ________
    4. Date of maturity of bond ________
    *5. Tangible net worth [if any portion of the closure and post-
closure cost estimates is included in ``total liabilities'' on your 
firm's financial statements, you may add the amount of that portion to 
this line] $________
    *6. Total assets in U.S. (required only if less than 90% of firm's 
assets are located in the U.S.) $________
    7. Is line 5 at least $10 million ? (Yes/No) ________
    8. Is line 5 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________
    *9. Are at least 90% of firm's assets located in the U.S.? If not, 
complete line 10 (Yes/No) ________
    10. Is line 6 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________
    I hereby certify that the wording of this letter is identical to the 
wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(f) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date shown immediately below.

 [Signature]____________________________________________________________

 [Name]_________________________________________________________________

 [Title]________________________________________________________________

 [Date]_________________________________________________________________

    (g) A letter from the chief financial officer, as specified in 
Sec. 264.147(f) or Sec. 265.147(f) of this chapter, must be worded as 
follows, except that instructions in brackets are to be replaced with 
the relevant information and the brackets deleted.

                   Letter From Chief Financial Officer

    [Address to Regional Administrator of every Region in which 
facilities for which financial responsibility is to be demonstrated 
through the financial test are located].
    I am the chief financial officer of [firm's name and address]. This 
letter is in support of the use of the financial test to demonstrate 
financial responsibility for liability coverage [insert ``and closure 
and/or post-closure care'' if applicable] as specified in subpart H of 
40 CFR parts 264 and 265.
    [Fill out the following paragraphs regarding facilities and 
liability coverage. If there are no facilities that belong in a 
particular paragraph, write ``None'' in the space indicated. For each 
facility, include its EPA Identification Number, name, and address].
    The firm identified above is the owner or operator of the following 
facilities for which liability coverage for [insert ``sudden'' or 
``nonsudden'' or ``both sudden and nonsudden''] accidental occurrences 
is being demonstrated through the financial test specified in subpart H 
of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265:________
    The firm identified above guarantees, through the guarantee 
specified in subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265, liability coverage 
for [insert ``sudden'' or ``nonsudden'' of ``both sudden and 
nonsudden''] accidental occurrences at the following facilities owned or 
operated by the following: ________. The firm identified above is 
[insert one or more: (1) The direct or higher-tier parent corporation of 
the owner or operator; (2) owned by the same parent corporation as the 
parent corporation of the owner or operator, and receiving the following 
value in consideration of this guarantee ________; or (3) engaged in the 
following substantial business relationship with the owner or operator 
________, and receiving the following value in consideration of this 
guarantee ________]. [Attach a written description of the business 
relationship or a copy of the contract establishing such relationship to 
this letter.]
    [If you are using the financial test to demonstrate coverage of both 
liability and closure and post-closure care, fill in the following five 
paragraphs regarding facilities and associated closure and post-closure 
cost estimates. If there are no facilities that belong in a particular 
paragraph, write ``None'' in the space indicated. For each facility, 
include its EPA identification number, name, address, and current 
closure and/or post-closure cost estimates. Identify each cost estimate 
as to whether it is for closure or post-closure care.]
    1. The firm identified above owns or operates the following 
facilities for which financial assurance for closure or post-closure 
care or liability coverage is demonstrated through the financial test 
specified in subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265. The current closure 
and/or post-closure cost estimate covered by the test are shown for each 
facility: ________.
    2. The firm identified above guarantees, through the guarantee 
specified in subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265, the closure and 
post-closure care or liability coverage of the following facilities 
owned or operated by the guaranteed party. The current cost estimates 
for closure or post-closure care so guaranteed are shown for each 
facility: ________.
    3. In States where EPA is not administering the financial 
requirements of subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265, this firm is 
demonstrating financial assurance for the closure or post-closure care 
of the following facilities through the use of a test equivalent or 
substantially equivalent to the financial test specified in subpart H or 
40 CFR parts

[[Page 238]]

264 and 265. The current closure or post-closure cost estimates covered 
by such a test are shown for each facility: ________.
    4. The firm identified above owns or operates the following 
hazardous waste management facilities for which financial assurance for 
closure or, if a disposal facility, post-closure care, is not 
demonstrated either to EPA or a State through the financial test or any 
other financial assurance mechanisms specified in subpart H of 40 CFR 
parts 264 and 265 or equivalent or substantially equivalent State 
mechanisms. The current closure and/or post-closure cost estimates not 
covered by such financial assurance are shown for each facility: 
________.
    5. This firm is the owner or operator or guarantor of the following 
UIC facilities for which financial assurance for plugging and 
abandonment is required under part 144 and is assured through a 
financial test. The current closure cost estimates as required by 40 CFR 
144.62 are shown for each facility:________.
    This firm [insert ``is required'' or ``is not required''] to file a 
Form 10K with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for the 
latest fiscal year.
    The fiscal year of this firm ends on [month, day]. The figures for 
the following items marked with an asterisk are derived from this firm's 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
completed fiscal year, ended [date].

          Part A. Liability Coverage for Accidental Occurrences

    [Fill in Alternative I if the criteria of paragraph (f)(1)(i) of 
Sec. 264.147 or Sec. 265.147 are used. Fill in Alternative II if the 
criteria of paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of Sec. 264.147 or Sec. 265.147 are 
used.]

                              Alternative I

    1. Amount of annual aggregate liability coverage to be demonstrated 
$ ________.
    *2. Current assets $ ________.
    *3. Current $ ________.
    4. Net working capital (line 2 minus line 3) $ ________.
    *5. Tangible net worth $ ________.
    *6. If less than 90% of assets are located in the U.S., give total 
U.S. assets $ ________.
    7. Is line 5 at least $10 million? (Yes/No) ________.
    8. Is line 4 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________.
    9. Is line 5 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________.
    *10. Are at least 90% of assets located in the U.S.? (Yes/No) 
________. If not, complete line 11.
    11. Is line 6 at least 6 times line 1? (Yes/No) ________.

                             Alternative II

    1. Amount of annual aggregate liability coverage to be demonstrated 
$ ________.
    2. Current bond rating of most recent issuance and name of rating 
service ________ ________.
    3. Date of issuance of bond ________ ________.
    4. Date of maturity of bond ________ ________.
    *5. Tangible net worth $ ________.
    *6. Total assets in U.S. (required only if less than 90% of assets 
are located in the U.S.) $ ________.
    7. Is line 5 at least $10 million? (Yes/No) ________.
    8. Is line 5 at least 6 times line 1? ________.
    9. Are at least 90% of assets located in the U.S.? If not, complete 
line 10. (Yes/No) ________.
    10. Is line 6 at least 6 times line 1? ________.
    [Fill in part B if you are using the financial test to demonstrate 
assurance of both liability coverage and closure or post-closure care.]

       Part B. Closure or Post-Closure Care and Liability Coverage

    [Fill in Alternative I if the criteria of paragraphs (f)(1)(i) of 
Sec. 264.143 or Sec. 264.145 and (f)(1)(i) of Sec. 264.147 are used or 
if the criteria of paragraphs (e)(1)(i) of Sec. 265.143 or Sec. 265.145 
and (f)(1)(i) of Sec. 265.147 are used. Fill in Alternative II if the 
criteria of paragraphs (f)(1)(ii) of Sec. 264.143 or Sec. 264.145 and 
(f)(1)(ii) of Sec. 264.147 are used or if the criteria of paragraphs 
(e)(1)(i) of Sec. 265.143 or Sec. 265.145 and (f)(1)(ii) of Sec. 265.147 
are used.]

                              Alternative I

    1. Sum of current closure and post-closure cost estimates (total of 
all cost estimates listed above) $ ________
    2. Amount of annual aggregate liability coverage to be demonstrated 
$ ________
    3. Sum of lines 1 and 2 $ ________
    *4. Total liabilities (if any portion of your closure or post-
closure cost estimates is included in your total liabilities, you may 
deduct that portion from this line and add that amount to lines 5 and 6) 
$ ________
    *5. Tangible net worth $ ________
    *6. Net worth $ ________
    *7. Current assets $ ________
    *8. Current liabilities $ ________
    9. Net working capital (line 7 minus line 8) $ ________
    10. The sum of net income plus depreciation, depletion, and 
amortization $________
    *11. Total assets in U.S. (required only if less than 90% of assets 
are located in the U.S.) $ ________
    12. Is line 5 at least $10 million? (Yes/No)
    13. Is line 5 at least 6 times line 3? (Yes/No)
    14. Is line 9 at least 6 times line 3? (Yes/No)
    *15. Are at least 90% of assets located in the U.S.? (Yes/No) If, 
not, complete line 16.

[[Page 239]]

    16. Is line 11 at least 6 times line 3? (Yes/No)
    17. Is line 4 divided by line 6 less than 2.0? (Yes/No)
    18. Is line 10 divided by line 4 greater than 0.1? (Yes/No)
    19. Is line 7 divided by line 8 greater than 1.5? (Yes/No)

                             Alternative II

    1. Sum of current closure and post-closure cost estimates (total of 
all cost estimates listed above) $ ________
    2. Amount of annual aggregate liability coverage to be demonstrated 
$ ________
    3. Sum of lines 1 and 2 $ ________
    4. Current bond rating of most recent issuance and name of rating 
service ________ ________
    5. Date of issuance of bond ________ ________
    6. Date of maturity of bond ________ ________
    *7. Tangible net worth (if any portion of the closure or post-
closure cost estimates is included in ``total liabilities'' on your 
financial statements you may add that portion to this line) ________ $ 
________
    *8. Total assets in the U.S. (required only if less than 90% of 
assets are located in the U.S.) $ ________
    9. Is line 7 at least $10 million? (Yes/No)
    10. Is line 7 at least 6 times line 3? (Yes/No)
    *11. Are at least 90% of assets located in the U.S.? (Yes/No) If not 
complete line 12.
    12. Is line 8 at least 6 times line 3? (Yes/No)
    I hereby certify that the wording of this letter is identical to the 
wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(g) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date shown immediately below.

 [Signature]____________________________________________________________

 [Name]_________________________________________________________________

 [Title]________________________________________________________________

 [Date]_________________________________________________________________

    (h)(1) A corporate guarantee, as specified in Sec. 264.143(f) or 
Sec. 264.145(f), or Sec. 265.143(e) or Sec. 265.145(e) of this chapter, 
must be worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets are to 
be replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

          Corporate Guarantee for Closure or Post-Closure Care

    Guarantee made this [date] by [name of guaranteeing entity], a 
business corporation organized under the laws of the State of [insert 
name of State], herein referred to as guarantor. This guarantee is made 
on behalf of the [owner or operator] of [business address], which is 
[one of the following: ``our subsidiary''; ``a subsidiary of [name and 
address of common parent corporation], of which guarantor is a 
subsidiary''; or ``an entity with which guarantor has a substantial 
business relationship, as defined in 40 CFR [either 264.141(h) or 
265.141(h)]'' to the United States Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA).

                                Recitals

    1. Guarantor meets or exceeds the financial test criteria and agrees 
to comply with the reporting requirements for guarantors as specified in 
40 CFR 264.143(f), 264.145(f), 265.143(e), and 265.145(e).
    2. [Owner or operator] owns or operates the following hazardous 
waste management facility(ies) covered by this guarantee: [List for each 
facility: EPA Identification Number, name, and address. Indicate for 
each whether guarantee is for closure, post-closure care, or both.]
    3. ``Closure plans'' and ``post-closure plans'' as used below refer 
to the plans maintained as required by subpart G of 40 CFR parts 264 and 
265 for the closure and post-closure care of facilities as identified 
above.
    4. For value received from [owner or operator], guarantor guarantees 
to EPA that in the event that [owner or operator] fails to perform 
[insert ``closure,'' ``post-closure care'' or ``closure and post-closure 
care''] of the above facility(ies) in accordance with the closure or 
post-closure plans and other permit or interim status requirements 
whenever required to do so, the guarantor shall do so or establish a 
trust fund as specified in subpart H of 40 CFR part 264 or 265, as 
applicable, in the name of [owner or operator] in the amount of the 
current closure or post-closure cost estimates as specified in subpart H 
of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265.
    5. Guarantor agrees that if, at the end of any fiscal year before 
termination of this guarantee, the guarantor fails to meet the financial 
test criteria, guarantor shall send within 90 days, by certified mail, 
notice to the EPA Regional Administrator(s) for the Region(s) in which 
the facility(ies) is(are) located and to [owner or operator] that he 
intends to provide alternate financial assurance as specified in subpart 
H of 40 CFR part 264 or 265, as applicable, in the name of [owner or 
operator]. Within 120 days after the end of such fiscal year, the 
guarantor shall establish such financial assurance unless [owner or 
operator] has done so.
    6. The guarantor agrees to notify the EPA Regional Administrator by 
certified mail, of a voluntary or involuntary proceeding under Title 11 
(Bankruptcy), U.S. Code, naming guarantor as debtor, within 10 days 
after commencement of the proceeding.
    7. Guarantor agrees that within 30 days after being notified by an 
EPA Regional Administrator of a determination that guarantor no longer 
meets the financial test criteria or that he is disallowed from 
continuing as a guarantor of closure or post-closure care, he shall 
establish alternate financial

[[Page 240]]

assurance as specified in subpart H of 40 CFR part 264 or 265, as 
applicable, in the name of [owner or operator] unless [owner or 
operator] has done so.
    8. Guarantor agrees to remain bound under this guarantee 
notwithstanding any or all of the following: amendment or modification 
of the closure or post-closure plan, amendment or modification of the 
permit, the extension or reduction of the time of performance of closure 
or post-closure, or any other modification or alteration of an 
obligation of the owner or operator pursuant to 40 CFR part 264 or 265.
    9. Guarantor agrees to remain bound under this guarantee for as long 
as [owner or operator] must comply with the applicable financial 
assurance requirements of subpart H of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265 for the 
above-listed facilities, except as provided in paragraph 10 of this 
agreement.
    10. [Insert the following language if the guarantor is (a) a direct 
or higher-tier corporate parent, or (b) a firm whose parent corporation 
is also the parent corporation of the owner or operator]:
    Guarantor may terminate this guarantee by sending notice by 
certified mail to the EPA Regional Administrator(s) for the Region(s) in 
which the facility(ies) is(are) located and to [owner or operator], 
provided that this guarantee may not be terminated unless and until [the 
owner or operator] obtains, and the EPA Regional Administrator(s) 
approve(s), alternate closure and/or post-closure care coverage 
complying with 40 CFR 264.143, 264.145, 265.143, and/or 265.145.

[Insert the following language if the guarantor is a firm qualifying as 
a guarantor due to its ``substantial business relationship'' with its 
owner or operator]

    Guarantor may terminate this guarantee 120 days following the 
receipt of notification, through certified mail, by the EPA Regional 
Administrator(s) for the Region(s) in which the facility(ies) is(are) 
located and by [the owner or operator].
    11. Guarantor agrees that if [owner or operator] fails to provide 
alternate financial assurance as specified in subpart H of 40 CFR part 
264 or 265, as applicable, and obtain written approval of such assurance 
from the EPA Regional Administrator(s) within 90 days after a notice of 
cancellation by the guarantor is received by an EPA Regional 
Administrator from guarantor, guarantor shall provide such alternate 
financial assurance in the name of [owner or operator].
    12. Guarantor expressly waives notice of acceptance of this 
guarantee by the EPA or by [owner or operator]. Guarantor also expressly 
waives notice of amendments or modifications of the closure and/or post-
closure plan and of amendments or modifications of the facility 
permit(s).
    I hereby certify that the wording of this guarantee is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(h) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date first above written.

 Effective date:________________________________________________________
 [Name of guarantor]____________________________________________________

 [Authorized signature for guarantor]___________________________________

 [Name of person signing]_______________________________________________

 [Title of person signing]______________________________________________

 Signature of witness or notary:________________________________________

    (2) A guarantee, as specified in Sec. 264.147(g) or Sec. 265.147(g) 
of this chapter, must be worded as follows, except that instructions in 
brackets are to be replaced with the relevant information and the 
brackets deleted:

                    Guarantee for Liability Coverage

    Guarantee made this [date] by [name of guaranteeing entity], a 
business corporation organized under the laws of [if incorporated within 
the United States insert ``the State of ________'' and insert name of 
State; if incorporated outside the United States insert the name of the 
country in which incorporated, the principal place of business within 
the United States, and the name and address of the registered agent in 
the State of the principal place of business], herein referred to as 
guarantor. This guarantee is made on behalf of [owner or operator] of 
[business address], which is one of the following: ``our subsidiary;'' 
``a subsidiary of [name and address of common parent corporation], or 
which guarantor is a subsidiary;'' or ``an entity with which guarantor 
has a substantial business relationship, as defined in 40 CFR [either 
264.141(h)]'', to any and all third parties who have sustained or may 
sustain bodily injury or property damage caused by [sudden and/or 
nonsudden] accidental occurrences arising from operation of the 
facility(ies) covered by this guarantee.

                                Recitals

    1. Guarantor meets or exceeds the financial test criteria and agrees 
to comply with the reporting requirements for guarantors as specified in 
40 CFR 264.147(g) and 265.147(g).
    2. [Owner or operator] owns or operates the following hazardous 
waste management facility(ies) covered by this guarantee: [List for each 
facility: EPA identification number, name, and address; and if guarantor 
is incorporated outside the United States list the name and address of 
the guarantor's registered agent in each State.] This corporate 
guarantee satisfies RCRA third-party liability requirements for [insert 
``sudden'' or ``nonsudden'' or ``both sudden and nonsudden''] accidental 
occurrences in above-named owner or operator facilities for coverage in 
the amount of [insert dollar amount] for each occurrence and [insert 
dollar amount] annual aggregate.

[[Page 241]]

    3. For value received from [owner or operator], guarantor guarantees 
to any and all third parties who have sustained or may sustain bodily 
injury or property damage caused by [sudden and/or nonsudden] accidental 
occurrences arising from operations of the facility(ies) covered by this 
guarantee that in the event that [owner or operator] fails to satisfy a 
judgment or award based on a determination of liability for bodily 
injury or property damage to third parties caused by [sudden and/or 
nonsudden] accidental occurrences, arising from the operation of the 
above-named facilities, or fails to pay an amount agreed to in 
settlement of a claim arising from or alleged to arise from such injury 
or damage, the guarantor will satisfy such judgment(s), award(s) or 
settlement agreement(s) up to the limits of coverage identified above.
    4. Such obligation does not apply to any of the following:
    (a) Bodily injury or property damage for which [insert owner or 
operator] is obligated to pay damages by reason of the assumption of 
liability in a contract or agreement. This exclusion does not apply to 
liability for damages that [insert owner or operator] would be obligated 
to pay in the absence of the contract or agreement.
    (b) Any obligation of [insert owner or operator] under a workers' 
compensation, disability benefits, or unemployment compensation law or 
any similar law.
    (c) Bodily injury to:
    (1) An employee of [insert owner or operator] arising from, and in 
the course of, employment by [insert owner or operator]; or
    (2) The spouse, child, parent, brother, or sister of that employee 
as a consequence of, or arising from, and in the course of employment by 
[insert owner or operator]. This exclusion applies:
    (A) Whether [insert owner or operator] may be liable as an employer 
or in any other capacity; and
    (B) To any obligation to share damages with or repay another person 
who must pay damages because of the injury to persons identified in 
paragraphs (1) and (2).
    (d) Bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership, 
maintenance, use, or entrustment to others of any aircraft, motor 
vehicle or watercraft.
    (e) Property damage to:
    (1) Any property owned, rented, or occupied by [insert owner or 
operator];
    (2) Premises that are sold, given away or abandoned by [insert owner 
or operator] if the property damage arises out of any part of those 
premises;
    (3) Property loaned to [insert owner or operator];
    (4) Personal property in the care, custody or control of [insert 
owner or operator];
    (5) That particular part of real property on which [insert owner or 
operator] or any contractors or subcontractors working directly or 
indirectly on behalf of [insert owner or operator] are performing 
operations, if the property damage arises out of these operations.
    5. Guarantor agrees that if, at the end of any fiscal year before 
termination of this guarantee, the guarantor fails to meet the financial 
test criteria, guarantor shall send within 90 days, by certified mail, 
notice to the EPA Regional Administrator[s] for the Region[s] in which 
the facility[ies] is[are] located and to [owner or operator] that he 
intends to provide alternate liability coverage as specified in 40 CFR 
264.147 and 265.147, as applicable, in the name of [owner or operator]. 
Within 120 days after the end of such fiscal year, the guarantor shall 
establish such liability coverage unless [owner or operator] has done 
so.
    6. The guarantor agrees to notify the EPA Regional Administrator by 
certified mail of a voluntary or involuntary proceeding under title 11 
(Bankruptcy), U.S. Code, naming guarantor as debtor, within 10 days 
after commencement of the proceeding.
    7. Guarantor agrees that within 30 days after being notified by an 
EPA Regional Administrator of a determination that guarantor no longer 
meets the financial test criteria or that he is disallowed from 
continuing as a guarantor, he shall establish alternate liability 
coverage as specified in 40 CFR 264.147 or 265.147 in the name of [owner 
or operator], unless [owner or operator] has done so.
    8. Guarantor reserves the right to modify this agreement to take 
into account amendment or modification of the liability requirements set 
by 40 CFR 264.147 and 265.147, provided that such modification shall 
become effective only if a Regional Administrator does not disapprove 
the modification within 30 days of receipt of notification of the 
modification.
    9. Guarantor agrees to remain bound under this guarantee for so long 
as [owner or operator] must comply with the applicable requirements of 
40 CFR 264.147 and 265.147 for the above-listed facility(ies), except as 
provided in paragraph 10 of this agreement.
    10. [Insert the following language if the guarantor is (a) a direct 
or higher-tier corporate parent, or (b) a firm whose parent corporation 
is also the parent corporation of the owner or operator]:
    Guarantor may terminate this guarantee by sending notice by 
certified mail to the EPA Regional Administrator(s) for the Region(s) in 
which the facility(ies) is(are) located and to [owner or operator], 
provided that this guarantee may not be terminated unless and until [the 
owner or operator] obtains, and the EPA Regional Administrator(s) 
approve(s), alternate liability coverage complying with 40 CFR 264.147 
and/or 265.147.

[[Page 242]]

    [Insert the following language if the guarantor is a firm qualifying 
as a guarantor due to its ``substantial business relationship'' with the 
owner or operator]:
    Guarantor may terminate this guarantee 120 days following receipt of 
notification, through certified mail, by the EPA Regional 
Administrator(s) for the Region(s) in which the facility(ies) is(are) 
located and by [the owner or operator].
    11. Guarantor hereby expressly waives notice of acceptance of this 
guarantee by any party.
    12. Guarantor agrees that this guarantee is in addition to and does 
not affect any other responsibility or liability of the guarantor with 
respect to the covered facilities.
    13. The Guarantor shall satisfy a third-party liability claim only 
on receipt of one of the following documents:
    (a) Certification from the Principal and the third-party claimant(s) 
that the liability claim should be paid. The certification must be 
worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets are to be 
replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

                      Certification of Valid Claim

    The undersigned, as parties [insert Principal] and [insert name and 
address of third-party claimant(s)], hereby certify that the claim of 
bodily injury and/or property damage caused by a [sudden or nonsudden] 
accidental occurrence arising from operating [Principal's hazardous 
waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility should be paid in the 
amount of $        .

 [Signatures]___________________________________________________________

 Principal______________________________________________________________

 (Notary) Date__________________________________________________________

 [Signatures]___________________________________________________________

 Claimant(s)____________________________________________________________

 (Notary) Date__________________________________________________________

    (b) A valid final court order establishing a judgment against the 
Principal for bodily injury or property damage caused by sudden or 
nonsudden accidental occurrences arising from the operation of the 
Principal's facility or group of facilities.
    14. In the event of combination of this guarantee with another 
mechanism to meet liability requirements, this guarantee will be 
considered [insert ``primary'' or ``excess''] coverage.
    I hereby certify that the wording of the guarantee is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(h)(2) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date shown immediately below.

 Effective date:________________________________________________________

 [Name of guarantor]____________________________________________________

 [Authorized signature for guarantor]___________________________________

 [Name of person signing]_______________________________________________

 [Title of person signing]______________________________________________

 Signature of witness of notary:________________________________________

    (i) A hazardous waste facility liability endorsement as required in 
Sec. 264.147 or Sec. 265.147 must be worded as follows, except that 
instructions in brackets are to be replaced with the relevant 
information and the brackets deleted:

             Hazardous Waste Facility Liability Endorsement

    1. This endorsement certifies that the policy to which the 
endorsement is attached provides liability insurance covering bodily 
injury and property damage in connection with the insured's obligation 
to demonstrate financial responsibility under 40 CFR 264.147 or 265.147. 
The coverage applies at [list EPA Identification Number, name, and 
address for each facility] for [insert ``sudden accidental 
occurrences,'' ``nonsudden accidental occurrences,'' or ``sudden and 
nonsudden accidental occurrences''; if coverage is for multiple 
facilities and the coverage is different for different facilities, 
indicate which facilities are insured for sudden accidental occurrences, 
which are insured for nonsudden accidental occurrences, and which are 
insured for both]. The limits of liability are [insert the dollar amount 
of the ``each occurrence'' and ``annual aggregate'' limits of the 
Insurer's liability], exclusive of legal defense costs.
    2. The insurance afforded with respect to such occurrences is 
subject to all of the terms and conditions of the policy; provided, 
however, that any provisions of the policy inconsistent with subsections 
(a) through (e) of this Paragraph 2 are hereby amended to conform with 
subsections (a) through (e):
    (a) Bankruptcy or insolvency of the insured shall not relieve the 
Insurer of its obligations under the policy to which this endorsement is 
attached.
    (b) The Insurer is liable for the payment of amounts within any 
deductible applicable to the policy, with a right of reimbursement by 
the insured for any such payment made by the Insurer. This provision 
does not apply with respect to that amount of any deductible for which 
coverage is demonstrated as specified in 40 CFR 264.147(f) or 
265.147(f).
    (c) Whenever requested by a Regional Administrator of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Insurer agrees to furnish to 
the Regional Administrator a signed duplicate original of the policy and 
all endorsements.
    (d) Cancellation of this endorsement, whether by the Insurer, the 
insured, a parent corporation providing insurance coverage for its 
subsidiary, or by a firm having an insurable interest in and obtaining 
liability insurance on behalf of the owner or operator of

[[Page 243]]

the hazardous waste management facility, will be effective only upon 
written notice and only after the expiration of 60 days after a copy of 
such written notice is received by the Regional Administrator(s) of the 
EPA Region(s) in which the facility(ies) is(are) located.
    (e) Any other termination of this endorsement will be effective only 
upon written notice and only after the expiration of thirty (30) days 
after a copy of such written notice is received by the Regional 
Administrator(s) of the EPA Region(s) in which the facility(ies) is 
(are) located.
    Attached to and forming part of policy No. ______ issued by [name of 
Insurer], herein called the Insurer, of [address of Insurer] to [name of 
insured] of [address] this ____ day of ______, 19__. The effective date 
of said policy is ____ day of ______, 19__.
    I hereby certify that the wording of this endorsement is identical 
to the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(i) as such regulation was 
constituted on the date first above written, and that the Insurer is 
licensed to transact the business of insurance, or eligible to provide 
insurance as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in one or more States.

[Signature of Authorized Representative of Insurer]
[Type name]
[Title], Authorized Representive of [name of Insurer]
[Address of Representative]

    (j) A certificate of liability insurance as required in Sec. 264.147 
or Sec. 265.147 must be worded as follows, except that the instructions 
in brackets are to be replaced with the relevant information and the 
brackets deleted:

       Hazardous Waste Facility Certificate of Liability Insurance

    1. [Name of Insurer], (the ``Insurer''), of [address of Insurer] 
hereby certifies that it has issued liability insurance covering bodily 
injury and property damage to [name of insured], (the ``insured''), of 
[address of insured] in connection with the insured's obligation to 
demonstrate financial responsibility under 40 CFR 264.147 or 265.147. 
The coverage applies at [list EPA Identification Number, name, and 
address for each facility] for [insert ``sudden accidental 
occurrences,'' ``nonsudden accidental occurrences,'' or ``sudden and 
nonsudden accidental occurrences''; if coverage is for multiple 
facilities and the coverage is different for different facilities, 
indicate which facilities are insured for sudden accidental occurrences, 
which are insured for nonsudden accidental occurrences, and which are 
insured for both]. The limits of liability are [insert the dollar amount 
of the ``each occurrence'' and ``annual aggregate'' limits of the 
Insurer's liability], exclusive of legal defense costs. The coverage is 
provided under policy number ______, issued on [date]. The effective 
date of said policy is [date].
    2. The Insurer further certifies the following with respect to the 
insurance described in Paragraph 1:
    (a) Bankruptcy or insolvency of the insured shall not relieve the 
Insurer of its obligations under the policy.
    (b) The Insurer is liable for the payment of amounts within any 
deductible applicable to the policy, with a right of reimbursement by 
the insured for any such payment made by the Insurer. This provision 
does not apply with respect to that amount of any deductible for which 
coverage is demonstrated as specified in 40 CFR 264.147(f) or 
265.147(f).
    (c) Whenever requested by a Regional Administrator of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Insurer agrees to furnish to 
the Regional Administrator a signed duplicate original of the policy and 
all endorsements.
    (d) Cancellation of the insurance, whether by the insurer, the 
insured, a parent corportation providing insurance coverage for its 
subsidiary, or by a firm having an insurable interest in and obtaining 
liability insurance on behalf of the owner or operator of the hazardous 
waste management facility, will be effective only upon written notice 
and only after the expiration of 60 days after a copy of such written 
notice is received by the Regional Administrator(s) of the EPA Region(s) 
in which the facility(ies) is(are) located.
    (e) Any other termination of the insurance will be effective only 
upon written notice and only after the expiration of thirty (30) days 
after a copy of such written notice is received by the Regional 
Administrator(s) of the EPA Region(s) in which the facility(ies) is 
(are) located.
    I hereby certify that the wording of this instrument is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(j) as such regulation was 
constituted on the date first above written, and that the Insurer is 
licensed to transact the business of insurance, or eligible to provide 
insurance as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in one or more States.
[Signature of authorized representative of Insurer]
[Type name]
[Title], Authorized Representative of [name of Insurer]
[Address of Representative]


    (k) A letter of credit, as specified in Sec. 264.147(h) or 
265.147(h) of this chapter, must be worded as follows, except that 
instructions in brackets are to be replaced with the relevant 
information and the brackets deleted:

[[Page 244]]

                  Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit

 Name and Address of Issuing Institution________________________________

 Regional Administrator(s)______________________________________________

 Region(s)______________________________________________________________

 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency___________________________________

    Dear Sir or Madam: We hereby establish our Irrevocable Standby 
Letter of Credit No. ____________ in the favor of [``any and all third-
party liability claimants'' or insert name of trustee of the standby 
trust fund], at the request and for the account of [owner or operator's 
name and address] for third-party liability awards or settlements up to 
[in words] U.S. dollars $____________ per occurrence and the annual 
aggregate amount of [in words] U.S. dollars $____________, for sudden 
accidental occurrences and/or for third-party liability awards or 
settlements up to the amount of [in words] U.S. dollars $____________ 
per occurrence, and the annual aggregate amount of [in words] U.S. 
dollars $____________, for nonsudden accidental occurrences available 
upon presentation of a sight draft bearing reference to this letter of 
credit No. ____________, and [insert the following language if the 
letter of credit is being used without a standby trust fund: ``(1) a 
signed certificate reading as follows:

                       Certificate of Valid Claim

    The undersigned, as parties [insert principal] and [insert name and 
address of third party claimant(s)], hereby certify that the claim of 
bodily injury and/or property damage caused by a [sudden or nonsudden] 
accidental occurrence arising from operations of [principal's] hazardous 
waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility should be paid in the 
amount of $[        ]. We hereby certify that the claim does not apply 
to any of the following:
    (a) Bodily injury or property damage for which [insert principal] is 
obligated to pay damages by reason of the assumption of liability in a 
contract or agreement. This exclusion does not apply to liability for 
damages that [insert principal] would be obligated to pay in the absence 
of the contract or agreement.
    (b) Any obligation of [insert principal] under a workers' 
compensation, disability benefits, or unemployment compensation law or 
any similar law.
    (c) Bodily injury to:
    (1) An employee of [insert principal] arising from, and in the 
course of, employment by [insert principal]; or
    (2) The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of that employee as 
a consequence of, or arising from, and in the course of employment by 
[insert principal].
    This exclusion applies:
    (A) Whether [insert principal] may be liable as an employer or in 
any other capacity; and
    (B) To any obligation to share damages with or repay another person 
who must pay damages because of the injury to persons identified in 
paragraphs (1) and (2).
    (d) Bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership, 
maintenance, use, or entrustment to others of any aircraft, motor 
vehicle or watercraft.
    (e) Property damage to:
    (1) Any property owned, rented, or occupied by [insert principal];
    (2) Premises that are sold, given away or abandoned by [insert 
principal] if the property damage arises out of any part of those 
premises;
    (3) Property loaned to [insert principal];
    (4) Personal property in the care, custody or control of [insert 
principal];
    (5) That particular part of real property on which [insert 
principal] or any contractors or subcontractors working directly or 
indirectly on behalf of [insert principal] are performing operations, if 
the property damage arises out of these operations.

 [Signatures]___________________________________________________________

 Grantor________________________________________________________________

 [Signatures]___________________________________________________________

 Claimant(s)____________________________________________________________

or (2) a valid final court order establishing a judgment against the 
Grantor for bodily injury or property damage caused by sudden or 
nonsudden accidental occurrences arising from the operation of the 
Grantor's facility or group of facilities.
    This letter of credit is effective as of [date] and shall expire on 
[date] at least one year later], but such expiration date shall be 
automatically extended for a period of [at least one year] on [date and 
on each successive expiration date, unless, at least 120 days before the 
current expiration date, we notify you, the USEPA Regional Administrator 
for Region [Region ], and [owner's or operator's name] by certified 
mail that we have decided not to extend this letter of credit beyond the 
current expiration date.
    Whenever this letter of credit is drawn on under and in compliance 
with the terms of this credit, we shall duly honor such draft upon 
presentation to us.
    [Insert the following language if a standby trust fund is not being 
used: ``In the event that this letter of credit is used in combination 
with another mechanism for liability coverage, this letter of credit 
shall be considered [insert ``primary'' or ``excess'' coverage].''
    We certify that the wording of this letter of credit is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(k) as such regulations were 
constituted on the date shown immediately below. [Signature(s) and 
title(s) of official(s) of issuing institution] [Date].
    This credit is subject to [insert ``the most recent edition of the 
Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits, published

[[Page 245]]

and copyrighted by the International Chamber of Commerce,'' or ``the 
Uniform Commercial Code''].

    (l) A surety bond, as specified in Sec. 264.147(h) or 
Sec. 265.147(h) of this chapter, must be worded as follows: except that 
instructions in brackets are to be replaced with the relevant 
information and the brackets deleted:

                              Payment Bond

Surety Bond No. [Insert number]

    Parties [Insert name and address of owner or operator], Principal, 
incorporated in [Insert State of incorporation] of [Insert city and 
State of principal place of business] and [Insert name and address of 
surety company(ies)], Surety Company(ies), of [Insert surety(ies) place 
of business].
    EPA Identification Number, name, and address for each facility 
guaranteed by this bond: ________

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Nonsudden
                                   Sudden accidental      accidental
                                      occurrences         occurrences
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Penal Sum Per Occurrence........  [insert amount]...  [insert amount]
Annual Aggregate................  [insert amount]...  [insert amount]
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Purpose: This is an agreement between the Surety(ies) and the 
Principal under which the Surety(ies), its(their) successors and 
assignees, agree to be responsible for the payment of claims against the 
Principal for bodily injury and/or property damage to third parties 
caused by [``sudden'' and/or ``nonsudden''] accidental occurrences 
arising from operations of the facility or group of facilities in the 
sums prescribed herein; subject to the governing provisions and the 
following conditions.
    Governing Provisions:
    (1) Section 3004 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 
1976, as amended.
    (2) Rules and regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), particularly 40 CFR [``Sec. 264.147'' or ``Sec. 265.147''] 
(if applicable).
    (3) Rules and regulations of the governing State agency (if 
applicable) [insert citation].
    Conditions:
    (1) The Principal is subject to the applicable governing provisions 
that require the Principal to have and maintain liability coverage for 
bodily injury and property damage to third parties caused by [``sudden'' 
and/or ``nonsudden''] accidental occurrences arising from operations of 
the facility or group of facilities. Such obligation does not apply to 
any of the following:
    (a) Bodily injury or property damage for which [insert principal] is 
obligated to pay damages by reason of the assumption of liability in a 
contract or agreement. This exclusion does not apply to liability for 
damages that [insert principal] would be obligated to pay in the absence 
of the contract or agreement.
    (b) Any obligation of [insert principal] under a workers' 
compensation, disability benefits, or unemployment compensation law or 
similar law.
    (c) Bodily injury to:
    (1) An employee of [insert principal] arising from, and in the 
course of, employment by [insert principal]; or
    (2) The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of that employee as 
a consequence of, or arising from, and in the course of employment by 
[insert principal]. This exclusion applies:
    (A) Whether [insert principal] may be liable as an employer or in 
any other capacity; and
    (B) To any obligation to share damages with or repay another person 
who must pay damages because of the injury to persons identified in 
paragraphs (1) and (2).
    (d) Bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership, 
maintenance, use, or entrustment to others of any aircraft, motor 
vehicle or watercraft.
    (e) Property damage to:
    (1) Any property owned, rented, or occupied by [insert principal];
    (2) Premises that are sold, given away or abandoned by [insert 
principal] if the property damage arises out of any part of those 
premises;
    (3) Property loaned to [insert principal];
    (4) Personal property in the care, custody or control of [insert 
principal];
    (5) That particular part of real property on which [insert 
principal] or any contractors or subcontractors working directly or 
indirectly on behalf of [insert principal] are performing operations, if 
the property damage arises out of these operations.
    (2) This bond assures that the Principal will satisfy valid third 
party liability claims, as described in condition 1.
    (3) If the Principal fails to satisfy a valid third party liability 
claim, as described above, the Surety(ies) becomes liable on this bond 
obligation.
    (4) The Surety(ies) shall satisfy a third party liability claim only 
upon the receipt of one of the following documents:
    (a) Certification from the Principal and the third party claimant(s) 
that the liability claim should be paid. The certification must be 
worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets are to be 
replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

                      Certification of Valid Claim

    The undersigned, as parties [insert name of Principal] and [insert 
name and address of third party claimant(s)], hereby certify that the 
claim of bodily injury and/or property damage caused by a [sudden or 
nonsudden]

[[Page 246]]

accidential occurrence arising from operating [Principal's] hazardous 
waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility should be paid in the 
amount of $[    ].

[Signature]
Principal

[Notary]    Date

[Signature(s)]
Claimant(s)

[Notary]    Date

    or (b) A valid final court order establishing a judgment against the 
Principal for bodily injury or property damage caused by sudden or 
nonsudden accidental occurrences arising from the operation of the 
Principal's facility or group of facilities.
    (5) In the event of combination of this bond with another mechanism 
for liability coverage, this bond will be considered [insert ``primary'' 
or ``excess''] coverage.
    (6) The liability of the Surety(ies) shall not be discharged by any 
payment or succession of payments hereunder, unless and until such 
payment or payments shall amount in the aggregate to the penal sum of 
the bond. In no event shall the obligation of the Surety(ies) hereunder 
exceed the amount of said annual aggregate penal sum, provided that the 
Surety(ies) furnish(es) notice to the Regional Administrator forthwith 
of all claims filed and payments made by the Surety(ies) under this 
bond.
    (7) The Surety(ies) may cancel the bond by sending notice of 
cancellation by certified mail to the Principal and the USEPA Regional 
Administrator for Region [Region ], provided, however, that 
cancellation shall not occur during the 120 days beginning on the date 
of receipt of the notice of cancellation by the Principal and the 
Regional Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipt.
    (8) The Principal may terminate this bond by sending written notice 
to the Surety(ies) and to the EPA Regional Administrator(s) of the EPA 
Region(s) in which the bonded facility(ies) is (are) located.
    (9) The Surety(ies) hereby waive(s) notification of amendments to 
applicable laws, statutes, rules and regulations and agree(s) that no 
such amendment shall in any way alleviate its (their) obligation on this 
bond.
    (10) This bond is effective from [insert date] (12:01 a.m., standard 
time, at the address of the Principal as stated herein) and shall 
continue in force until terminated as described above.
    In Witness Whereof, the Principal and Surety(ies) have executed this 
Bond and have affixed their seals on the date set forth above.
    The persons whose signatures appear below hereby certify that they 
are authorized to execute this surety bond on behalf of the Principal 
and Surety(ies) and that the wording of this surety bond is identical to 
the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(1), as such regulations were 
constituted on the date this bond was executed.

                                PRINCIPAL

[Signature(s)]
[Name(s)]
[Title(s)]
[Corporate Seal]

                          CORPORATE SURETY[IES]

[Name and address]
 State of incorporation:________________________________________________
 Liability Limit: $_____________________________________________________
[Signature(s)]
[Name(s) and title(s)]
[Corporate seal]
[For every co-surety, provide signature(s), corporate seal, and other 
information in the same manner as for Surety above.]
 Bond premium: $________________________________________________________

    (m)(1) A trust agreement, as specified in Sec. 264.147(j) or 
Sec. 265.147(j) of this chapter, must be worded as follows, except that 
instructions in brackets are to be replaced with the relevant 
information and the brackets deleted:

                             Trust Agreement

    Trust Agreement, the ``Agreement,'' entered into as of [date] by and 
between [name of the owner or operator] a [name of State] [insert 
``corporation,'' ``partnership,'' ``association,'' or 
``proprietorship''], the ``Grantor,'' and [name of corporate trustee], 
[insert, ``incorporated in the State of ________'' or ``a national 
bank''], the ``trustee.''
    Whereas, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, ``EPA,'' 
an agency of the United States Government, has established certain 
regulations applicable to the Grantor, requiring that an owner or 
operator of a hazardous waste management facility or group of facilities 
must demonstrate financial responsibility for bodily injury and property 
damage to third parties caused by sudden accidental and/or nonsudden 
accidental occurrences arising from operations of the facility or group 
of facilities.
    Whereas, the Grantor has elected to establish a trust to assure all 
or part of such financial responsibility for the facilities identified 
herein.
    Whereas, the Grantor, acting through its duly authorized officers, 
has selected the Trustee to be the trustee under this agreement, and the 
Trustee is willing to act as trustee.
    Now, therefore, the Grantor and the Trustee agree as follows:
    Section 1. Definitions. As used in this Agreement:
    (a) The term ``Grantor'' means the owner or operator who enters into 
this Agreement and any successors or assigns of the Grantor.

[[Page 247]]

    (b) The term ``Trustee'' means the Trustee who enters into this 
Agreement and any successor Trustee.
    Section 2. Identification of Facilities. This agreement pertains to 
the facilities identified on attached schedule A [on schedule A, for 
each facility list the EPA Identification Number, name, and address of 
the facility(ies) and the amount of liability coverage, or portions 
thereof, if more than one instrument affords combined coverage as 
demonstrated by this Agreement].
    Section 3. Establishment of Fund. The Grantor and the Trustee hereby 
establish a trust fund, hereinafter the ``Fund,'' for the benefit of any 
and all third parties injured or damaged by [sudden and/or nonsudden] 
accidental occurrences arising from operation of the facility(ies) 
covered by this guarantee, in the amounts of ____________ [up to $1 
million] per occurrence and ____________ [up to $2 million] annual 
aggregate for sudden accidental occurrences and ____________ [up to $3 
million] per occurrence and ____________ [up to $6 million] annual 
aggregate for nonsudden occurrences, except that the Fund is not 
established for the benefit of third parties for the following:
    (a) Bodily injury or property damage for which [insert Grantor] is 
obligated to pay damages by reason of the assumption of liability in a 
contract or agreement. This exclusion does not apply to liability for 
damages that [insert Grantor] would be obligated to pay in the absence 
of the contract or agreement.
    (b) Any obligation of [insert Grantor] under a workers' 
compensation, disability benefits, or unemployment compensation law or 
any similar law.
    (c) Bodily injury to:
    (1) An employee of [insert Grantor] arising from, and in the course 
of, employment by [insert Grantor]; or
    (2) The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of that employee as 
a consequence of, or arising from, and in the course of employment by 
[insert Grantor].
    This exclusion applies:
    (A) Whether [insert Grantor] may be liable as an employer or in any 
other capacity; and
    (B) To any obligation to share damages with or repay another person 
who must pay damages because of the injury to persons identified in 
paragraphs (1) and (2).
    (d) Bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership, 
maintenance, use, or entrustment to others of any aircraft, motor 
vehicle or watercraft.
    (e) Property damage to:
    (1) Any property owned, rented, or occupied by [insert Grantor];
    (2) Premises that are sold, given away or abandoned by [insert 
Grantor] if the property damage arises out of any part of those 
premises;
    (3) Property loaned to [insert Grantor];
    (4) Personal property in the care, custody or control of [insert 
Grantor];
    (5) That particular part of real property on which [insert Grantor] 
or any contractors or subcontractors working directly or indirectly on 
behalf of [insert Grantor] are performing operations, if the property 
damage arises out of these operations.
    In the event of combination with another mechanism for liability 
coverage, the fund shall be considered [insert ``primary'' or 
``excess''] coverage.
    The Fund is established initially as consisting of the property, 
which is acceptable to the Trustee, described in Schedule B attached 
hereto. Such property and any other property subsequently transferred to 
the Trustee is referred to as the Fund, together with all earnings and 
profits thereon, less any payments or distributions made by the Trustee 
pursuant to this Agreement. The Fund shall be held by the Trustee, IN 
TRUST, as hereinafter provided. The Trustee shall not be responsible nor 
shall it undertake any responsibility for the amount or adequacy of, nor 
any duty to collect from the Grantor, any payments necessary to 
discharge any liabilities of the Grantor established by EPA.
    Section 4. Payment for Bodily Injury or Property Damage. The Trustee 
shall satisfy a third party liability claim by making payments from the 
Fund only upon receipt of one of the following documents;
    (a) Certification from the Grantor and the third party claimant(s) 
that the liability claim should be paid. The certification must be 
worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets are to be 
replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

                      Certification of Valid Claim

    The undersigned, as parties [insert Grantor] and [insert name and 
address of third party claimant(s)], hereby certify that the claim of 
bodily injury and/or property damage caused by a [sudden or nonsudden] 
accidental occurrence arising from operating [Grantor's] hazardous waste 
treatment, storage, or disposal facility should be paid in the amount of 
$[      ].

[Signatures]
Grantor

[Signatures]
Claimant(s)

    (b) A valid final court order establishing a judgment against the 
Grantor for bodily injury or property damage caused by sudden or 
nonsudden accidental occurrences arising from the operation of the 
Grantor's facility or group of facilities.
    Section 5. Payments Comprising the Fund. Payments made to the 
Trustee for the Fund shall consist of cash or securities acceptable to 
the Trustee.

[[Page 248]]

    Section 6. Trustee Management. The Trustee shall invest and reinvest 
the principal and income, in accordance with general investment policies 
and guidelines which the Grantor may communicate in writing to the 
Trustee from time to time, subject, however, to the provisions of this 
section. In investing, reinvesting, exchanging, selling, and managing 
the Fund, the Trustee shall discharge his duties with respect to the 
trust fund solely in the interest of the beneficiary and with the care, 
skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstance then prevailing 
which persons of prudence, acting in a like capacity and familiar with 
such matters, would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like 
character and with like aims; except that:
    (i) Securities or other obligations of the Grantor, or any other 
owner or operator of the facilities, or any of their affiliates as 
defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 
80a-2.(a), shall not be acquired or held unless they are securities or 
other obligations of the Federal or a State government;
    (ii) The Trustee is authorized to invest the Fund in time or demand 
deposits of the Trustee, to the extent insured by an agency of the 
Federal or State government; and
    (iii) The Trustee is authorized to hold cash awaiting investment or 
distribution uninvested for a reasonable time and without liability for 
the payment of interest thereon.
    Section 7. Commingling and Investment. The Trustee is expressly 
authorized in its discretion:
    (a) To transfer from time to time any or all of the assets of the 
Fund to any common commingled, or collective trust fund created by the 
Trustee in which the fund is eligible to participate, subject to all of 
the provisions thereof, to be commingled with the assets of other trusts 
participating therein; and
    (b) To purchase shares in any investment company registered under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. 81a-1 et seq., including 
one which may be created, managed, underwritten, or to which investment 
advice is rendered or the shares of which are sold by the Trustee. The 
Trustee may vote such shares in its discretion.
    Section 8. Express Powers of Trustee. Without in any way limiting 
the powers and discretions conferred upon the Trustee by the other 
provisions of this Agreement or by law, the Trustee is expressly 
authorized and empowered:
    (a) To sell, exchange, convey, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any 
property held by it, by public or private sale. No person dealing with 
the Trustee shall be bound to see to the application of the purchase 
money or to inquire into the validity or expediency of any such sale or 
other disposition;
    (b) To make, execute, acknowledge, and deliver any and all documents 
of transfer and conveyance and any and all other instruments that may be 
necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers herein granted;
    (c) To register any securities held in the Fund in its own name or 
in the name of a nominee and to hold any security in bearer form or in 
book entry, or to combine certificates representing such securities with 
certificates of the same issue held by the Trustee in other fiduciary 
capacities, or to deposit or arrange for the deposit of such securities 
in a qualified central depositary even though, when so deposited, such 
securities may be merged and held in bulk in the name of the nominee of 
such depositary with other securities deposited therein by another 
person, or to deposit or arrange for the deposit of any securities 
issued by the United States Government, or any agency or instrumentality 
thereof, with a Federal Reserve bank, but the books and records of the 
Trustee shall at all times show that all such securities are part of the 
Fund;
    (d) To deposit any cash in the Fund in interest-bearing accounts 
maintained or savings certificates issued by the Trustee, in its 
separate corporate capacity, or in any other banking institution 
affiliated with the Trustee, to the extent insured by an agency of the 
Federal or State government; and
    (e) To compromise or otherwise adjust all claims in favor of or 
against the Fund.
    Section 9. Taxes and Expenses. All taxes of any kind that may be 
assessed or levied against or in respect of the Fund and all brokerage 
commissions incurred by the Fund shall be paid from the Fund. All other 
expenses incurred by the Trustee in connection with the administration 
of this Trust, including fees for legal services rendered to the 
Trustee, the compensation of the Trustee to the extent not paid directly 
by the Grantor, and all other proper charges and disbursements of the 
Trustee shall be paid from the Fund.
    Section 10. Annual Valuations. The Trustee shall annually, at least 
30 days prior to the anniversary date of establishment of the Fund, 
furnish to the Grantor and to the appropriate EPA Regional Administrator 
a statement confirming the value of the Trust. Any securities in the 
Fund shall be valued at market value as of no more than 60 days prior to 
the anniversary date of establishment of the Fund. The failure of the 
Grantor to object in writing to the Trustee within 90 days after the 
statement has been furnished to the Grantor and the EPA Regional 
Administrator shall constitute a conclusively binding assent by the 
Grantor barring the Grantor from asserting any claim or liability 
against the Trustee with respect to matters disclosed in the statement.
    Section 11. Advice of Counsel. The Trustee may from time to time 
consult with counsel,

[[Page 249]]

who may be counsel to the Grantor with respect to any question arising 
as to the construction of this Agreement or any action to be taken 
hereunder. The Trustee shall be fully protected, to the extent permitted 
by law, in acting upon the advice of counsel.
    Section 12. Trustee Compensation. The Trustee shall be entitled to 
reasonable compensation for its services as agreed upon in writing from 
time to time with the Grantor.
    Section 13. Successor Trustee. The Trustee may resign or the Grantor 
may replace the Trustee, but such resignation or replacement shall not 
be effective until the Grantor has appointed a successor trustee and 
this successor accepts the appointment. The successor trustee shall have 
the same powers and duties as those conferred upon the Trustee 
hereunder. Upon the successor trustee's acceptance of the appointment, 
the Trustee shall assign, transfer, and pay over to the successor 
trustee the funds and properties then constituting the Fund. If for any 
reason the Grantor cannot or does not act in the event of the 
resignation of the Trustee, the Trustee may apply to a court of 
competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor trustee or for 
instructions. The successor trustee shall specify the date on which it 
assumes administration of the trust in a writing sent to the Grantor, 
the EPA Regional Administrator, and the present Trustee by certified 
mail 10 days before such change becomes effective. Any expenses incurred 
by the Trustee as a result of any of the acts contemplated by this 
section shall be paid as provided in Section 9.
    Section 14. Instructions to the Trustee. All orders, requests, and 
instructions by the Grantor to the Trustee shall be in writing, signed 
by such persons as are designated in the attached Exhibit A or such 
other designees as the Grantor may designate by amendments to Exhibit A. 
The Trustee shall be fully protected in acting without inquiry in 
accordance with the Grantor's orders, requests, and instructions. All 
orders, requests, and instructions by the EPA Regional Administrator to 
the Trustee shall be in writing, signed by the EPA Regional 
Administrators of the Regions in which the facilities are located, or 
their designees, and the Trustee shall act and shall be fully protected 
in acting in accordance with such orders, requests, and instructions. 
The Trustee shall have the right to assume, in the absence of written 
notice to the contrary, that no event constituting a change or a 
termination of the authority of any person to act on behalf of the 
Grantor or EPA hereunder has occurred. The Trustee shall have no duty to 
act in the absence of such orders, requests, and instructions from the 
Grantor and/or EPA, except as provided for herein.
    Section 15. Notice of Nonpayment. If a payment for bodily injury or 
property damage is made under Section 4 of this trust, the Trustee shall 
notify the Grantor of such payment and the amount(s) thereof within five 
(5) working days. The Grantor shall, on or before the anniversary date 
of the establishment of the Fund following such notice, either make 
payments to the Trustee in amounts sufficient to cause the trust to 
return to its value immediately prior to the payment of claims under 
Section 4, or shall provide written proof to the Trustee that other 
financial assurance for liability coverage has been obtained equalling 
the amount necessary to return the trust to its value prior to the 
payment of claims. If the Grantor does not either make payments to the 
Trustee or provide the Trustee with such proof, the Trustee shall within 
10 working days after the anniversary date of the establishment of the 
Fund provide a written notice of nonpayment to the EPA Regional 
Administrator.
    Section 16. Amendment of Agreement. This Agreement may be amended by 
an instrument in writing executed by the Grantor, the Trustee, and the 
appropriate EPA Regional Administrator, or by the Trustee and the 
appropriate EPA Regional Administrator if the Grantor ceases to exist.
    Section 17. Irrevocability and Termination. Subject to the right of 
the parties to amend this Agreement as provided in Section 16, this 
Trust shall be irrevocable and shall continue until terminated at the 
written agreement of the Grantor, the Trustee, and the EPA Regional 
Administrator, or by the Trustee and the EPA Regional Administrator, if 
the Grantor ceases to exist. Upon termination of the Trust, all 
remaining trust property, less final trust administration expenses, 
shall be delivered to the Grantor.
    The Regional Administrator will agree to termination of the Trust 
when the owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance as 
specified in this section.
    Section 18. Immunity and Indemnification. The Trustee shall not 
incur personal liability of any nature in connection with any act or 
omission, made in good faith, in the administration of this Trust, or in 
carrying out any directions by the Grantor or the EPA Regional 
Administrator issued in accordance with this Agreement. The Trustee 
shall be indemnified and saved harmless by the Grantor or from the Trust 
Fund, or both, from and against any personal liability to which the 
Trustee may be subjected by reason of any act or conduct in its official 
capacity, including all expenses reasonably incurred in its defense in 
the event the Grantor fails to provide such defense.
    Section 19. Choice of Law. This Agreement shall be administered, 
construed, and enforced according to the laws of the State of [enter 
name of State].
    Section 20. Interpretation. As used in this Agreement, words in the 
singular include the plural and words in the plural include the

[[Page 250]]

singular. The descriptive headings for each section of this Agreement 
shall not affect the interpretation or the legal efficacy of this 
Agreement.
    In Witness Whereof the parties have caused this Agreement to be 
executed by their respective officers duly authorized and their 
corporate seals to be hereunto affixed and attested as of the date first 
above written. The parties below certify that the wording of this 
Agreement is identical to the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(m) as 
such regulations were constituted on the date first above written.

 _______________________________________________________________________
[Signature of Grantor]
[Title]

Attest:

[Title]
[Seal]
 _______________________________________________________________________
[Signature of Trustee]

Attest:

[Title]
[Seal]
    (2) The following is an example of the certification of 
acknowledgement which must accompany the trust agreement for a trust 
fund as specified in Secs. 264.147(j) or 265.147(j) of this chapter. 
State requirements may differ on the proper content of this 
acknowledgement.

 State of_______________________________________________________________
 County of______________________________________________________________
    On this [date], before me personally came [owner or operator] to me 
known, who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say that she/he 
resides at [address], that she/he is [title] of [corporation], the 
corporation described in and which executed the above instrument; that 
she/he knows the seal of said corporation; that the seal affixed to such 
instrument is such corporate seal; that it was so affixed by order of 
the Board of Directors of said corporation, and that she/he signed her/
his name thereto by like order.
 _______________________________________________________________________
[Signature of Notary Public]

    (n)(1) A standby trust agreement, as specified in Sec. 264.147(h) or 
265.147(h) of this chapter, must be worded as follows, except that 
instructions in brackets are to be replaced with the relevant 
information and the brackets deleted:

                         Standby Trust Agreement

    Trust Agreement, the ``Agreement,'' entered into as of [date] by and 
between [name of the owner or operator] a [name of a State] [insert 
``corporation,'' ``partnership,'' ``association,'' or 
``proprietorship''], the ``Grantor,'' and [name of corporate trustee], 
[insert, ``incorporated in the State of ______________'' or ``a national 
bank''], the ``trustee.''
    Whereas the United States Environmental Protection Agency, ``EPA,'' 
an agency of the United States Government, has established certain 
regulations applicable to the Grantor, requiring that an owner or 
operator of a hazardous waste management facility or group of facilities 
must demonstrate financial responsibility for bodily injury and property 
damage to third parties caused by sudden accidental and/or nonsudden 
accidental occurrences arising from operations of the facility or group 
of facilities.
    Whereas, the Grantor has elected to establish a standby trust into 
which the proceeds from a letter of credit may be deposited to assure 
all or part of such financial responsibility for the facilities 
identified herein.
    Whereas, the Grantor, acting through its duly authorized officers, 
has selected the Trustee to be the trustee under this agreement, and the 
Trustee is willing to act as trustee.
    Now, therefore, the Grantor and the Trustee agree as follows:
    Section 1. Definitions. As used in this Agreement:
    (a) The term Grantor means the owner or operator who enters into 
this Agreement and any successors or assigns of the Grantor.
    (b) The term Trustee means the Trustee who enters into this 
Agreement and any successor Trustee.
    Section 2. Identification of Facilities. This agreement pertains to 
the facilities identified on attached schedule A [on schedule A, for 
each facility list the EPA Identification Number, name, and address of 
the facility(ies) and the amount of liability coverage, or portions 
thereof, if more than one instrument affords combined coverage as 
demonstrated by this Agreement].
    Section 3. Establishment of Fund. The Grantor and the Trustee hereby 
establish a standby trust fund, hereafter the ``Fund,'' for the benefit 
of any and all third parties injured or damaged by [sudden and/or 
nonsudden] accidental occurrences arising from operation of the 
facility(ies) covered by this guarantee, in the amounts of ____________  
 [up to $1 million] per occurrence and ____________   [up to $2 million] 
annual aggregate for sudden accidental occurrences and ____________   
[up to $3 million] per occurrence and ____________   [up to $6 million] 
annual aggregate for nonsudden occurrences, except that the Fund is not 
established for the benefit of third parties for the following:
    (a) Bodily injury or property damage for which [insert Grantor] is 
obligated to pay damages by reason of the assumption of liability in a 
contract or agreement. This exclusion does not apply to liability for 
damages that [insert Grantor] would be obligated to pay in the absence 
of the contract or agreement.
    (b) Any obligation of [insert Grantor] under a workers' 
compensation, disability

[[Page 251]]

benefits, or unemployment compensation law or any similar law.
    (c) Bodily injury to:
    (1) An employee or [insert Grantor] arising from , and in the course 
of, employment by [insert Grantor]; or
    (2) The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of that employee as 
a consequence of, or arising from, and in the course of employment by 
[insert Grantor].
    This exclusion applies:
    (A) Whether [insert Grantor] may be liable as an employer or in any 
other capacity; and
    (B) To any obligation to share damages with or repay another person 
who must pay damages because of the injury to persons identified in 
paragraphs (1) and (2).
    (d) Bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership, 
maintenance, use, or entrustment to others of any aircraft, motor 
vehicle or watercraft.
    (e) Property damage to:
    (1) Any property owned, rented, or occupied by [insert Grantor];
    (2) Premises that are sold, given away or abandoned by [insert 
Grantor] if the property damage arises out of any part of those 
premises;
    (3) Property loaned [insert Grantor];
    (4) Personal property in the care, custody or control of [insert 
Grantor];
    (5) That particular part of real property on which [insert Grantor] 
or any contractors or subcontractors working directly or indirectly on 
behalf of [insert Grantor] are performing operations, if the property 
damage arises out of these operations.
    In the event of combination with another mechanism for liability 
coverage, the fund shall be considered [insert ``primary'' or 
``excess''] coverage.
    The Fund is established initially as consisting of the proceeds of 
the letter of credit deposited into the Fund. Such proceeds and any 
other property subsequently transferred to the Trustee is referred to as 
the Fund, together with all earnings and profits thereon, less any 
payments or distributions made by the Trustee pursuant to this 
Agreement. The Fund shall be held by the Trustee, IN TRUST, as 
hereinafter provided. The Trustee shall not be responsible nor shall it 
undertake any responsibility for the amount or adequacy of, nor any duty 
to collect from the Grantor, any payments necessary to discharge any 
liabilities of the Grantor established by EPA.
    Section 4. Payment for Bodily Injury or Property Damage. The Trustee 
shall satisfy a third party liability claim by drawing on the letter of 
credit described in Schedule B and by making payments from the Fund only 
upon receipt of one of the following documents:
    (a) Certification from the Grantor and the third party claimant(s) 
that the liability claim should be paid. The certification must be 
worded as follows, except that instructions in brackets are to be 
replaced with the relevant information and the brackets deleted:

                      Certification of Valid Claim

    The undersigned, as parties [insert Grantor] and [insert name and 
address of third party claimant(s)], hereby certify that the claim of 
bodily injury and/or property damage caused by a [sudden or nonsudden] 
accidental occurrence arising from operating [Grantor's] hazardous waste 
treatment, storage, or disposal facility should be paid in the amount of 
$[        ].

 [Signature]____________________________________________________________

 Grantor________________________________________________________________

 [Signatures]___________________________________________________________

 Claimant(s)____________________________________________________________
    (b) A valid final court order establishing a judgment against the 
Grantor for bodily injury or property damage caused by sudden or 
nonsudden accidental occurrences arising from the operation of the 
Grantor's facility or group of facilities.
    Section 5. Payments Comprising the Fund. Payments made to the 
Trustee for the Fund shall consist of the proceeds from the letter of 
credit drawn upon by the Trustee in accordance with the requirements of 
40 CFR 264.151(k) and Section 4 of this Agreement.
    Section 6. Trustee Management. The Trustee shall invest and reinvest 
the principal and income, in accordance with general investment policies 
and guidelines which the Grantor may communicate in writing to the 
Trustee from time to time, subject, however, to the provisions of this 
Section. In investing, reinvesting, exchanging, selling, and managing 
the Fund, the Trustee shall discharge his duties with respect to the 
trust fund solely in the interest of the beneficiary and with the care, 
skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing 
which persons of prudence, acting in a like capacity and familiar with 
such matters, would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like 
character and with like aims; except that:
    (i) Securities or other obligations of the Grantor, or any other 
owner or operator of the facilities, or any of their affiliates as 
defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 
80a-2(a), shall not be acquired or held, unless they are securities or 
other obligations of the Federal or a State government;
    (ii) The Trustee is authorized to invest the Fund in time or demand 
deposits of the Trustee, to the extent insured by an agency of the 
Federal or a State government; and
    (iii) The Trustee is authorized to hold cash awaiting investment or 
distribution uninvested for a reasonable time and without liability for 
the payment of interest thereon.

[[Page 252]]

    Section 7. Commingling and Investment. The Trustee is expressly 
authorized in its discretion:
    (a) To transfer from time to time any or all of the assets of the 
Fund to any common, commingled, or collective trust fund created by the 
Trustee in which the Fund is eligible to participate, subject to all of 
the provisions thereof, to be commingled with the assets of other trusts 
participating therein; and
    (b) To purchase shares in any investment company registered under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq., including 
one which may be created, managed, underwritten, or to which investment 
advice is rendered or the shares of which are sold by the Trustee. The 
Trustee may vote such shares in its discretion.
    Section 8. Express Powers of Trustee. Without in any way limiting 
the powers and discretions conferred upon the Trustee by the other 
provisions of this Agreement or by law, the Trustee is expressly 
authorized and empowered:
    (a) To sell, exchange, convey, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any 
property held by it, by public or private sale. No person dealing with 
the Trustee shall be bound to see to the application of the purchase 
money or to inquire into the validity or expediency of any such sale or 
other disposition;
    (b) To make, execute, acknowledge, and deliver any and all documents 
of transfer and conveyance and any and all other instruments that may be 
necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers herein granted;
    (c) To register any securities held in the Fund in its own name or 
in the name of a nominee and to hold any security in bearer form or in 
book entry, or to combine certificates representing such securities with 
certificates of the same issue held by the Trustee in other fiduciary 
capacities, or to deposit or arrange for the deposit of such securities 
in a qualified central depositary even though, when so deposited, such 
securities may be merged and held in bulk in the name of the nominee of 
such depositary with other securities deposited therein by another 
person, or to deposit or arrange for the deposit of any securities 
issued by the United States Government, or any agency or instrumentality 
thereof, with a Federal Reserve Bank, but the books and records of the 
Trustee shall at all times show that all such securities are part of the 
Fund;
    (d) To deposit any cash in the Fund in interest-bearing accounts 
maintained or savings certificates issued by the Trustee, in its 
separate corporate capacity, or in any other banking institution 
affiliated with the Trustee, to the extent insured by an agency of the 
Federal or State government; and
    (e) To compromise or otherwise adjust all claims in favor of or 
against the Fund.
    Section 9. Taxes and Expenses. All taxes of any kind that may be 
assessed or levied against or in respect of the Fund and all brokerage 
commissions incurred by the Fund shall be paid from the Fund. All other 
expenses incurred by the Trustee in connection with the administration 
of this Trust, including fees for legal services rendered to the 
Trustee, the compensation of the Trustee to the extent not paid directly 
by the Grantor, and all other proper charges and disbursements to the 
Trustee shall be paid from the Fund.
    Section 10. Advice of Counsel. The Trustee may from time to time 
consult with counsel, who may be counsel to the Grantor, with respect to 
any question arising as to the construction of this Agreement or any 
action to be taken hereunder. The Trustee shall be fully protected, to 
the extent permitted by law, in acting upon the advice of counsel.
    Section 11. Trustee Compensation. The Trustee shall be entitled to 
reasonable compensation for its services as agreed upon in writing from 
time to time with the Grantor.
    Section 12. Successor Trustee. The Trustee may resign or the Grantor 
may replace the Trustee, but such resignation or replacement shall not 
be effective until the Grantor has appointed a successor trustee and 
this successor accepts the appointment. The successor trustee shall have 
the same powers and duties as those conferred upon the Trustee 
hereunder. Upon the successor trustee's acceptance of the appointment; 
the Trustee shall assign, transfer, and pay over to the successor 
trustee the funds and properties then constituting the Fund. If for any 
reason the Grantor cannot or does not act in the event of the 
resignation of the Trustee, the Trustee may apply to a court of 
competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor trustee or for 
instructions. The successor trustee shall specify the date on which it 
assumes administration of the trust in a writing sent to the Grantor, 
the EPA Regional Administrator and the present Trustee by certified mail 
10 days before such change becomes effective. Any expenses incurred by 
the Trustee as a result of any of the acts contemplated by this Section 
shall be paid as provided in Section 9.
    Section 13. Instructions to the Trustee. All orders, requests, 
certifications of valid claims, and instructions to the Trustee shall be 
in writing, signed by such persons as are designated in the attached 
Exhibit A or such other designees as the Grantor may designate by 
amendments to Exhibit A. The Trustee shall be fully protected in acting 
without inquiry in accordance with the Grantor's orders, requests, and 
instructions. The Trustee shall have the right to assume, in the absence 
of written notice to the contrary, that no event constituting a change 
or a termination of the authority of any person to act on behalf of the 
Grantor or the EPA

[[Page 253]]

Regional Administrator hereunder has occurred. The Trustee shall have no 
duty to act in the absence of such orders, requests, and instructions 
from the Grantor and/or EPA, except as provided for herein.
    Section 14. Amendment of Agreement. This Agreement may be amended by 
an instrument in writing executed by the Grantor, the Trustee, and the 
EPA Regional Administrator, or by the Trustee and the EPA Regional 
Administrator if the Grantor ceases to exist.
    Section 15. Irrevocability and Termination. Subject to the right of 
the parties to amend this Agreement as provided in Section 14, this 
Trust shall be irrevocable and shall continue until terminated at the 
written agreement of the Grantor, the Trustee, and the EPA Regional 
Administrator, or by the Trustee and the EPA Regional Administrator, if 
the Grantor ceases to exist. Upon termination of the Trust, all 
remaining trust property, less final trust administration expenses, 
shall be paid to the Grantor.
    The Regional Administrator will agree to termination of the Trust 
when the owner or operator substitutes alternative financial assurance 
as specified in this section.
    Section 16. Immunity and indemnification. The Trustee shall not 
incur personal liability of any nature in connection with any act or 
omission, made in good faith, in the administration of this Trust, or in 
carrying out any directions by the Grantor and the EPA Regional 
Administrator issued in accordance with this Agreement. The Trustee 
shall be indemnified and saved harmless by the Grantor or from the Trust 
Fund, or both, from and against any personal liability to which the 
Trustee may be subjected by reason of any act or conduct in its official 
capacity, including all expenses reasonable incurred in its defense in 
the event the Grantor fails to provide such defense.
    Section 17. Choice of Law. This Agreement shall be administered, 
construed, and enforced according to the laws of the State of [enter 
name of State].
    Section 18. Interpretation. As used in this Agreement, words in the 
singular include the plural and words in the plural include the 
singular. The descriptive headings for each Section of this Agreement 
shall not affect the interpretation of the legal efficacy of this 
Agreement.
    In Witness Whereof the parties have caused this Agreement to be 
executed by their respective officers duly authorized and their 
corporate seals to be hereunto affixed and attested as of the date first 
above written. The parties below certify that the wording of this 
Agreement is identical to the wording specified in 40 CFR 264.151(n) as 
such regulations were constituted on the date first above written.

 _______________________________________________________________________
[Signature of Grantor]

[Title]
Attest:
[Title]
[Seal]

 _______________________________________________________________________
[Signature of Trustee]

Attest:
[Title]
[Seal]
    (2) The following is an example of the certification of 
acknowledgement which must accompany the trust agreement for a standby 
trust fund as specified in section 264.147(h) or 265.147(h) of this 
chapter. State requirements may differ on the proper content of this 
acknowledgement.

 State of_______________________________________________________________

 County of______________________________________________________________
    On this [date], before me personally came [owner or operator] to me 
known, who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say that she/he 
resides at [address], that she/he is [title] of [corporation], the 
corporation described in and which executed the above instrument; that 
she/he knows the seal of said corporation; that the seal affixed to such 
instrument is such corporate seal; that it was so affixed by order of 
the Board of Directors of said corporation, and that she/he signed her/
his name thereto by like order.

 _______________________________________________________________________
[Signature of Notary Public]

[47 FR 15059, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 47 FR 16556, Apr. 16, 1982; 47 
FR 17989, Apr. 27, 1982; 47 FR 19995, May 10, 1982; 47 FR 28627, July 1, 
1982; 51 FR 16450, May 2, 1986; 51 FR 25354, July 11, 1986; 52 FR 44320, 
Nov. 18, 1987; 53 FR 33952, Sept. 1, 1988; 57 FR 42836, Sept. 16, 1992; 
59 FR 29960, June 10, 1994]


<R04>
               Subpart I--Use and Management of Containers

    Source: 46 FR 2866, Jan. 12, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.170  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of all 
hazardous waste facilities that store containers of hazardous waste, 
except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.

[Comment: Under Sec. 261.7 and Sec. 261.33(c), if a hazardous waste is 
emptied from a container the residue remaining in the container is not 
considered a hazardous waste if the container is ``empty'' as defined in 
Sec. 261.7. In that event, management of the container is exempt from 
the requirements of this subpart.]


[[Page 254]]




<R05>
Sec. 264.171  Condition of containers.

    If a container holding hazardous waste is not in good condition 
(e.g., severe rusting, apparent structural defects) or if it begins to 
leak, the owner or operator must transfer the hazardous waste from this 
container to a container that is in good condition or manage the waste 
in some other way that complies with the requirements of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 264.172  Compatibility of waste with containers.

    The owner or operator must use a container made of or lined with 
materials which will not react with, and are otherwise compatible with, 
the hazardous waste to be stored, so that the ability of the container 
to contain the waste is not impaired.


<R05>
Sec. 264.173  Management of containers.

    (a) A container holding hazardous waste must always be closed during 
storage, except when it is necessary to add or remove waste.
    (b) A container holding hazardous waste must not be opened, handled, 
or stored in a manner which may rupture the container or cause it to 
leak.

[Comment: Reuse of containers in transportation is governed by U.S. 
Department of Transportation regulations including those set forth in 49 
CFR 173.28.]


<R05>
Sec. 264.174  Inspections.

    At least weekly, the owner or operator must inspect areas where 
containers are stored, looking for leaking containers and for 
deterioration of containers and the containment system caused by 
corrosion or other factors.

[Comment: See Secs. 264.15(c) and 264.171 for remedial action required 
if deterioration or leaks are detected.]


<R05>
Sec. 264.175  Containment.

    (a) Container storage areas must have a containment system that is 
designed and operated in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, 
except as otherwise provided by paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) A containment system must be designed and operated as follows:
    (1) A base must underly the containers which is free of cracks or 
gaps and is sufficiently impervious to contain leaks, spills, and 
accumulated precipitation until the collected material is detected and 
removed;
    (2) The base must be sloped or the containment system must be 
otherwise designed and operated to drain and remove liquids resulting 
from leaks, spills, or precipitation, unless the containers are elevated 
or are otherwise protected from contact with accumulated liquids;
    (3) The containment system must have sufficient capacity to contain 
10% of the volume of containers or the volume of the largest container, 
whichever is greater. Containers that do not contain free liquids need 
not be considered in this determination;
    (4) Run-on into the containment system must be prevented unless the 
collection system has sufficient excess capacity in addition to that 
required in paragraph (b)(3) of this section to contain any run-on which 
might enter the system; and
    (5) Spilled or leaked waste and accumulated precipitation must be 
removed from the sump or collection area in as timely a manner as is 
necessary to prevent overflow of the collection system.

    [Comment: If the collected material is a hazardous waste under part 
261 of this Chapter, it must be managed as a hazardous waste in 
accordance with all applicable requirements of parts 262 through 266 of 
this chapter. If the collected material is discharged through a point 
source to waters of the United States, it is subject to the requirements 
of section 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended.]


    (c) Storage areas that store containers holding only wastes that do 
not contain free liquids need not have a containment system defined by 
paragraph (b) of this section, except as provided by paragraph (d) of 
this section or provided that:
    (1) The storage area is sloped or is otherwise designed and operated 
to drain and remove liquid resulting from precipitation, or
    (2) The containers are elevated or are otherwise protected from 
contact with accumulated liquid.
    (d) Storage areas that store containers holding the wastes listed 
below

[[Page 255]]

that do not contain free liquids must have a containment system defined 
by paragraph (b) of this section:
    (1) FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27.
    (2) [Reserved]
[46 FR 55112, Nov. 6, 1981, as amended at 50 FR 2003, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.176  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    Containers holding ignitable or reactive waste must be located at 
least 15 meters (50 feet) from the facility's property line.

[Comment: See Sec. 264.17(a) for additional requirements.]


<R05>
Sec. 264.177  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    (a) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials (see 
appendix V for examples), must not be placed in the same container, 
unless Sec. 264.17(b) is complied with.
    (b) Hazardous waste must not be placed in an unwashed container that 
previously held an incompatible waste or material.

[Comment: As required by Sec. 264.13, the waste analysis plan must 
include analyses needed to comply with Sec. 264.177. Also, 
Sec. 264.17(c) requires wastes analyses, trial tests or other 
documentation to assure compliance with Sec. 264.17(b). As required by 
Sec. 264.73, the owner or operator must place the results of each waste 
analysis and trial test, and any documented information, in the 
operating record of the facility.]

    (c) A storage container holding a hazardous waste that is 
incompatible with any waste or other materials stored nearby in other 
containers, piles, open tanks, or surface impoundments must be separated 
from the other materials or protected from them by means of a dike, 
berm, wall, or other device.

[Comment: The purpose of this section is to prevent fires, explosions, 
gaseous emission, leaching, or other discharge of hazardous waste or 
hazardous waste constituents which could result from the mixing of 
incompatible wastes or materials if containers break or leak.]


<R05>
Sec. 264.178  Closure.

    At closure, all hazardous waste and hazardous waste residues must be 
removed from the containment system. Remaining containers, liners, 
bases, and soil containing or contaminated with hazardous waste or 
hazardous waste residues must be decontaminated or removed.

[Comment: At closure, as throughout the operating period, unless the 
owner or operator can demonstrate in accordance with Sec. 261.3(d) of 
this chapter that the solid waste removed from the containment system is 
not a hazardous waste, the owner or operator becomes a generator of 
hazardous waste and must manage it in accordance with all applicable 
requirements of parts 262 through 266 of this chapter].


<R05>
Sec. 264.179  Air emission standards.

    The owner or operator shall manage all hazardous waste placed in a 
container in accordance with the applicable requirements of subparts AA, 
BB, and CC of this part.
[61 FR 59950, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R04>
                         Subpart J--Tank Systems

    Source: 51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.190  Applicability.

    The requirements of this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that use tank systems for storing or treating hazardous waste 
except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this 
section or in Sec. 264.1 of this part.
    (a) Tank systems that are used to store or treat hazardous waste 
which contains no free liquids and are situated inside a building with 
an impermeable floor are exempted from the requirements in Sec. 264.193. 
To demonstrate the absence or presence of free liquids in the stored/
treated waste, the following test must be used: Method 9095 (Paint 
Filter Liquids Test) as described in ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid 
Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846, as 
incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of this chapter.

[[Page 256]]

    (b) Tank systems, including sumps, as defined in Sec. 260.10, that 
serve as part of a secondary containment system to collect or contain 
releases of hazardous wastes are exempted from the requirements in 
Sec. 264.193(a).
    (c) Tanks, sumps, and other such collection devices or systems used 
in conjunction with drip pads, as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter 
and regulated under 40 CFR part 264 subpart W, must meet the 
requirements of this subpart.
[51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986, as amended at 
53 FR 34086, Sept. 2, 1988; 55 FR 50484, Dec. 6, 1990; 58 FR 46050, Aug. 
31, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 264.191  Assessment of existing tank system's integrity.

    (a) For each existing tank system that does not have secondary 
containment meeting the requirements of Sec. 264.193, the owner or 
operator must determine that the tank system is not leaking or is unfit 
for use. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the owner 
or operator must obtain and keep on file at the facility a written 
assessment reviewed and certified by an independent, qualified 
registered professional engineer, in accordance with Sec. 270.11(d), 
that attests to the tank system's integrity by January 12, 1988.
    (b) This assessment must determine that the tank system is 
adequately designed and has sufficient structural strength and 
compatibility with the waste(s) to be stored or treated, to ensure that 
it will not collapse, rupture, or fail. At a minimum, this assessment 
must consider the following:
    (1) Design standard(s), if available, according to which the tank 
and ancillary equipment were constructed;
    (2) Hazardous characteristics of the waste(s) that have been and 
will be handled;
    (3) Existing corrosion protection measures;
    (4) Documented age of the tank system, if available (otherwise, an 
estimate of the age); and
    (5) Results of a leak test, internal inspection, or other tank 
integrity examination such that:
    (i) For non-enterable underground tanks, the assessment must include 
a leak test that is capable of taking into account the effects of 
temperature variations, tank end deflection, vapor pockets, and high 
water table effects, and
    (ii) For other than non-enterable underground tanks and for 
ancillary equipment, this assessment must include either a leak test, as 
described above, or other integrity examination, that is certified by an 
independent, qualified, registered professional engineer in accordance 
with Sec. 270.11(d), that addresses cracks, leaks, corrosion, and 
erosion.

    [Note: The practices described in the American Petroleum Institute 
(API) Publication, Guide for Inspection of Refinery Equipment, Chapter 
XIII, ``Atmospheric and Low-Pressure Storage Tanks,'' 4th edition, 1981, 
may be used, where applicable, as guidelines in conducting other than a 
leak test.]

    (c) Tank systems that store or treat materials that become hazardous 
wastes subsequent to July 14, 1986, must conduct this assessment within 
12 months after the date that the waste becomes a hazardous waste.
    (d) If, as a result of the assessment conducted in accordance with 
paragraph (a), a tank system is found to be leaking or unfit for use, 
the owner or operator must comply with the requirements of Sec. 264.196.
[51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 264.192  Design and installation of new tank systems or components.

    (a) Owners or operators of new tank systems or components must 
obtain and submit to the Regional Administrator, at time of submittal of 
part B information, a written assessment, reviewed and certified by an 
independent, qualified registered professional engineer, in accordance 
with Sec. 270.11(d), attesting that the tank system has sufficient 
structural integrity and is acceptable for the storing and treating of 
hazardous waste. The assessment must show that the foundation, 
structural support, seams, connections, and pressure controls (if 
applicable) are adequately designed and that the tank system has 
sufficient structural strength, compatibility with the waste(s) to be 
stored or treated, and corrosion protection to ensure that it will not 
collapse, rupture, or fail. This

[[Page 257]]

assessment, which will be used by the Regional Administrator to review 
and approve or disapprove the acceptability of the tank system design, 
must include, at a minimum, the following information:
    (1) Design standard(s) according to which tank(s) and/or the 
ancillary equipment are constructed;
    (2) Hazardous characteristics of the waste(s) to be handled;
    (3) For new tank systems or components in which the external shell 
of a metal tank or any external metal component of the tank system will 
be in contact with the soil or with water, a determination by a 
corrosion expert of:
    (i) Factors affecting the potential for corrosion, including but not 
limited to:
    (A) Soil moisture content;
    (B) Soil pH;
    (C) Soil sulfides level;
    (D) Soil resistivity;
    (E) Structure to soil potential;
    (F) Influence of nearby underground metal structures (e.g., piping);
    (G) Existence of stray electric current;
    (H) Existing corrosion-protection measures (e.g., coating, cathodic 
protection), and
    (ii) The type and degree of external corrosion protection that are 
needed to ensure the integrity of the tank system during the use of the 
tank system or component, consisting of one or more of the following:
    (A) Corrosion-resistant materials of construction such as special 
alloys, fiberglass reinforced plastic, etc.;
    (B) Corrosion-resistant coating (such as epoxy, fiberglass, etc.) 
with cathodic protection (e.g., impressed current or sacrificial 
anodes); and
    (C) Electrical isolation devices such as insulating joints, flanges, 
etc.

    [Note: The practices described in the National Association of 
Corrosion Engineers (NACE) standard, ``Recommended Practice (RP-02-85)--
Control of External Corrosion on Metallic Buried, Partially Buried, or 
Submerged Liquid Storage Systems,'' and the American Petroleum Institute 
(API) Publication 1632, ``Cathodic Protection of Underground Petroleum 
Storage Tanks and Piping Systems,'' may be used, where applicable, as 
guidelines in providing corrosion protection for tank systems.]

    (4) For underground tank system components that are likely to be 
adversely affected by vehicular traffic, a determination of design or 
operational measures that will protect the tank system against potential 
damage; and
    (5) Design considerations to ensure that:
    (i) Tank foundations will maintain the load of a full tank;
    (ii) Tank systems will be anchored to prevent flotation or 
dislodgment where the tank system is placed in a saturated zone, or is 
located within a seismic fault zone subject to the standards of 
Sec. 264.18(a); and
    (iii) Tank systems will withstand the effects of frost heave.
    (b) The owner or operator of a new tank system must ensure that 
proper handling procedures are adhered to in order to prevent damage to 
the system during installation. Prior to covering, enclosing, or placing 
a new tank system or component in use, an independent, qualified 
installation inspector or an independent, qualified, registered 
professional engineer, either of whom is trained and experienced in the 
proper installation of tank systems or components, must inspect the 
system for the presence of any of the following items:
    (1) Weld breaks;
    (2) Punctures;
    (3) Scrapes of protective coatings;
    (4) Cracks;
    (5) Corrosion;
    (6) Other structural damage or inadequate construction/installation.

All discrepancies must be remedied before the tank system is covered, 
enclosed, or placed in use.
    (c) New tank systems or components that are placed underground and 
that are backfilled must be provided with a backfill material that is a 
noncorrosive, porous, homogeneous substance and that is installed so 
that the backfill is placed completely around the tank and compacted to 
ensure that the tank and piping are fully and uniformly supported.
    (d) All new tanks and ancillary equipment must be tested for 
tightness prior to being covered, enclosed, or placed in use. If a tank 
system is found not to be tight, all repairs necessary to remedy the 
leak(s) in the system must be performed prior to the tank system

[[Page 258]]

being covered, enclosed, or placed into use.
    (e) Ancillary equipment must be supported and protected against 
physical damage and excessive stress due to settlement, vibration, 
expansion, or contraction.

    [Note: The piping system installation procedures described in 
American Petroleum Institute (API) Publication 1615 (November 1979), 
``Installation of Underground Petroleum Storage Systems,'' or ANSI 
Standard B31.3, ``Petroleum Refinery Piping,'' and ANSI Standard B31.4 
``Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping System,'' may be used, where 
applicable, as guidelines for proper installation of piping systems.]



    (f) The owner or operator must provide the type and degree of 
corrosion protection recommended by an independent corrosion expert, 
based on the information provided under paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section, or other corrosion protection if the Regional Administrator 
believes other corrosion protection is necessary to ensure the integrity 
of the tank system during use of the tank system. The installation of a 
corrosion protection system that is field fabricated must be supervised 
by an independent corrosion expert to ensure proper installation.
    (g) The owner or operator must obtain and keep on file at the 
facility written statements by those persons required to certify the 
design of the tank system and supervise the installation of the tank 
system in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs (b) through (f) 
of this section, that attest that the tank system was properly designed 
and installed and that repairs, pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (d) of 
this section, were performed. These written statements must also include 
the certification statement as required in Sec. 270.11(d) of this 
chapter.
[51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 264.193  Containment and detection of releases.

    (a) In order to prevent the release of hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents to the environment, secondary containment that meets the 
requirements of this section must be provided (except as provided in 
paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section):
    (1) For all new tank systems or components, prior to their being put 
into service;
    (2) For all existing tank systems used to store or treat EPA 
Hazardous Waste Nos. F020, F021, F022, F023, F026, and F027, within two 
years after January 12, 1987;
    (3) For those existing tank systems of known and documented age, 
within two years after January 12, 1987 or when the tank system has 
reached 15 years of age, whichever comes later;
    (4) For those existing tank systems for which the age cannot be 
documented, within eight years of January 12, 1987; but if the age of 
the facility is greater than seven years, secondary containment must be 
provided by the time the facility reaches 15 years of age, or within two 
years of January 12, 1987, whichever comes later; and
    (5) For tank systems that store or treat materials that become 
hazardous wastes subsequent to January 12, 1987, within the time 
intervals required in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section, 
except that the date that a material becomes a hazardous waste must be 
used in place of January 12, 1987.
    (b) Secondary containment systems must be:
    (1) Designed, installed, and operated to prevent any migration of 
wastes or accumulated liquid out of the system to the soil, ground 
water, or surface water at any time during the use of the tank system; 
and
    (2) Capable of detecting and collecting releases and accumulated 
liquids until the collected material is removed.
    (c) To meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section, 
secondary containment systems must be at a minimum:
    (1) Constructed of or lined with materials that are compatible with 
the wastes(s) to be placed in the tank system and must have sufficient 
strength and thickness to prevent failure owing to pressure gradients 
(including static head and external hydrological forces), physical 
contact with the waste to which it is exposed, climatic conditions, and 
the stress of daily operation (including stresses from nearby vehicular 
traffic).

[[Page 259]]

    (2) Placed on a foundation or base capable of providing support to 
the secondary containment system, resistance to pressure gradients above 
and below the system, and capable of preventing failure due to 
settlement, compression, or uplift;
    (3) Provided with a leak-detection system that is designed and 
operated so that it will detect the failure of either the primary or 
secondary containment structure or the presence of any release of 
hazardous waste or accumulated liquid in the secondary containment 
system within 24 hours, or at the earliest practicable time if the owner 
or operator can demonstrate to the Regional Administrator that existing 
detection technologies or site conditions will not allow detection of a 
release within 24 hours; and
    (4) Sloped or otherwise designed or operated to drain and remove 
liquids resulting from leaks, spills, or precipitation. Spilled or 
leaked waste and accumulated precipitation must be removed from the 
secondary containment system within 24 hours, or in as timely a manner 
as is possible to prevent harm to human health and the environment, if 
the owner or operator can demonstrate to the Regional Administrator that 
removal of the released waste or accumulated precipitation cannot be 
accomplished within 24 hours.

    [Note: If the collected material is a hazardous waste under part 261 
of this chapter, it is subject to management as a hazardous waste in 
accordance with all applicable requirements of parts 262 through 265 of 
this chapter. If the collected material is discharged through a point 
source to waters of the United States, it is subject to the requirements 
of sections 301, 304, and 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. If 
discharged to a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), it is sub]ect to 
the requirements of section 307 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. If 
the collected material is released to the environment, it may be subject 
to the reporting requirements of 40 CFR part 302.]

    (d) Secondary containment for tanks must include one or more of the 
following devices:
    (1) A liner (external to the tank);
    (2) A vault;
    (3) A double-walled tank; or
    (4) An equivalent device as approved by the Regional Administrator
    (e) In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) 
of this section, secondary containment systems must satisfy the 
following requirements:
    (1) External liner systems must be:
    (i) Designed or operated to contain 100 percent of the capacity of 
the largest tank within its boundary;
    (ii) Designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration of 
precipitation into the secondary containment system unless the 
collection system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on or 
infiltration. Such additional capacity must be sufficient to contain 
precipitation from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event.
    (iii) Free of cracks or gaps; and
    (iv) Designed and installed to surround the tank completely and to 
cover all surrounding earth likely to come into contact with the waste 
if the waste is released from the tank(s) (i.e., capable of preventing 
lateral as well as vertical migration of the waste).
    (2) Vault systems must be:
    (i) Designed or operated to contain 100 percent of the capacity of 
the largest tank within its boundary;
    (ii) Designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration of 
precipitation into the secondary containment system unless the 
collection system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on or 
infiltration. Such additional capacity must be sufficient to contain 
precipitation from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event:
    (iii) Constructed with chemical-resistant water stops in place at 
all joints (if any):
    (iv) Provided with an impermeable interior coating or lining that is 
compatible with the stored waste and that will prevent migration of 
waste into the concrete;
    (v) Provided with a means to protect against the formation of and 
ignition of vapors within the vault, if the waste being stored or 
treated:
    (A) Meets the definition of ignitable waste under Sec. 262.21 of 
this chapter; or
    (B) Meets the definition of reactive waste under Sec. 262.21 of this 
chapter, and may form an ignitable or explosive vapor.

[[Page 260]]

    (vi) Provided with an exterior moisture barrier or be otherwise 
designed or operated to prevent migration of moisture into the vault if 
the vault is subject to hydraulic pressure.
    (3) Double-walled tanks must be:
    (i) Designed as an integral structure (i.e., an inner tank 
completely enveloped within an outer shell) so that any release from the 
inner tank is contained by the outer shell.
    (ii) Protected, if constructed of metal, from both corrosion of the 
primary tank interior and of the external surface of the outer shell: 
and
    (iii) Provided with a built-in continuous leak detection system 
capable of detecting a release within 24 hours, or at the earliest 
practicable time, if the owner or operator can demonstrate to the 
Regional Administrator, and the Regional Administrator concludes, that 
the existing detection technology or site conditions would not allow 
detection of a release within 24 hours.

    [Note: The provisions outlined in the Steel Tank Institute's (STI) 
``Standard for Dual Wall Underground Steel Storage Tanks'' may be used 
as guidelines for aspects of the design of underground steel double-
walled tanks.]

    (f) Ancillary equipment must be provided with secondary containment 
(e.g., trench, jacketing, double-walled piping) that meets the 
requirements of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section except for:
    (1) Aboveground piping (exclusive of flanges, joints, valves, and 
other connections) that are visually inspected for leaks on a daily 
basis;
    (2) Welded flanges, welded joints, and welded connections, that are 
visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis;
    (3) Sealless or magnetic coupling pumps and sealless valves, that 
are visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis; and
    (4) Pressurized aboveground piping systems with automatic shut-off 
devices (e.g., excess flow check valves, flow metering shutdown devices, 
loss of pressure actuated shut-off devices) that are visually inspected 
for leaks on a daily basis.
    (g) The owner or operator may obtain a variance from the 
requirements of this section if the Regional Administrator finds, as a 
result of a demonstration by the owner or operator that alternative 
design and operating practices, together with location characteristics, 
will prevent the migration of any hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents into the ground water; or surface water at least as 
effectively as secondary containment during the active life of the tank 
system or that in the event of a release that does migrate to ground 
water or surface water, no substantial present or potential hazard will 
be posed to human health or the environment. New underground tank 
systems may not, per a demonstration in accordance with paragraph (g)(2) 
of this section, be exempted from the secondary containment requirements 
of this section.
    (1) In deciding whether to grant a variance based on a demonstration 
of equivalent protection of ground water and surface water, the Regional 
Administrator will consider:
    (i) The nature and quantity of the wastes;
    (ii) The proposed alternate design and operation;
    (iii) The hydrogeologic setting of the facility, including the 
thickness of soils present between the tank system and ground water, and
    (iv) All other factors that would influence the quality and mobility 
of the hazardous constituents and the potential for them to migrate to 
ground water or surface water
    (2) In deciding whether to grant a variance based on a demonstration 
of no substantial present or potential hazard, the Regional 
Administrator will consider:
    (i) The potential adverse effects on ground water, surface water, 
and land quality taking into account:
    (A) The physical and chemical characteristics of the waste in the 
tank system, including its potential for migration.
    (B) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and 
surrounding land,
    (C) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to waste 
constituents,
    (D) The potential for damage to wildlife, crops, vegetation, and 
physical structures caused by exposure to waste constituents, and

[[Page 261]]

    (E) The persistence and permanence of the potential adverse effects;
    (ii) The potential adverse effects of a release on ground-water 
quality, taking into account:
    (A) The quantity and quality of ground water and the direction of 
ground-water flow,
    (B) The proximity and withdrawal rates of ground-water users,
    (C) The current and future uses of ground water in the area, and
    (D) The existing quality of ground water, including other sources of 
contamination and their cumulative impact on the ground-water quality;
    (iii) The potential adverse effects of a release on surface water 
quality, taking into account:
    (A) The quantity and quality of ground water and the direction of 
ground-water flow,
    (B) The patterns of rainfall in the region,
    (C) The proximity of the tank system to surface waters,
    (D) The current and future uses of surface waters in the area and 
any water quality standards established for those surface waters, and
    (E) The existing quality of surface water, including other sources 
of contamination and the cumulative impact on surface-water quality; and
    (iv) The potential adverse effects of a release on the land 
surrounding the tank system, taking into account:
    (A) The patterns of rainfall in the region, and
    (B) The current and future uses of the surrounding land.
    (3) The owner or operator of a tank system, for which a variance 
from secondary containment had been granted in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (g)(1) of this section, at which a release of 
hazardous waste has occurred from the primary tank system but has not 
migrated beyond the zone of engineering control (as established in the 
variance), must:
    (i) Comply with the requirements of Sec. 264.196, except paragraph 
(d), and
    (ii) Decontaminate or remove contaminated soil to the extent 
necessary to:
    (A) Enable the tank system for which the variance was granted to 
resume operation with the capability for the detection of releases at 
least equivalent to the capability it had prior to the release; and
    (B) Prevent the migration of hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents to ground water or surface water; and
    (iii) If contaminated soil cannot be removed or decontaminated in 
accordance with paragraph (g)(3)(ii) of this section, comply with the 
requirement of Sec. 264.197(b).
    (4) The owner or operator of a tank system, for which a variance 
from secondary containment had been granted in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (g)(1) of this section, at which a release of 
hazardous waste has occurred from the primary tank system and has 
migrated beyond the zone of engineering control (as established in the 
variance), must:
    (i) Comply with the requirements of Sec. 264.196 (a), (b), (c), and 
(d); and
    (ii) Prevent the migration of hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents to ground water or surface water, if possible, and 
decontaminate or remove contaminated soil. If contaminated soil cannot 
be decontaminated or removed or if ground water has been contaminated, 
the owner or operator must comply with the requirements of 
Sec. 264.197(b); and
    (iii) If repairing, replacing, or reinstalling the tank system, 
provide secondary containment in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraphs (a) through (f) of this section or reapply for a variance 
from secondary containment and meet the requirements for new tank 
systems in Sec. 264.192 if the tank system is replaced. The owner or 
operator must comply with these requirements even if contaminated soil 
can be decontaminated or removed and ground water or surface water has 
not been contaminated.
    (h) The following procedures must be followed in order to request a 
variance from secondary containment:
    (1) The Regional Administrator must be notified in writing by the 
owner or operator that he intends to conduct and submit a demonstration 
for a variance from secondary containment as allowed in paragraph (g) of 
this section according to the following schedule:
    (i) For existing tank systems, at least 24 months prior to the date 
that

[[Page 262]]

secondary containment must be provided in accordance with paragraph (a) 
of this section.
    (ii) For new tank systems, at least 30 days prior to entering into a 
contract for installation.
    (2) As part of the notification, the owner or operator must also 
submit to the Regional Administrator a description of the steps 
necessary to conduct the demonstration and a timetable for completing 
each of the steps. The demonstration must address each of the factors 
listed in paragraph (g)(1) or paragraph (g)(2) of this section;
    (3) The demonstration for a variance must be completed within 180 
days after notifying the Regional Administrator of an intent to conduct 
the demonstration; and
    (4) If a variance is granted under this paragraph, the Regional 
Administrator will require the permittee to construct and operate the 
tank system in the manner that was demonstrated to meet the requirements 
for the variance.
    (i) All tank systems, until such time as secondary containment that 
meets the requirements of this section is provided, must comply with the 
following:
    (1) For non-enterable underground tanks, a leak test that meets the 
requirements of Sec. 264.191(b)(5) or other tank integrity method, as 
approved or required by the Regional Administrator, must be conducted at 
least annually.
    (2) For other than non-enterable underground tanks, the owner or 
operator must either conduct a leak test as in paragraph (i)(1) of this 
section or develop a schedule and procedure for an assessment of the 
overall condition of the tank system by an independent, qualified 
registered professional engineer. The schedule and procedure must be 
adequate to detect obvious cracks, leaks, and corrosion or erosion that 
may lead to cracks and leaks. The owner or operator must remove the 
stored waste from the tank, if necessary, to allow the condition of all 
internal tank surfaces to be assessed. The frequency of these 
assessments must be based on the material of construction of the tank 
and its ancillary equipment, the age of the system, the type of 
corrosion or erosion protection used, the rate of corrosion or erosion 
observed during the previous inspection, and the characteristics of the 
waste being stored or treated.
    (3) For ancillary equipment, a leak test or other integrity 
assessment as approved by the Regional Administrator must be conducted 
at least annually.

    [Note: The practices described in the American Petroleum Institute 
(API) Publication Guide for Inspection of Refinery Equipment, Chapter 
XIII, ``Atmospheric and Low-Pressure Storage Tanks,'' 4th edition, 1981, 
may be used, where applicable, as guidelines for assessing the overall 
condition of the tank system.]

    (4) The owner or operator must maintain on file at the facility a 
record of the results of the assessments conducted in accordance with 
paragraphs (i)(1) through (i)(3) of this section.
    (5) If a tank system or component is found to be leaking or unfit 
for use as a result of the leak test or assessment in paragraphs (i)(1) 
through (i)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must comply with 
the requirements of Sec. 264.196.
[51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986, as amended at 
53 FR 34086, Sept. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.194  General operating requirements.

    (a) Hazardous wastes or treatment reagents must not be placed in a 
tank system if they could cause the tank, its ancillary equipment, or 
the containment system to rupture, leak, corrode, or otherwise fail.
    (b) The owner or operator must use appropriate controls and 
practices to prevent spills and overflows from tank or containment 
systems. These include at a minimum:
    (1) Spill prevention controls (e.g., check valves, dry disconnect 
couplings);
    (2) Overfill prevention controls (e.g., level sensing devices, high 
level alarms, automatic feed cutoff, or bypass to a standby tank); and
    (3) Maintenance of sufficient freeboard in uncovered tanks to 
prevent overtopping by wave or wind action or by precipitation.
    (c) The owner or operator must comply with the requirements of 
Sec. 264.196 if

[[Page 263]]

a leak or spill occurs in the tank system.


<R05>
Sec. 264.195  Inspections.

    (a) The owner or operator must develop and follow a schedule and 
procedure for inspecting overfill controls.
    (b) The owner or operator must inspect at least once each operating 
day:
    (1) Aboveground portions of the tank system, if any, to detect 
corrosion or releases of waste;
    (2) Data gathered from monitoring and leak detection equipment 
(e.g., pressure or temperature gauges, monitoring wells) to ensure that 
the tank system is being operated according to its design; and
    (3) The construction materials and the area immediately surrounding 
the externally accessible portion of the tank system, including the 
secondary containment system (e.g., dikes) to detect erosion or signs of 
releases of hazardous waste (e.g., wet spots, dead vegetation).

    [Note: Section 264.15(c) requires the owner or operator to remedy 
any deterioration or malfunction he finds. Section 264.196 requires the 
owner or operator to notify the Regional Administrator within 24 hours 
of confirming a leak. Also, 40 CFR part 302 may require the owner or 
operator to notify the National Response Center of a release.]

    (c) The owner or operator must inspect cathodic protection systems, 
if present, according to, at a minimum, the following schedule to ensure 
that they are functioning properly:
    (1) The proper operation of the cathodic protection system must be 
confirmed within six months after initial installation and annually 
thereafter; and
    (2) All sources of impressed current must be inspected and/or 
tested, as appropriate, at least bimonthly (i.e., every other month).

    [Note: The practices described in the National Association of 
Corrosion Engineers (NACE) standard, ``Recommended Practice (RP-02-85)--
Control of External Corrosion on Metallic Buried, Partially Buried, or 
Submerged Liquid Storage Systems,'' and the American Petroleum Institute 
(API) Publication 1632, ``Cathodic Protection of Underground Petroleum 
Storage Tanks and Piping Systems,'' may be used, where applicable, as 
guidelines in maintaining and inspecting cathodic protection systems.]

    (d) The owner or operator must document in the operating record of 
the facility an inspection of those items in paragraphs (a) through (c) 
of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 264.196  Response to leaks or spills and disposition of leaking or unfit-for-use tank systems.

    A tank system or secondary containment system from which there has 
been a leak or spill, or which is unfit for use, must be removed from 
service immediately, and the owner or operator must satisfy the 
following requirements:
    (a) Cessation of use; prevent flow or addition of wastes. The owner 
or operator must immediately stop the flow of hazardous waste into the 
tank system or secondary containment system and inspect the system to 
determine the cause of the release.
    (b) Removal of waste from tank system or secondary containment 
system. (1) If the release was from the tank system, the owner/operator 
must, within 24 hours after detection of the leak or, if the owner/
operator demonstrates that it is not possible, at the earliest 
practicable time, remove as much of the waste as is necessary to prevent 
further release of hazardous waste to the environment and to allow 
inspection and repair of the tank system to be performed.
    (2) If the material released was to a secondary containment system, 
all released materials must be removed within 24 hours or in as timely a 
manner as is possible to prevent harm to human health and the 
environment.
    (c) Containment of visible releases to the environment. The owner/
operator must immediately conduct a visual inspection of the release 
and, based upon that inspection:
    (1) Prevent further migration of the leak or spill to soils or 
surface water; and
    (2) Remove, and properly dispose of, any visible contamination of 
the soil or surface water.
    (d) Notifications, reports. (1) Any release to the environment, 
except as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, must be reported 
to the Regional Administrator within 24 hours of its

[[Page 264]]

detection. If the release has been reported pursuant to 40 CFR part 302, 
that report will satisfy this requirement.
    (2) A leak or spill of hazardous waste is exempted from the 
requirements of this paragraph if it is:
    (i) Less than or equal to a quantity of one (1) pound, and
    (ii) Immediately contained and cleaned up.
    (3) Within 30 days of detection of a release to the environment, a 
report containing the following information must be submitted to the 
Regional Administrator:
    (i) Likely route of migration of the release;
    (ii) Characteristics of the surrounding soil (soil composition, 
geology, hydrogeology, climate);
    (iii) Results of any monitoring or sampling conducted in connection 
with the release (if available). If sampling or monitoring data relating 
to the release are not available within 30 days, these data must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator as soon as they become 
available.
    (iv) Proximity to downgradient drinking water, surface water, and 
populated areas; and
    (v) Description of response actions taken or planned.
    (e) Provision of secondary containment, repair, or closure. (1) 
Unless the owner/operator satisfies the requirements of paragraphs 
(e)(2) through (4) of this section, the tank system must be closed in 
accordance with Sec. 264.197.
    (2) If the cause of the release was a spill that has not damaged the 
integrity of the system, the owner/operator may return the system to 
service as soon as the released waste is removed and repairs, if 
necessary, are made.
    (3) If the cause of the release was a leak from the primary tank 
system into the secondary containment system, the system must be 
repaired prior to returning the tank system to service.
    (4) If the source of the release was a leak to the environment from 
a component of a tank system without secondary containment, the owner/
operator must provide the component of the system from which the leak 
occurred with secondary containment that satisfies the requirements of 
Sec. 264.193 before it can be returned to service, unless the source of 
the leak is an aboveground portion of a tank system that can be 
inspected visually. If the source is an aboveground component that can 
be inspected visually, the component must be repaired and may be 
returned to service without secondary containment as long as the 
requirements of paragraph (f) of this section are satisfied. If a 
component is replaced to comply with the requirements of this 
subparagraph, that component must satisfy the requirements for new tank 
systems or components in Secs. 264.192 and 264.193. Additionally, if a 
leak has occurred in any portion of a tank system component that is not 
readily accessible for visual inspection (e.g., the bottom of an 
inground or onground tank), the entire component must be provided with 
secondary containment in accordance with Sec. 264.193 prior to being 
returned to use.
    (f) Certification of major repairs. If the owner/operator has 
repaired a tank system in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section, 
and the repair has been extensive (e.g., installation of an internal 
liner; repair of a ruptured primary containment or secondary containment 
vessel), the tank system must not be returned to service unless the 
owner/operator has obtained a certification by an independent, 
qualified, registered, professional engineer in accordance with 
Sec. 270.11(d) that the repaired system is capable of handling hazardous 
wastes without release for the intended life of the system. This 
certification must be submitted to the Regional Administrator within 
seven days after returning the tank system to use.

    [Note: The Regional Administrator may, on the basis of any 
information received that there is or has been a release of hazardous 
waste or hazardous constituents into the environment, issue an order 
under RCRA section 3004(v), 3008(h), or 7003(a) requiring corrective 
action or such other response as deemed necessary to protect human 
health or the environment.]



    [Note: See Sec. 264.15(c) for the requirements necessary to remedy a 
failure. Also, 40 CFR part 302 may require the owner or operator

[[Page 265]]

to notify the National Response Center of certain releases.]

[51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986, as amended at 
53 FR 34086, Sept. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 264.197  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure of a tank system, the owner or operator must remove 
or decontaminate all waste residues, contaminated containment system 
components (liners, etc.), contaminated soils, and structures and 
equipment contaminated with waste, and manage them as hazardous waste, 
unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this chapter applies. The closure plan, closure 
activities, cost estimates for closure, and financial responsibility for 
tank systems must meet all of the requirements specified in subparts G 
and H of this part.
    (b) If the owner or operator demonstrates that not all contaminated 
soils can be practicably removed or decontaminated as required in 
paragraph (a) of this section, then the owner or operator must close the 
tank system and perform post-closure care in accordance with the closure 
and post-closure care requirements that apply to landfills 
(Sec. 264.310). In addition, for the purposes of closure, post-closure, 
and financial responsibility, such a tank system is then considered to 
be a landfill, and the owner or operator must meet all of the 
requirements for landfills specified in subparts G and H of this part.
    (c) If an owner or operator has a tank system that does not have 
secondary containment that meets the requirements of Sec. 264.193 (b) 
through (f) and has not been granted a variance from the secondary 
containment requirements in accordance with Sec. 264.193(g), then:
    (1) The closure plan for the tank system must include both a plan 
for complying with paragraph (a) of this section and a contingent plan 
for complying with paragraph (b) of this section.
    (2) A contingent post-closure plan for complying with paragraph (b) 
of this section must be prepared and submitted as part of the permit 
application.
    (3) The cost estimates calculated for closure and post-closure care 
must reflect the costs of complying with the contingent closure plan and 
the contingent post-closure plan, if those costs are greater than the 
costs of complying with the closure plan prepared for the expected 
closure under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (4) Financial assurance must be based on the cost estimates in 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (5) For the purposes of the contingent closure and post-closure 
plans, such a tank system is considered to be a landfill, and the 
contingent plans must meet all of the closure, post-closure, and 
financial responsibility requirements for landfills under subparts G and 
H of this part.
[51 FR 25472, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 264.198  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive wastes.

    (a) Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in tank systems, 
unless:
    (1) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately 
after placement in the tank system so that:
    (i) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolved material no longer 
meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under Secs. 261.21 
or 261.23 of this chapter, and
    (ii) Section 264.17(b) is complied with; or
    (2) The waste is stored or treated in such a way that it is 
protected from any material or conditions that may cause the waste to 
ignite or react; or
    (3) The tank system is used solely for emergencies.
    (b) The owner or operator of a facility where ignitable or reactive 
waste is stored or treated in a tank must comply with the requirements 
for the maintenance of protective distances between the waste management 
area and any public ways, streets, alleys, or an adjoining property line 
that can be built upon as required in Tables 2-1 through 2-6 of the 
National Fire Protection Association's ``Flammable and Combustible 
Liquids Code,'' (1977 or 1981), (incorporated by reference, see 
Sec. 260.11).


<R05>
Sec. 264.199  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    (a) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, must 
not

[[Page 266]]

be placed in the same tank system, unless Sec. 264.17(b) is complied 
with.
    (b) Hazardous waste must not be placed in a tank system that has not 
been decontaminated and that previously held an incompatible waste or 
material, unless Sec. 264.17(b) is complied with.


<R05>
Sec. 264.200  Air emission standards.

    The owner or operator shall manage all hazardous waste placed in a 
tank in accordance with the applicable requirements of subparts AA, BB, 
and CC of this part.
[61 FR 59950, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R04>
                     Subpart K--Surface Impoundments

    Source: 47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.220  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that use surface impoundments to treat, store, or dispose of 
hazardous waste except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 264.221  Design and operating requirements.

    (a) Any surface impoundment that is not covered by paragraph (c) of 
this section or Sec. 265.221 of this chapter must have a liner for all 
portions of the impoundment (except for existing portions of such 
impoundments). The liner must be designed, constructed, and installed to 
prevent any migration of wastes out of the impoundment to the adjacent 
subsurface soil or ground water or surface water at any time during the 
active life (including the closure period) of the impoundment. The liner 
may be constructed of materials that may allow wastes to migrate into 
the liner (but not into the adjacent subsurface soil or ground water or 
surface water) during the active life of the facility, provided that the 
impoundment is closed in accordance with Sec. 264.228(a)(1). For 
impoundments that will be closed in accordance with Sec. 264.228(a)(2), 
the liner must be constructed of materials that can prevent wastes from 
migrating into the liner during the active life of the facility. The 
liner must be:
    (1) Constructed of materials that have appropriate chemical 
properties and sufficient strength and thickness to prevent failure due 
to pressure gradients (including static head and external hydrogeologic 
forces), physical contact with the waste or leachate to which they are 
exposed, climatic conditions, the stress of installation, and the stress 
of daily operation;
    (2) Placed upon a foundation or base capable of providing support to 
the liner and resistance to pressure gradients above and below the liner 
to prevent failure of the liner due to settlement, compression, or 
uplift; and
    (3) Installed to cover all surrounding earth likely to be in contact 
with the waste or leachate.
    (b) The owner or operator will be exempted from the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section if the Regional Administrator finds, based 
on a demonstration by the owner or operator, that alternate design and 
operating practices, together with location characteristics, will 
prevent the migration of any hazardous constituents (see Sec. 264.93) 
into the ground water or surface water at any future time. In deciding 
whether to grant an exemption, the Regional Administrator will consider:
    (1) The nature and quantity of the wastes;
    (2) The proposed alternate design and operation;
    (3) The hydrogeologic setting of the facility, including the 
attenuative capacity and thickness of the liners and soils present 
between the impoundment and ground water or surface water; and
    (4) All other factors which would influence the quality and mobility 
of the leachate produced and the potential for it to migrate to ground 
water or surface water.
    (c) The owner or operator of each new surface impoundment unit on 
which construction commences after January 29, 1992, each lateral 
expansion of a surface impoundment unit on which construction commences 
after July 29, 1992 and each replacement of an existing surface 
impoundment unit that is to commence reuse after July 29, 1992 must 
install two or more liners and a

[[Page 267]]

leachate collection and removal system between such liners. 
``Construction commences'' is as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter 
under ``existing facility''.
    (1)(i) The liner system must include:
    (A) A top liner designed and constructed of materials (e.g., a 
geomembrane) to prevent the migration of hazardous constituents into 
such liner during the active life and post-closure care period; and
    (B) A composite bottom liner, consisting of at least two components. 
The upper component must be designed and constructed of materials (e.g., 
a geomembrane) to prevent the migration of hazardous constituents into 
this component during the active life and post-closure care period. The 
lower component must be designed and constructed of materials to 
minimize the migration of hazardous constituents if a breach in the 
upper component were to occur. The lower component must be constructed 
of at least 3 feet (91 cm) of compacted soil material with a hydraulic 
conductivity of no more than 1 x 10/<SUP>-7</SUP>/ cm/sec.
    (ii) The liners must comply with paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of 
this section.
    (2) The leachate collection and removal system between the liners, 
and immediately above the bottom composite liner in the case of multiple 
leachate collection and removal systems, is also a leak detection 
system. This leak detection system must be capable of detecting, 
collecting, and removing leaks of hazardous constituents at the earliest 
practicable time through all areas of the top liner likely to be exposed 
to waste or leachate during the active life and post-closure care 
period. The requirements for a leak detection system in this paragraph 
are satisfied by installation of a system that is, at a minimum:
    (i) Constructed with a bottom slope of one percent or more;
    (ii) Constructed of granular drainage materials with a hydraulic 
conductivity of 1 x 10/<SUP>-1</SUP>/ cm/sec or more and a thickness of 
12 inches (30.5 cm) or more; or constructed of synthetic or geonet 
drainage materials with a transmissivity of 3 x 10/<SUP>-4</SUP>/ 
m\2\sec or more;
    (iii) Constructed of materials that are chemically resistant to the 
waste managed in the surface impoundment and the leachate expected to be 
generated, and of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent collapse 
under the pressures exerted by overlying wastes and any waste cover 
materials or equipment used at the surface impoundment;
    (iv) Designed and operated to minimize clogging during the active 
life and post-closure care period; and
    (v) Constructed with sumps and liquid removal methods (e.g., pumps) 
of sufficient size to collect and remove liquids from the sump and 
prevent liquids from backing up into the drainage layer. Each unit must 
have its own sump(s). The design of each sump and removal system must 
provide a method for measuring and recording the volume of liquids 
present in the sump and of liquids removed.
    (3) The owner or operator shall collect and remove pumpable liquids 
in the sumps to minimize the head on the bottom liner.
    (4) The owner or operator of a leak detection system that is not 
located completely above the seasonal high water table must demonstrate 
that the operation of the leak detection system will not be adversely 
affected by the presence of ground water.
    (d) The Regional Administrator may approve alternative design or 
operating practices to those specified in paragraph (c) of this section 
if the owner or operator demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that 
such design and operating practices, together with location 
characteristics:
    (1) Will prevent the migration of any hazardous constituent into the 
ground water or surface water at least as effectively as the liners and 
leachate collection and removal system specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section; and
    (2) Will allow detection of leaks of hazardous constituents through 
the top liner at least as effectively.
    (e) The double liner requirement set forth in paragraph (c) of this 
section may be waived by the Regional Administrator for any monofill, 
if:
    (1) The monofill contains only hazardous wastes from foundry furnace 
emission controls or metal casting

[[Page 268]]

molding sand, and such wastes do not contain constituents which would 
render the wastes hazardous for reasons other than the EP toxicity 
characteristics in Sec. 261.24 of this chapter; and
    (2)(i)(A) The monofill has at least one liner for which there is no 
evidence that such liner is leaking. For the purposes of this paragraph, 
the term ``liner'' means a liner designed, constructed, installed, and 
operated to prevent hazardous waste from passing into the liner at any 
time during the active life of the facility, or a liner designed, 
constructed, installed, and operated to prevent hazardous waste from 
migrating beyond the liner to adjacent subsurface soil, ground water, or 
surface water at any time during the active life of the facility. In the 
case of any surface impoundment which has been exempted from the 
requirements of paragraph (c) of this section on the basis of a liner 
designed, constructed, installed, and operated to prevent hazardous 
waste from passing beyond the liner, at the closure of such impoundment, 
the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate all waste residues, 
all contaminated liner material, and contaminated soil to the extent 
practicable. If all contaminated soil is not removed or decontaminated, 
the owner or operator of such impoundment will comply with appropriate 
post-closure requirements, including but not limited to ground-water 
monitoring and corrective action;
    (B) The monofill is located more than one-quarter mile from an 
underground source of drinking water (as that term is defined in 
Sec. 144.3 of this chapter); and
    (C) The monofill is in compliance with generally applicable ground-
water monitoring requrements for facilities with permits under RCRA 
section 3005(c); or
    (ii) The owner or operator demonstrates that the monofill is 
located, designed and operated so as to assure that there will be no 
migration of any hazardous constituent into ground water or surface 
water at any future time.
    (f) The owner or operator of any replacement surface impoundment 
unit is exempt from paragraph (c) of this section if:
    (1) The existing unit was constructed in compliance with the design 
standards of sections 3004 (o)(1)(A)(i) and (o)(5) of the Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act; and
    (2) There is no reason to believe that the liner is not functioning 
as designed.
    (g) A surface impoundment must be designed, constructed, maintained, 
and operated to prevent overtopping resulting from normal or abnormal 
operations; overfilling; wind and wave action; rainfall; run-on; 
malfunctions of level controllers, alarms, and other equipment; and 
human error.
    (h) A surface impoundment must have dikes that are designed, 
constructed, and maintained with sufficient structural integrity to 
prevent massive failure of the dikes. In ensuring structural integrity, 
it must not be presumed that the liner system will function without 
leakage during the active life of the unit.
    (i) The Regional Administrator will specify in the permit all design 
and operating practices that are necessary to ensure that the 
requirements of this section are satisfied.
[47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 50 
FR 28747, July 15, 1985; 57 FR 3487, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.222  Action leakage rate.

    (a) The Regional Administrator shall approve an action leakage rate 
for surface impoundment units subject to Sec. 264.221 (c) or (d). The 
action leakage rate is the maximum design flow rate that the leak 
detection system (LDS) can remove without the fluid head on the bottom 
liner exceeding 1 foot. The action leakage rate must include an adequate 
safety margin to allow for uncertainties in the design (e.g., slope, 
hydraulic conductivity, thickness of drainage material), construction, 
operation, and location of the LDS, waste and leachate characteristics, 
likelihood and amounts of other sources of liquids in the LDS, and 
proposed response actions (e.g., the action leakage rate must consider 
decreases in the flow capacity of the system over time resulting from 
siltation and clogging, rib layover and creep of synthetic components of 
the system, overburden pressures, etc.).

[[Page 269]]

    (b) To determine if the action leakage rate has been exceeded, the 
owner or operator must convert the weekly or monthly flow rate from the 
monitoring data obtained under Sec. 264.226(d) to an average daily flow 
rate (gallons per acre per day) for each sump. Unless the Regional 
Administrator approves a different calculation, the average daily flow 
rate for each sump must be calculated weekly during the active life and 
closure period, and if the unit is closed in accordance with 
Sec. 264.228(b), monthly during the post-closure care period when 
monthly monitoring is required under Sec. 264.226(d).
[57 FR 3487, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.223  Response actions.

    (a) The owner or operator of surface impoundment units subject to 
Sec. 264.221 (c) or (d) must have an approved response action plan 
before receipt of waste. The response action plan must set forth the 
actions to be taken if the action leakage rate has been exceeded. At a 
minimum, the response action plan must describe the actions specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) If the flow rate into the leak detection system exceeds the 
action leakage rate for any sump, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing of the exceedence 
within 7 days of the determination;
    (2) Submit a preliminary written assessment to the Regional 
Administrator within 14 days of the determination, as to the amount of 
liquids, likely sources of liquids, possible location, size, and cause 
of any leaks, and short-term actions taken and planned;
    (3) Determine to the extent practicable the location, size, and 
cause of any leak;
    (4) Determine whether waste receipt should cease or be curtailed, 
whether any waste should be removed from the unit for inspection, 
repairs, or controls, and whether or not the unit should be closed;
    (5) Determine any other short-term and longer-term actions to be 
taken to mitigate or stop any leaks; and
    (6) Within 30 days after the notification that the action leakage 
rate has been exceeded, submit to the Regional Administrator the results 
of the analyses specified in paragraphs (b) (3), (4), and (5) of this 
section, the results of actions taken, and actions planned. Monthly 
thereafter, as long as the flow rate in the leak detection system 
exceeds the action leakage rate, the owner or operator must submit to 
the Regional Administrator a report summarizing the results of any 
remedial actions taken and actions planned.
    (c) To make the leak and/or remediation determinations in paragraphs 
(b) (3), (4), and (5) of this section, the owner or operator must:
    (1)(i) Assess the source of liquids and amounts of liquids by 
source,
    (ii) Conduct a fingerprint, hazardous constituent, or other analyses 
of the liquids in the leak detection system to identify the source of 
liquids and possible location of any leaks, and the hazard and mobility 
of the liquid; and
    (iii) Assess the seriousness of any leaks in terms of potential for 
escaping into the environment; or
    (2) Document why such assessments are not needed.
[57 FR 3488, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Secs. 264.224--264.225  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.226  Monitoring and inspection.

    (a) During construction and installation, liners (except in the case 
of existing portions of surface impoundments exempt from 
Sec. 264.221(a)) and cover systems (e.g., membranes, sheets, or 
coatings) must be inspected for uniformity, damage, and imperfections 
(e.g., holes, cracks, thin spots, or foreign materials). Immediately 
after construction or installation:
    (1) Synthetic liners and covers must be inspected to ensure tight 
seams and joints and the absence of tears, punctures, or blisters; and
    (2) Soil-based and admixed liners and covers must be inspected for 
inperfections including lenses, cracks, channels, root holes, or other 
structural non-uniformities that may cause an increase in the 
permeability of the liner or cover.
    (b) While a surface impoundment is in operation, it must be 
inspected weekly and after storms to detect evidence of any of the 
following:

[[Page 270]]

    (1) Deterioration, malfunctions, or improper operation of 
overtopping control systems;
    (2) Sudden drops in the level of the impoundment's contents; and
    (3) Severe erosion or other signs of deterioration in dikes or other 
containment devices.
    (c) Prior to the issuance of a permit, and after any extended period 
of time (at least six months) during which the impoundment was not in 
service, the owner or operator must obtain a certification from a 
qualified engineer that the impoundment's dike, including that portion 
of any dike which provides freeboard, has structural integrity. The 
certification must establish, in particular, that the dike:
    (1) Will withstand the stress of the pressure exerted by the types 
and amounts of wastes to be placed in the impoundment; and
    (2) Will not fail due to scouring or piping, without dependence on 
any liner system included in the surface impoundment construction.
    (d)(1) An owner or operator required to have a leak detection system 
under Sec. 264.221 (c) or (d) must record the amount of liquids removed 
from each leak detection system sump at least once each week during the 
active life and closure period.
    (2) After the final cover is installed, the amount of liquids 
removed from each leak detection system sump must be recorded at least 
monthly. If the liquid level in the sump stays below the pump operating 
level for two consecutive months, the amount of liquids in the sumps 
must be recorded at least quarterly. If the liquid level in the sump 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive quarters, the 
amount of liquids in the sumps must be recorded at least semi-annually. 
If at any time during the post-closure care period the pump operating 
level is exceeded at units on quarterly or semi-annual recording 
schedules, the owner or operator must return to monthly recording of 
amounts of liquids removed from each sump until the liquid level again 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive months.
    (3) ``Pump operating level'' is a liquid level proposed by the owner 
or operator and approved by the Regional Administrator based on pump 
activation level, sump dimensions, and level that avoids backup into the 
drainage layer and minimizes head in the sump.
[47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 50 
FR 28748, July 15, 1985; 57 FR 3488, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.227  Emergency repairs; contingency plans.

    (a) A surface impoundment must be removed from service in accordance 
with paragraph (b) of this section when:
    (1) The level of liquids in the impoundment suddenly drops and the 
drop is not known to be caused by changes in the flows into or out of 
the impoundment; or
    (2) The dike leaks.
    (b) When a surface impoundment must be removed from service as 
required by paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Immediately shut off the flow or stop the addition of wastes 
into the impoundment;
    (2) Immediately contain any surface leakage which has occurred or is 
occurring;
    (3) Immediately stop the leak;
    (4) Take any other necessary steps to stop or prevent catastrophic 
failure;
    (5) If a leak cannot be stopped by any other means, empty the 
impoundment; and
    (6) Notify the Regional Administrator of the problem in writing 
within seven days after detecting the problem.
    (c) As part of the contingency plan required in subpart D of this 
part, the owner or operator must specify a procedure for complying with 
the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.
    (d) No surface impoundment that has been removed from service in 
accordance with the requirements of this section may be restored to 
service unless the portion of the impoundment which was failing is 
repaired and the following steps are taken:
    (1) If the impoundment was removed from service as the result of 
actual or imminent dike failure, the dike's structural integrity must be 
recertified in accordance with Sec. 264.226(c).
    (2) If the impoundment was removed from service as the result of a 
sudden drop in the liquid level, then:

[[Page 271]]

    (i) For any existing portion of the impoundment, a liner must be 
installed in compliance with Sec. 264.221(a); and
    (ii) For any other portion of the impoundment, the repaired liner 
system must be certified by a qualified engineer as meeting the design 
specifications approved in the permit.
    (e) A surface impoundment that has been removed from service in 
accordance with the requirements of this section and that is not being 
repaired must be closed in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 264.228.
[47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 28748, July 15, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.228  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Remove or decontaminate all waste residues, contaminated 
containment system components (liners, etc.), contaminated subsoils, and 
structures and equipment contaminated with waste and leachate, and 
manage them as hazardous waste unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this chapter 
applies; or
    (2)(i) Eliminate free liquids by removing liquid wastes or 
solidifying the remaining wastes and waste residues;
    (ii) Stabilize remaining wastes to a bearing capacity sufficient to 
support final cover; and
    (iii) Cover the surface impoundment with a final cover designed and 
constructed to:
    (A) Provide long-term minimization of the migration of liquids 
through the closed impoundment;
    (B) Function with minimum maintenance;
    (C) Promote drainage and minimize erosion or abrasion of the final 
cover;
    (D) Accommodate settling and subsidence so that the cover's 
integrity is maintained; and
    (E) Have a permeability less than or equal to the permeability of 
any bottom liner system or natural subsoils present.
    (b) If some waste residues or contaminated materials are left in 
place at final closure, the owner or operator must comply with all post-
closure requirements contained in Secs. 264.117 through 264.120, 
including maintenance and monitoring throughout the post- closure care 
period (specified in the permit under Sec. 264.117). The owner or 
operator must:
    (1) Maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the final cover, 
including making repairs to the cap as necessary to correct the effects 
of settling, subsidence, erosion, or other events;
    (2) Maintain and monitor the leak detection system in accordance 
with Secs. 264.221(c)(2)(iv) and (3) and 264.226(d), and comply with all 
other applicable leak detection system requirements of this part;
    (3) Maintain and monitor the ground-water monitoring system and 
comply with all other applicable requirements of subpart F of this part; 
and
    (4) Prevent run-on and run-off from eroding or otherwise damaging 
the final cover.
    (c)(1) If an owner or operator plans to close a surface impoundment 
in accordance with paragraph (a)(1) of this section, and the impoundment 
does not comply with the liner requirements of Sec. 264.221(a) and is 
not exempt from them in accordance with Sec. 264.221(b), then:
    (i) The closure plan for the impoundment under Sec. 264.112 must 
include both a plan for complying with paragraph (a)(1) of this section 
and a contingent plan for complying with paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section in case not all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed 
at closure; and
    (ii) The owner or operator must prepare a contingent post-closure 
plan under Sec. 264.118 for complying with paragraph (b) of this section 
in case not all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at 
closure.
    (2) The cost estimates calculated under Secs. 264.142 and 264.144 
for closure and post-closure care of an impoundment subject to this 
paragraph must include the cost of complying with the contingent closure 
plan and the contingent post-closure plan, but are not required to 
include the cost of expected closure under paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section.
[47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 28748, July 15, 1985; 
57 FR 3488, Jan. 29, 1992]

[[Page 272]]


<R05>
Sec. 264.229  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a surface 
impoundment, unless the waste and impoundment satisfy all applicable 
requirements of 40 CFR part 268, and:
    (a) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately 
after placement in the impoundment so that:
    (1) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no 
longer meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under 
Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (2) Section 264.17(b) is complied with; or
    (b) The waste is managed in such a way that it is protected from any 
material or conditions which may cause it to ignite or react; or
    (c) The surface impoundment is used solely for emergencies.
[47 FR 32357, July 26, 1982, as amended at 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 264.230  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V of this part for examples) must not be placed in the same 
surface impoundment, unless Sec. 264.17(b) is complied with.


<R05>
Sec. 264.231  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27.

    (a) Hazardous Wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27 must not 
be placed in a surface impoundment unless the owner or operator operates 
the surface impoundment in accordance with a management plan for these 
wastes that is approved by the Regional Administrator pursuant to the 
standards set out in this paragraph, and in accord with all other 
applicable requirements of this part. The factors to be considered are:
    (1) The volume, physical, and chemical characteristics of the 
wastes, including their potential to migrate through soil or to 
volatilize or escape into the atmosphere;
    (2) The attenuative properties of underlying and surrounding soils 
or other materials;
    (3) The mobilizing properties of other materials co-disposed with 
these wastes; and
    (4) The effectiveness of additional treatment, design, or monitoring 
techniques.
    (b) The Regional Administrator may determine that additional design, 
operating, and monitoring requirements are necessary for surface 
impoundments managing hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and 
FO27 in order to reduce the possibility of migration of these wastes to 
ground water, surface water, or air so as to protect human health and 
the environment.
[50 FR 2004, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.232  Air emission standards.

    The owner or operator shall manage all hazardous waste placed in a 
surface impoundment in accordance with the applicable requirements of 
subparts BB and CC of this part.
[61 FR 59950, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R04>
                         Subpart L--Waste Piles

    Source: 47 FR 32359, July 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.250  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that store or treat hazardous waste in piles, except as 
Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.
    (b) The regulations in this subpart do not apply to owners or 
operators of waste piles that are closed with wastes left in place. Such 
waste piles are subject to regulation under subpart N of this part 
(Landfills).
    (c) The owner or operator of any waste pile that is inside or under 
a structure that provides protection from precipitation so that neither 
run-off nor leachate is generated is not subject to regulation under 
Sec. 264.251 or under subpart F of this part, provided that:
    (1) Liquids or materials containing free liquids are not placed in 
the pile;
    (2) The pile is protected from surface water run-on by the structure 
or in some other manner;

[[Page 273]]

    (3) The pile is designed and operated to control dispersal of the 
waste by wind, where necessary, by means other than wetting; and
    (4) The pile will not generate leachate through decomposition or 
other reactions.


<R05>
Sec. 264.251  Design and operating requirements.

    (a) A waste pile (except for an existing portion of a waste pile) 
must have:
    (1) A liner that is designed, constructed, and installed to prevent 
any migration of wastes out of the pile into the adjacent subsurface 
soil or ground water or surface water at any time during the active life 
(including the closure period) of the waste pile. The liner may be 
constructed of materials that may allow waste to migrate into the liner 
itself (but not into the adjacent subsurface soil or ground water or 
surface water) during the active life of the facility. The liner must 
be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that have appropriate chemical 
properties and sufficient strength and thickness to prevent failure due 
to pressure gradients (including static head and external hydrogeologic 
forces), physical contact with the waste or leachate to which they are 
exposed, climatic conditions, the stress of installation, and the stress 
of daily operation;
    (ii) Placed upon a foundation or base capable of providing support 
to the liner and resistance to pressure gradients above and below the 
liner to prevent failure of the liner due to settlement, compression, or 
uplift; and
    (iii) Installed to cover all surrounding earth likely to be in 
contact with the waste or leachate; and
    (2) A leachate collection and removal system immediately above the 
liner that is designed, constructed, maintained, and operated to collect 
and remove leachate from the pile. The Regional Administrator will 
specify design and operating conditions in the permit to ensure that the 
leachate depth over the liner does not exceed 30 cm (one foot). The 
leachate collection and removal system must be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that are:
    (A) Chemically resistent to the waste managed in the pile and the 
leachate expected to be generated; and
    (B) Of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent collapse under 
the pressures exerted by overlaying wastes, waste cover materials, and 
by any equipment used at the pile; and
    (ii) Designed and operated to function without clogging through the 
scheduled closure of the waste pile.
    (b) The owner or operator will be exempted from the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section, if the Regional Administrator finds, 
based on a demonstration by the owner or operator, that alternate design 
and operating practices, together with location characteristics, will 
prevent the migration of any hazardous constituents (see Sec. 264.93) 
into the ground water or surface water at any future time. In deciding 
whether to grant an exemption, the Regional Administrator will consider:
    (1) The nature and quantity of the wastes;
    (2) The proposed alternate design and operation;
    (3) The hydrogeologic setting of the facility, including attenuative 
capacity and thickness of the liners and soils present between the pile 
and ground water or surface water; and
    (4) All other factors which would influence the quality and mobility 
of the leachate produced and the potential for it to migrate to ground 
water or surface water.
    (c) The owner or operator of each new waste pile unit on which 
construction commences after January 29, 1992, each lateral expansion of 
a waste pile unit on which construction commences after July 29, 1992, 
and each replacement of an existing waste pile unit that is to commence 
reuse after July 29, 1992 must install two or more liners and a leachate 
collection and removal system above and between such liners. 
``Construction commences'' is as defined in Sec. 260.10 under ``existing 
facility''.
    (1)(i) The liner system must include:
    (A) A top liner designed and constructed of materials (e.g., a 
geomembrane) to prevent the migration of hazardous constituents into 
such liner during the active life and post-closure care period; and
    (B) A composite bottom liner, consisting of at least two components. 
The upper component must be designed and

[[Page 274]]

constructed of materials (e.g., a geomembrane) to prevent the migration 
of hazardous constituents into this component during the active life and 
post-closure care period. The lower component must be designed and 
constructed of materials to minimize the migration of hazardous 
constituents if a breach in the upper component were to occur. The lower 
component must be constructed of at least 3 feet (91 cm) of compacted 
soil material with a hydraulic conductivity of no more than 
1 x 10<SUP>-7</SUP> cm/sec.
    (ii) The liners must comply with paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (ii), and 
(iii) of this section.
    (2) The leachate collection and removal system immediately above the 
top liner must be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to 
collect and remove leachate from the waste pile during the active life 
and post-closure care period. The Regional Administrator will specify 
design and operating conditions in the permit to ensure that the 
leachate depth over the liner does not exceed 30 cm (one foot). The 
leachate collection and removal system must comply with paragraphs 
(c)(3)(iii) and (iv) of this section.
    (3) The leachate collection and removal system between the liners, 
and immediately above the bottom composite liner in the case of multiple 
leachate collection and removal systems, is also a leak detection 
system. This leak detection system must be capable of detecting, 
collecting, and removing leaks of hazardous constituents at the earliest 
practicable time through all areas of the top liner likely to be exposed 
to waste or leachate during the active life and post-closure care 
period. The requirements for a leak detection system in this paragraph 
are satisfied by installation of a system that is, at a minimum:
    (i) Constructed with a bottom slope of one percent or more;
    (ii) Constructed of granular drainage materials with a hydraulic 
conductivity of 1 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP> cm/sec or more and a thickness of 12 
inches (30.5 cm) or more; or constructed of synthetic or geonet drainage 
materials with a transmissivity of 3 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> m\2\/sec or more:
    (iii) Constructed of materials that are chemically resistant to the 
waste managed in the waste pile and the leachate expected to be 
generated, and of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent collapse 
under the pressures exerted by overlying wastes, waste cover materials, 
and equipment used at the waste pile;
    (iv) Designed and operated to minimize clogging during the active 
life and post-closure care period; and
    (v) Constructed with sumps and liquid removal methods (e.g., pumps) 
of sufficient size to collect and remove liquids from the sump and 
prevent liquids from backing up into the drainage layer. Each unit must 
have its own sump(s). The design of each sump and removal system must 
provide a method for measuring and recording the volume of liquids 
present in the sump and of liquids removed.
    (4) The owner or operator shall collect and remove pumpable liquids 
in the leak detection system sumps to minimize the head on the bottom 
liner.
    (5) The owner or operator of a leak detection system that is not 
located completely above the seasonal high water table must demonstrate 
that the operation of the leak detection system will not be adversely 
affected by the presence of ground water.
    (d) The Regional Administrator may approve alternative design or 
operating practices to those specified in paragraph (c) of this section 
if the owner or operator demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that 
such design and operating practices, together with location 
characteristics:
    (1) Will prevent the migration of any hazardous constituent into the 
ground water or surface water at least as effectively as the liners and 
leachate collection and removal systems specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section; and
    (2) Will allow detection of leaks of hazardous constituents through 
the top liner at least as effectively.
    (e) Paragraph (c) of this section does not apply to monofills that 
are granted a waiver by the Regional Administrator in accordance with 
Sec. 264.221(e).
    (f) The owner or operator of any replacement waste pile unit is 
exempt from paragraph (c) of this section if:

[[Page 275]]

    (1) The existing unit was constructed in compliance with the design 
standards of section 3004(o)(1)(A)(i) and (o)(5) of the Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act; and
    (2) There is no reason to believe that the liner is not functioning 
as designed.
    (g) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
active portion of the pile during peak discharge from at least a 25-year 
storm.
    (h) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-off management system to collect and control at least the 
water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-year storm.
    (i) Collection and holding facilities (e.g., tanks or basins) 
associated with run-on and run-off control systems must be emptied or 
otherwise managed expeditiously after storms to maintain design capacity 
of the system.
    (j) If the pile contains any particulate matter which may be subject 
to wind dispersal, the owner or operator must cover or otherwise manage 
the pile to control wind dispersal.
    (k) The Regional Administrator will specify in the permit all design 
and operating practices that are necessary to ensure that the 
requirements of this section are satisfied.
[47 FR 32359, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 57 
FR 3488, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.252  Action leakage rate.

    (a) The Regional Administrator shall approve an action leakage rate 
for surface impoundment units subject to Sec. 264.251(c) or (d). The 
action leakage rate is the maximum design flow rate that the leak 
detection system (LDS) can remove without the fluid head on the bottom 
liner exceeding 1 foot. The action leakage rate must include an adequate 
safety margin to allow for uncertainties in the design (e.g., slope, 
hydraulic conductivity, thickness of drainage material), construction, 
operation, and location of the LDS, waste and leachate characteristics, 
likelihood and amounts of other sources of liquids in the LDS, and 
proposed response actions (e.g., the action leakage rate must consider 
decreases in the flow capacity of the system over time resulting from 
siltation and clogging, rib layover and creep of synthetic components of 
the system, overburden pressures, etc.).
    (b) To determine if the action leakage rate has been exceeded, the 
owner or operator must convert the weekly flow rate from the monitoring 
data obtained under Sec. 264.254(c), to an average daily flow rate 
(gallons per acre per day) for each sump. Unless the Regional 
Administrator approves a different calculation, the average daily flow 
rate for each sump must be calculated weekly during the active life and 
closure period.
[57 FR 3489, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.253  Response actions.

    (a) The owner or operator of waste pile units subject to 
Sec. 264.251 (c) or (d) must have an approved response action plan 
before receipt of waste. The response action plan must set forth the 
actions to be taken if the action leakage rate has been exceeded. At a 
minimum, the response action plan must describe the actions specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) If the flow rate into the leak detection system exceeds the 
action leakage rate for any sump, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing of the exceedance 
within 7 days of the determination;
    (2) Submit a preliminary written assessment to the Regional 
Administrator within 14 days of the determination, as to the amount of 
liquids, likely sources of liquids, possible location, size, and cause 
of any leaks, and short-term actions taken and planned;
    (3) Determine to the extent practicable the location, size, and 
cause of any leak;
    (4) Determine whether waste receipt should cease or be curtailed, 
whether any waste should be removed from the unit for inspection, 
repairs, or controls, and whether or not the unit should be closed;
    (5) Determine any other short-term and long-term actions to be taken 
to mitigate or stop any leaks; and
    (6) Within 30 days after the notification that the action leakage 
rate has

[[Page 276]]

been exceeded, submit to the Regional Administrator the results of the 
analyses specified in paragraphs (b) (3), (4), and (5) of this section, 
the results of actions taken, and actions planned. Monthly thereafter, 
as long as the flow rate in the leak detection system exceeds the action 
leakage rate, the owner or operator must submit to the Regional 
Administrator a report summarizing the results of any remedial actions 
taken and actions planned.
    (c) To make the leak and/or remediation determinations in paragraphs 
(b) (3), (4), and (5) of this section, the owner or operator must:
    (1)(i) Assess the source of liquids and amounts of liquids by 
source,
    (ii) Conduct a fingerprint, hazardous constituent, or other analyses 
of the liquids in the leak detection system to identify the source of 
liquids and possible location of any leaks, and the hazard and mobility 
of the liquid; and
    (iii) Assess the seriousness of any leaks in terms of potential for 
escaping into the environment; or
    (2) Document why such assessments are not needed.
[57 FR 3489, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.254  Monitoring and inspection.

    (a) During construction or installation, liners (except in the case 
of existing portions of piles exempt from Sec. 264.251(a)) and cover 
systems (e.g., membranes, sheets, or coatings) must be inspected for 
uniformity, damage, and imperfections (e.g., holes, cracks, thin spots, 
or foreign materials). Immediately after construction or installation:
    (1) Synthetic liners and covers must be inspected to ensure tight 
seams and joints and the absence of tears, punctures, or blisters; and
    (2) Soil-based and admixed liners and covers must be inspected for 
imperfections including lenses, cracks, channels, root holes, or other 
structural non-uniformities that may cause an increase in the 
permeability of the liner or cover.
    (b) While a waste pile is in operation, it must be inspected weekly 
and after storms to detect evidence of any of the following:
    (1) Deterioration, malfunctions, or improper operation of run-on and 
run-off control systems;
    (2) Proper functioning of wind dispersal control systems, where 
present; and
    (3) The presence of leachate in and proper functioning of leachate 
collection and removal systems, where present.
    (c) An owner or operator required to have a leak detection system 
under Sec. 264.251(c) must record the amount of liquids removed from 
each leak detection system sump at least once each week during the 
active life and closure period.
[47 FR 32359, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 50 
FR 28748, July 15, 1985; 57 FR 3489, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.255  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.256  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a waste pile 
unless the waste and waste pile satisfy all applicable requirements of 
40 CFR part 268, and:
    (a) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately 
after placement in the pile so that:
    (1) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no 
longer meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under 
Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (2) Section 264.17(b) is complied with; or
    (b) The waste is managed in such a way that it is protected from any 
material or conditions which may cause it to ignite or react.
[47 FR 32359, July 26, 1982, as amended at 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 264.257  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    (a) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V of this part for examples) must not be placed in the same 
pile, unless Sec. 264.17(b) is complied with.
    (b) A pile of hazardous waste that is incompatible with any waste or 
other material stored nearby in containers, other piles, open tanks, or 
surface impoundments must be separated from the other materials, or 
protected from

[[Page 277]]

them by means of a dike, berm, wall, or other device.
    (c) Hazardous waste must not be piled on the same base where 
incompatible wastes or materials were previously piled, unless the base 
has been decontaminated sufficiently to ensure compliance with 
Sec. 264.17(b).


<R05>
Sec. 264.258  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure, the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate 
all waste residues, contaminated containment system components (liners, 
etc.), contaminated subsoils, and structures and equipment contaminated 
with waste and leachate, and manage them as hazardous waste unless 
Sec. 261.3(d) of this chapter applies.
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed or decontaminated, 
he must close the facility and perform post-closure care in accordance 
with the closure and post-closure care requirements that apply to 
landfills (Sec. 264.310).
    (c)(1) The owner or operator of a waste pile that does not comply 
with the liner requirements of Sec. 264.251(a)(1) and is not exempt from 
them in accordance with Sec. 264.250(c) or Sec. 264.251(b), must:
    (i) Include in the closure plan for the pile under Sec. 264.112 both 
a plan for complying with paragraph (a) of this section and a contingent 
plan for complying with paragraph (b) of this section in case not all 
contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at closure; and
    (ii) Prepare a contingent post-closure plan under Sec. 264.118 for 
complying with paragraph (b) of this section in case not all 
contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at closure.
    (2) The cost estimates calculated under Secs. 264.142 and 264.144 
for closure and post-closure care of a pile subject to this paragraph 
must include the cost of complying with the contingent closure plan and 
the contingent post-closure plan, but are not required to include the 
cost of expected closure under paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 264.259  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27.

    (a) Hazardous Wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27 must not 
be placed in waste piles that are not enclosed (as defined in 
Sec. 264.250(c)) unless the owner or operator operates the waste pile in 
accordance with a management plan for these wastes that is approved by 
the Regional Administrator pursuant to the standards set out in this 
paragraph, and in accord with all other applicable requirements of this 
part. The factors to be considered are:
    (1) The volume, physical, and chemical characteristics of the 
wastes, including their potential to migrate through soil or to 
volatilize or escape into the atmosphere;
    (2) The attenuative properties of underlying and surrounding soils 
or other materials;
    (3) The mobilizing properties of other materials co-disposed with 
these wastes; and
    (4) The effectiveness of additional treatment, design, or monitoring 
techniques.
    (b) The Regional Administrator may determine that additional design, 
operating, and monitoring requirements are necessary for piles managing 
hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and, FO27 in order to 
reduce the possibility of migration of these wastes to ground water, 
surface water, or air so as to protect human health and the environment.
[50 FR 2004, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R04>
                        Subpart M--Land Treatment

    Source: 47 FR 32361, July 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.270  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that treat or dispose of hazardous waste in land treatment 
units, except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.

[[Page 278]]


<R05>
Sec. 264.271  Treatment program.

    (a) An owner or operator subject to this subpart must establish a 
land treatment program that is designed to ensure that hazardous 
constituents placed in or on the treatment zone are degraded, 
transformed, or immobilized within the treatment zone. The Regional 
Administrator will specify in the facility permit the elements of the 
treatment program, including:
    (1) The wastes that are capable of being treated at the unit based 
on a demonstration under Sec. 264.272;
    (2) Design measures and operating practices necessary to maximize 
the success of degradation, transformation, and immobilization processes 
in the treatment zone in accordance with Sec. 264.273(a); and
    (3) Unsaturated zone monitoring provisions meeting the requirements 
of Sec. 264.278.
    (b) The Regional Administrator will specify in the facility permit 
the hazardous constituents that must be degraded, transformed, or 
immobilized under this subpart. Hazardous constituents are constituents 
identified in appendix VIII of part 261 of this chapter that are 
reasonably expected to be in, or derived from, waste placed in or on the 
treatment zone.
    (c) The Regional Administrator will specify the vertical and 
horizontal dimensions of the treatment zone in the facility permit. The 
treatment zone is the portion of the unsaturated zone below and 
including the land surface in which the owner or operator intends to 
maintain the conditions necessary for effective degradation, 
transformation, or immobilization of hazardous constituents. The maximum 
depth of the treatment zone must be:
    (1) No more than 1.5 meters (5 feet) from the initial soil surface; 
and
    (2) More than 1 meter (3 feet) above the seasonal high water table.
[47 FR 32361, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.272  Treatment demonstration.

    (a) For each waste that will be applied to the treatment zone, the 
owner or operator must demonstrate, prior to application of the waste, 
that hazardous constituents in the waste can be completely degraded, 
transformed, or immobilized in the treatment zone.
    (b) In making this demonstration, the owner or operator may use 
field tests, laboratory analyses, available data, or, in the case of 
existing units, operating data. If the owner or operator intends to 
conduct field tests or laboratory analyses in order to make the 
demonstration required under paragraph (a) of this section, he must 
obtain a treatment or disposal permit under Sec. 270.63. The Regional 
Administrator will specify in this permit the testing, analytical, 
design, and operating requirements (including the duration of the tests 
and analyses, and, in the case of field tests, the horizontal and 
vertical dimensions of the treatment zone, monitoring procedures, 
closure and clean-up activities) necessary to meet the requirements in 
paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) Any field test or laboratory analysis conducted in order to make 
a demonstration under paragraph (a) of this section must:
    (1) Accurately simulate the characteristics and operating conditions 
for the proposed land treatment unit including:
    (i) The characteristics of the waste (including the presence of 
appendix VIII of part 261 of this chapter constituents);
    (ii) The climate in the area;
    (iii) The topography of the surrounding area;
    (iv) The characteristics of the soil in the treatment zone 
(including depth); and
    (v) The operating practices to be used at the unit.
    (2) Be likely to show that hazardous constituents in the waste to be 
tested will be completely degraded, transformed, or immobilized in the 
treatment zone of the proposed land treatment unit; and
    (3) Be conducted in a manner that protects human health and the 
environment considering:
    (i) The characteristics of the waste to be tested;
    (ii) The operating and monitoring measures taken during the course 
of the test;
    (iii) The duration of the test;

[[Page 279]]

    (iv) The volume of waste used in the test;
    (v) In the case of field tests, the potential for migration of 
hazardous constituents to ground water or surface water.
[47 FR 32361, July 26, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 14294, Apr. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 264.273  Design and operating requirements.

    The Regional Administrator will specify in the facility permit how 
the owner or operator will design, construct, operate, and maintain the 
land treatment unit in compliance with this section.
    (a) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain the unit to maximize the degradation, transformation, and 
immobilization of hazardous constituents in the treatment zone. The 
owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and maintain the unit 
in accord with all design and operating conditions that were used in the 
treatment demonstration under Sec. 264.272. At a minimum, the Regional 
Administrator will specify the following in the facility permit:
    (1) The rate and method of waste application to the treatment zone;
    (2) Measures to control soil pH;
    (3) Measures to enhance microbial or chemical reactions (e.g., 
fertilization, tilling); and
    (4) Measures to control the moisture content of the treatment zone.
    (b) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain the treatment zone to minimize run-off of hazardous 
constituents during the active life of the land treatment unit.
    (c) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
treatment zone during peak discharge from at least a 25-year storm.
    (d) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-off management system to collect and control at least the 
water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-year storm.
    (e) Collection and holding facilities (e.g., tanks or basins) 
associated with run-on and run-off control systems must be emptied or 
otherwise managed expeditiously after storms to maintain the design 
capacity of the system.
    (f) If the treatment zone contains particulate matter which may be 
subject to wind dispersal, the owner or operator must manage the unit to 
control wind dispersal.
    (g) The owner or operator must inspect the unit weekly and after 
storms to detect evidence of:
    (1) Deterioration, malfunctions, or improper operation of run-on and 
run-off control systems; and
    (2) Improper functioning of wind dispersal control measures.
[47 FR 32361, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Secs. 264.274--264.275  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.276  Food-chain crops.

    The Regional Administrator may allow the growth of food-chain crops 
in or on the treatment zone only if the owner or operator satisfies the 
conditions of this section. The Regional Administrator will specify in 
the facility permit the specific food-chain crops which may be grown.
    (a)(1) The owner or operator must demonstrate that there is no 
substantial risk to human health caused by the growth of such crops in 
or on the treatment zone by demonstrating, prior to the planting of such 
crops, that hazardous constituents other than cadmium:
    (i) Will not be transferred to the food or feed portions of the crop 
by plant uptake or direct contact, and will not otherwise be ingested by 
food-chain animals (e.g., by grazing); or
    (ii) Will not occur in greater concentrations in or on the food or 
feed portions of crops grown on the treatment zone than in or on 
identical portions of the same crops grown on untreated soils under 
similar conditions in the same region.
    (2) The owner or operator must make the demonstration required under 
this paragraph prior to the planting of crops at the facility for all 
constituents identified in appendix VIII of part 261 of this chapter 
that are reasonably expected to be in, or derived from, waste placed in 
or on the treatment zone.

[[Page 280]]

    (3) In making a demonstration under this paragraph, the owner or 
operator may use field tests, greenhouse studies, available data, or, in 
the case of existing units, operating data, and must:
    (i) Base the demonstration on conditions similar to those present in 
the treatment zone, including soil characteristics (e.g., pH, cation 
exchange capacity), specific wastes, application rates, application 
methods, and crops to be grown; and
    (ii) Describe the procedures used in conducting any tests, including 
the sample selection criteria, sample size, analytical methods, and 
statistical procedures.
    (4) If the owner or operator intends to conduct field tests or 
greenhouse studies in order to make the demonstration required under 
this paragraph, he must obtain a permit for conducting such activities.
    (b) The owner or operator must comply with the following conditions 
if cadmium is contained in wastes applied to the treatment zone:
    (1)(i) The pH of the waste and soil mixture must be 6.5 or greater 
at the time of each waste application, except for waste containing 
cadmium at concentrations of 2 mg/kg (dry weight) or less;
    (ii) The annual application of cadmium from waste must not exceed 
0.5 kilograms per hectare (kg/ha) on land used for production of 
tobacco, leafy vegetables, or root crops grown for human consumption. 
For other food-chain crops, the annual cadmium application rate must not 
exceed:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Annual Cd
                                                             application
                                                                 rate
                        Time period                           (kilograms
                                                                 per
                                                               hectare)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Present to June 30, 1984...................................        2.0
July 1, 1984 to December 31, 1986..........................        1.25
Beginning January 1, 1987..................................        0.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) The cumulative application of cadmium from waste must not 
exceed 5 kg/ha if the waste and soil mixture has a pH of less than 6.5; 
and
    (iv) If the waste and soil mixture has a pH of 6.5 or greater or is 
maintained at a pH of 6.5 or greater during crop growth, the cumulative 
application of cadmium from waste must not exceed: 5 kg/ha if soil 
cation exchange capacity (CEC) is less than 5 meq/100g; 10 kg/ha if soil 
CEC is 5-15 meq/100g; and 20 kg/ha if soil CEC is greater than 15 meq/
100g; or
    (2)(i) Animal feed must be the only food-chain crop produced;
    (ii) The pH of the waste and soil mixture must be 6.5 or greater at 
the time of waste application or at the time the crop is planted, 
whichever occurs later, and this pH level must be maintained whenever 
food-chain crops are grown;
    (iii) There must be an operating plan which demonstrates how the 
animal feed will be distributed to preclude ingestion by humans. The 
operating plan must describe the measures to be taken to safeguard 
against possible health hazards from cadmium entering the food chain, 
which may result from alternative land uses; and
    (iv) Future property owners must be notified by a stipulation in the 
land record or property deed which states that the property has received 
waste at high cadmium application rates and that food-chain crops must 
not be grown except in compliance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 264.277  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.278  Unsaturated zone monitoring.

    An owner or operator subject to this subpart must establish an 
unsaturated zone monitoring program to discharge the following 
responsibilities:
    (a) The owner or operator must monitor the soil and soil-pore liquid 
to determine whether hazardous constituents migrate out of the treatment 
zone.
    (1) The Regional Administrator will specify the hazardous 
constituents to be monitored in the facility permit. The hazardous 
constituents to be monitored are those specified under Sec. 264.271(b).
    (2) The Regional Administrator may require monitoring for principal 
hazardous constituents (PHCs) in lieu of the constituents specified 
under Sec. 264.271(b). PHCs are hazardous constituents contained in the 
wastes to be applied at the unit that are the most

[[Page 281]]

difficult to treat, considering the combined effects of degradation, 
transformation, and immobilization. The Regional Administrator will 
establish PHCs if he finds, based on waste analyses, treatment 
demonstrations, or other data, that effective degradation, 
transformation, or immobilization of the PHCs will assure treatment at 
at least equivalent levels for the other hazardous constituents in the 
wastes.
    (b) The owner or operator must install an unsaturated zone 
monitoring system that includes soil monitoring using soil cores and 
soil-pore liquid monitoring using devices such as lysimeters. The 
unsaturated zone monitoring system must consist of a sufficient number 
of sampling points at appropriate locations and depths to yield samples 
that:
    (1) Represent the quality of background soil-pore liquid quality and 
the chemical make-up of soil that has not been affected by leakage from 
the treatment zone; and
    (2) Indicate the quality of soil-pore liquid and the chemical make-
up of the soil below the treatment zone.
    (c) The owner or operator must establish a background value for each 
hazardous constituent to be monitored under paragraph (a) of this 
section. The permit will specify the background values for each 
constituent or specify the procedures to be used to calculate the 
background values.
    (1) Background soil values may be based on a one-time sampling at a 
background plot having characteristics similar to those of the treatment 
zone.
    (2) Background soil-pore liquid values must be based on at least 
quarterly sampling for one year at a background plot having 
characteristics similar to those of the treatment zone.
    (3) The owner or operator must express all background values in a 
form necessary for the determination of statistically significant 
increases under paragraph (f) of this section.
    (4) In taking samples used in the determination of all background 
values, the owner or operator must use an unsaturated zone monitoring 
system that complies with paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (d) The owner or operator must conduct soil monitoring and soil-pore 
liquid monitoring immediately below the treatment zone. The Regional 
Administrator will specify the frequency and timing of soil and soil-
pore liquid monitoring in the facility permit after considering the 
frequency, timing, and rate of waste application, and the soil 
permeability. The owner or operator must express the results of soil and 
soil-pore liquid monitoring in a form necessary for the determination of 
statistically significant increases under paragraph (f) of this section.
    (e) The owner or operator must use consistent sampling and analysis 
procedures that are designed to ensure sampling results that provide a 
reliable indication of soil-pore liquid quality and the chemical make-up 
of the soil below the treatment zone. At a minimum, the owner or 
operator must implement procedures and techniques for:
    (1) Sample collection;
    (2) Sample preservation and shipment;
    (3) Analytical procedures; and
    (4) Chain of custody control.
    (f) The owner or operator must determine whether there is a 
statistically significant change over background values for any 
hazardous constituent to be monitored under paragraph (a) of this 
section below the treatment zone each time he conducts soil monitoring 
and soil-pore liquid monitoring under paragraph (d) of this section.
    (1) In determining whether a statistically significant increase has 
occurred, the owner or operator must compare the value of each 
constituent, as determined under paragraph (d) of this section, to the 
background value for that constituent according to the statistical 
procedure specified in the facility permit under this paragraph.
    (2) The owner or operator must determine whether there has been a 
statistically significant increase below the treatment zone within a 
reasonable time period after completion of sampling. The Regional 
Administrator will specify that time period in the facility permit after 
considering the complexity of the statistical test and the availability 
of laboratory facilities to perform the analysis of soil and soil-pore 
liquid samples.
    (3) The owner or operator must determine whether there is a 
statistically

[[Page 282]]

significant increase below the treatment zone using a statistical 
procedure that provides reasonable confidence that migration from the 
treatment zone will be identified. The Regional Administrator will 
specify a statistical procedure in the facility permit that he finds:
    (i) Is appropriate for the distribution of the data used to 
establish background values; and
    (ii) Provides a reasonable balance between the probability of 
falsely identifying migration from the treatment zone and the 
probability of failing to identify real migration from the treatment 
zone.
    (g) If the owner or operator determines, pursuant to paragraph (f) 
of this section, that there is a statistically significant increase of 
hazardous constituents below the treatment zone, he must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator of this finding in writing 
within seven days. The notification must indicate what constituents have 
shown statistically significant increases.
    (2) Within 90 days, submit to the Regional Administrator an 
application for a permit modification to modify the operating practices 
at the facility in order to maximize the success of degradation, 
transformation, or immobilization processes in the treatment zone.
    (h) If the owner or operator determines, pursuant to paragraph (f) 
of this section, that there is a statistically significant increase of 
hazardous constituents below the treatment zone, he may demonstrate that 
a source other than regulated units caused the increase or that the 
increase resulted from an error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation. 
While the owner or operator may make a demonstration under this 
paragraph in addition to, or in lieu of, submitting a permit 
modification application under paragraph (g)(2) of this section, he is 
not relieved of the requirement to submit a permit modification 
application within the time specified in paragraph (g)(2) of this 
section unless the demonstration made under this paragraph successfully 
shows that a source other than regulated units caused the increase or 
that the increase resulted from an error in sampling, analysis, or 
evaluation. In making a demonstration under this paragraph, the owner or 
operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing within seven days 
of determining a statistically significant increase below the treatment 
zone that he intends to make a determination under this paragraph;
    (2) Within 90 days, submit a report to the Regional Administrator 
demonstrating that a source other than the regulated units caused the 
increase or that the increase resulted from error in sampling, analysis, 
or evaluation;
    (3) Within 90 days, submit to the Regional Administrator an 
application for a permit modification to make any appropriate changes to 
the unsaturated zone monitoring program at the facility; and
    (4) Continue to monitor in accordance with the unsaturated zone 
monitoring program established under this section.
[47 FR 32361, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.279  Recordkeeping.

    The owner or operator must include hazardous waste application dates 
and rates in the operating record required under Sec. 264.73.
[47 FR 32361, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.280  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) During the closure period the owner or operator must:
    (1) Continue all operations (including pH control) necessary to 
maximize degradation, transformation, or immobilization of hazardous 
constituents within the treatment zone as required under 
Sec. 264.273(a), except to the extent such measures are inconsistent 
with paragraph (a)(8) of this section.
    (2) Continue all operations in the treatment zone to minimize run-
off of hazardous constituents as required under Sec. 264.273(b);
    (3) Maintain the run-on control system required under 
Sec. 264.273(c);
    (4) Maintain the run-off management system required under 
Sec. 264.273(d);
    (5) Control wind dispersal of hazardous waste if required under 
Sec. 264.273(f);

[[Page 283]]

    (6) Continue to comply with any prohibitions or conditions 
concerning growth of food-chain crops under Sec. 264.276;
    (7) Continue unsaturated zone monitoring in compliance with 
Sec. 264.278, except that soil-pore liquid monitoring may be terminated 
90 days after the last application of waste to the treatment zone; and
    (8) Establish a vegetative cover on the portion of the facility 
being closed at such time that the cover will not substantially impede 
degradation, transformation, or immobilization of hazardous constituents 
in the treatment zone. The vegetative cover must be capable of 
maintaining growth without extensive maintenance.
    (b) For the purpose of complying with Sec. 264.115, when closure is 
completed the owner or operator may submit to the Regional Administrator 
certification by an independent qualified soil scientist, in lieu of an 
independent registered professional engineer, that the facility has been 
closed in accordance with the specifications in the approved closure 
plan.
    (c) During the post-closure care period the owner or operator must:
    (1) Continue all operations (including pH control) necessary to 
enhance degradation and transformation and sustain immobilization of 
hazardous constituents in the treatment zone to the extent that such 
measures are consistent with other post-closure care activities;
    (2) Maintain a vegetative cover over closed portions of the 
facility;
    (3) Maintain the run-on control system required under 
Sec. 264.273(c);
    (4) Maintain the run-off management system required under 
Sec. 264.273(d);
    (5) Control wind dispersal of hazardous waste if required under 
Sec. 264.273(f);
    (6) Continue to comply with any prohibitions or conditions 
concerning growth of food-chain crops under Sec. 264.276; and
    (7) Continue unsaturated zone monitoring in compliance with 
Sec. 264.278, expect that soil-pore liquid monitoring may be terminated 
90 days after the last application of waste to the treatment zone.
    (d) The owner or operator is not subject to regulation under 
paragraphs (a)(8) and (c) of this section if the Regional Administrator 
finds that the level of hazardous constituents in the treatment zone 
soil does not exceed the background value of those constituents by an 
amount that is statistically significant when using the test specified 
in paragraph (d)(3) of this section. The owner or operator may submit 
such a demonstration to the Regional Administrator at any time during 
the closure of post-closure care periods. For the purposes of this 
paragraph:
    (1) The owner or operator must establish background soil values and 
determine whether there is a statistically significant increase over 
those values for all hazardous constituents specified in the facility 
permit under Sec. 264.271 (b).
    (i) Background soil values may be based on a one-time sampling of a 
background plot having characteristics similar to those of the treatment 
zone.
    (ii) The owner or operator must express background values and values 
for hazardous constituents in the treatment zone in a form necessary for 
the determination of statistically significant increases under paragraph 
(d)(3) of this section.
    (2) In taking samples used in the determination of background and 
treatment zone values, the owner or operator must take samples at a 
sufficient number of sampling points and at appropriate locations and 
depths to yield samples that represent the chemical make-up of soil that 
has not been affected by leakage from the treatment zone and the soil 
within the treatment zone, respectively.
    (3) In determining whether a statistically significant increase has 
occurred, the owner or operator must compare the value of each 
constituent in the treatment zone to the background value for that 
constituent using a statistical procedure that provides reasonable 
confidence that constituent presence in the treatment zone will be 
identified. The owner or operator must use a statistical procedure that:
    (i) Is appropriate for the distribution of the data used to 
establish background values; and
    (ii) Provides a reasonable balance between the probability of 
falsely identifying hazardous constituent presence

[[Page 284]]

in the treatment zone and the probability of failing to identify real 
presence in the treatment zone.
    (e) The owner or operator is not subject to regulation under Subpart 
F of this chapter if the Regional Administrator finds that the owner or 
operator satisfies paragraph (d) of this section and if unsaturated zone 
monitoring under Sec. 264.278 indicates that hazardous constituents have 
not migrated beyond the treatment zone during the active life of the 
land treatment unit.


<R05>
Sec. 264.281  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    The owner or operator must not apply ignitable or reactive waste to 
the treatment zone unless the waste and the treatment zone meet all 
applicable requirements of 40 CFR part 268, and:
    (a) The waste is immediately incorporated into the soil so that:
    (1) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no 
longer meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under 
Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (2) Section 264.17(b) is complied with; or
    (b) The waste is managed in such a way that it is protected from any 
material or conditions which may cause it to ignite or react.
[47 FR 32361, July 26, 1982, as amended at 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 264.282  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    The owner or operator must not place incompatible wastes, or 
incompatible wastes and materials (see appendix V of this part for 
examples), in or on the same treatment zone, unless Sec. 264.17(b) is 
complied with.


<R05>
Sec. 264.283  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27.

    (a) Hazardous Wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26 and, FO27 must not 
be placed in a land treatment unit unless the owner or operator operates 
the facility in accordance with a management plan for these wastes that 
is approved by the Regional Administrator pursuant to the standards set 
out in this paragraph, and in accord with all other applicable 
requirements of this part. The factors to be considered are:
    (1) The volume, physical, and chemical characteristics of the 
wastes, including their potential to migrate through soil or to 
volatilize or escape into the atmosphere;
    (2) The attenuative properties of underlying and surrounding soils 
or other materials;
    (3) The mobilizing properties of other materials co-disposed with 
these wastes; and
    (4) The effectiveness of additional treatment, design, or monitoring 
techniques.
    (b) The Regional Administrator may determine that additional design, 
operating, and monitoring requirements are necessary for land treatment 
facilities managing hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and 
FO27 in order to reduce the possibility of migration of these wastes to 
ground water, surface water, or air so as to protect human health and 
the environment.
[50 FR 2004, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R04>
                          Subpart N--Landfills

    Source: 47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.300  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that dispose of hazardous waste in landfills, except as 
Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 264.301  Design and operating requirements.

    (a) Any landfill that is not covered by paragraph (c) of this 
section or Sec. 265.301(a) of this chapter must have a liner system for 
all portions of the landfill (except for existing portions of such 
landfill). The liner system must have:
    (1) A liner that is designed, constructed, and installed to prevent 
any migration of wastes out of the landfill to the adjacent subsurface 
soil or ground water or surface water at anytime during the active life 
(including the closure period) of the landfill. The liner must be 
constructed of materials

[[Page 285]]

that prevent wastes from passing into the liner during the active life 
of the facility. The liner must be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that have appropriate chemical 
properties and sufficient strength and thickness to prevent failure due 
to pressure gradients (including static head and external hydrogeologic 
forces), physical contact with the waste or leachate to which they are 
exposed, climatic conditions, the stress of installation, and the stress 
of daily operation;
    (ii) Placed upon a foundation or base capable of providing support 
to the liner and resistance to pressure gradients above and below the 
liner to prevent failure of the liner due to settlement, compression, or 
uplift; and
    (iii) Installed to cover all surrounding earth likely to be in 
contact with the waste or leachate; and
    (2) A leachate collection and removal system immediately above the 
liner that is designed, constructed, maintained, and operated to collect 
and remove leachate from the landfill. The Regional Administrator will 
specify design and operating conditions in the permit to ensure that the 
leachate depth over the liner does not exceed 30 cm (one foot). The 
leachate collection and removal system must be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that are:
    (A) Chemically resistant to the waste managed in the landfill and 
the leachate expected to be generated; and
    (B) Of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent collapse under 
the pressures exerted by overlying wastes, waste cover materials, and by 
any equipment used at the landfill; and
    (ii) Designed and operated to function without clogging through the 
scheduled closure of the landfill.
    (b) The owner or operator will be exempted from the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section if the Regional Administrator finds, based 
on a demonstration by the owner or operator, that alternative design and 
operating practices, together with location characteristics, will 
prevent the migration of any hazardous constituents (see Sec. 264.93) 
into the ground water or surface water at any future time. In deciding 
whether to grant an exemption, the Regional Administrator will consider:
    (1) The nature and quantity of the wastes;
    (2) The proposed alternate design and operation;
    (3) The hydrogeologic setting of the facility, including the 
attenuative capacity and thickness of the liners and soils present 
between the landfill and ground water or surface water; and
    (4) All other factors which would influence the quality and mobility 
of the leachate produced and the potential for it to migrate to ground 
water or surface water.
    (c) The owner or operator of each new landfill unit on which 
construction commences after January 29, 1992, each lateral expansion of 
a landfill unit on which construction commences after July 29, 1992, and 
each replacement of an existing landfill unit that is to commence reuse 
after July 29, 1992 must install two or more liners and a leachate 
collection and removal system above and between such liners. 
``Construction commences'' is as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter 
under ``existing facility''.
    (1)(i) The liner system must include:
    (A) A top liner designed and constructed of materials (e.g., a 
geomembrane) to prevent the migration of hazardous constituents into 
such liner during the active life and post-closure care period; and
    (B) A composite bottom liner, consisting of at least two components. 
The upper component must be designed and constructed of materials (e.g., 
a geomembrane) to prevent the migration of hazardous constituents into 
this component during the active life and post-closure care period. The 
lower component must be designed and constructed of materials to 
minimize the migration of hazardous constituents if a breach in the 
upper component were to occur. The lower component must be constructed 
of at least 3 feet (91 cm) of compacted soil material with a hydraulic 
conductivity of no more than 1 x 10<SUP>-7</SUP> cm/sec.
    (ii) The liners must comply with paragraphs (a)(1) (i), (ii), and 
(iii) of this section.
    (2) The leachate collection and removal system immediately above the 
top liner must be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to 
collect and remove leachate from the landfill during

[[Page 286]]

the active life and post-closure care period. The Regional Administrator 
will specify design and operating conditions in the permit to ensure 
that the leachate depth over the liner does not exceed 30 cm (one foot). 
The leachate collection and removal system must comply with paragraphs 
(3)(c) (iii) and (iv) of this section.
    (3) The leachate collection and removal system between the liners, 
and immediately above the bottom composite liner in the case of multiple 
leachate collection and removal systems, is also a leak detection 
system. This leak detection system must be capable of detecting, 
collecting, and removing leaks of hazardous constituents at the earliest 
practicable time through all areas of the top liner likely to be exposed 
to waste or leachate during the active life and post-closure care 
period. The requirements for a leak detection system in this paragraph 
are satisfied by installation of a system that is, at a minimum:
    (i) Constructed with a bottom slope of one percent or more;
    (ii) Constructed of granular drainage materials with a hydraulic 
conductivity of 1 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP> cm/sec or more and a thickness of 12 
inches (30.5 cm) or more; or constructed of synthetic or geonet drainage 
materials with a transmissivity of 3 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> m<SUP>2</SUP>/sec 
or more;
    (iii) Constructed of materials that are chemically resistant to the 
waste managed in the landfill and the leachate expected to be generated, 
and of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent collapse under the 
pressures exerted by overlying wastes, waste cover materials, and 
equipment used at the landfill;
    (iv) Designed and operated to minimize clogging during the active 
life and post-closure care period; and
    (v) Constructed with sumps and liquid removal methods (e.g., pumps) 
of sufficient size to collect and remove liquids from the sump and 
prevent liquids from backing up into the drainage layer. Each unit must 
have its own sump(s). The design of each sump and removal system must 
provide a method for measuring and recording the volume of liquids 
present in the sump and of liquids removed.
    (4) The owner or operator shall collect and remove pumpable liquids 
in the leak detection system sumps to minimize the head on the bottom 
liner.
    (5) The owner or operator of a leak detection system that is not 
located completely above the seasonal high water table must demonstrate 
that the operation of the leak detection system will not be adversely 
affected by the presence of ground water.
    (d) The Regional Administrator may approve alternative design or 
operating practices to those specified in paragraph (c) of this section 
if the owner or operator demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that 
such design and operating practices, together with location 
characteristics:
    (1) Will prevent the migration of any hazardous constituent into the 
ground water or surface water at least as effectively as the liners and 
leachate collection and removal systems specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section; and
    (2) Will allow detection of leaks of hazardous constituents through 
the top liner at least as effectively.
    (e) The double liner requirement set forth in paragraph (c) of this 
section may be waived by the Regional Administrator for any monofill, 
if:
    (1) The monofill contains only hazardous wastes from foundry furnace 
emission controls or metal casting molding sand, and such wastes do not 
contain constituents which would render the wastes hazardous for reasons 
other than the Toxicity Characteristic in Sec. 261.24 of this chapter, 
with EPA Hazardous Waste Numbers D004 through D017; and
    (2)(i)(A) The monofill has at least one liner for which there is no 
evidence that such liner is leaking;
    (B) The monofill is located more than one-quarter mile from an 
underground source of drinking water (as that term is defined in 
Sec. 144.3 of this chapter); and
    (C) The monofill is in compliance with generally applicable ground-
water monitoring requirements for facilities with permits under RCRA 
3005(c); or
    (ii) The owner or operator demonstrates that the monofill is 
located, designed and operated so as to assure that there will be no 
migration of any hazardous constituent into ground

[[Page 287]]

water or surface water at any future time.
    (f) The owner or operator of any replacement landfill unit is exempt 
from paragraph (c) of this section if:
    (1) The existing unit was constructed in compliance with the design 
standards of section 3004(o)(1)(A)(i) and (o)(5) of the Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act; and
    (2) There is no reason to believe that the liner is not functioning 
as designed.
    (g) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
active portion of the landfill during peak discharge from at least a 25-
year storm.
    (h) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-off management system to collect and control at least the 
water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-year storm.
    (i) Collection and holding facilities (e.g., tanks or basins) 
associated with run-on and run-off control systems must be emptied or 
otherwise managed expeditiously after storms to maintain design capacity 
of the system.
    (j) If the landfill contains any particulate matter which may be 
subject to wind dispersal, the owner or operator must cover or otherwise 
manage the landfill to control wind dispersal.
    (k) The Regional Administrator will specify in the permit all design 
and operating practices that are necessary to ensure that the 
requirements of this section are satisfied.
    (l) Any permit under RCRA 3005(c) which is issued for a landfill 
located within the State of Alabama shall require the installation of 
two or more liners and a leachate collection system above and between 
such liners, notwithstanding any other provision of RCRA.
[47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 50 
FR 28748, July 15, 1985; 55 FR 11875, Mar. 29, 1990; 57 FR 3489, Jan. 
29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.302  Action leakage rate.

    (a) The Regional Administrator shall approve an action leakage rate 
for surface impoundment units subject to Sec. 264.301(c) or (d). The 
action leakage rate is the maximum design flow rate that the leak 
detection system (LDS) can remove without the fluid head on the bottom 
liner exceeding l foot. The action leakage rate must include an adequate 
safety margin to allow for uncertainties in the design (e.g., slope, 
hydraulic conductivity, thickness of drainage material), construction, 
operation, and location of the LDS, waste and leachate characteristics, 
likelihood and amounts of other sources of liquids in the LDS, and 
proposed response actions (e.g., the action leakage rate must consider 
decreases in the flow capacity of the system over time resulting from 
siltation and clogging, rib layover and creep of synthetic components of 
the system, overburden pressures, etc.).
    (b) To determine if the action leakage rate has been exceeded, the 
owner or operator must convert the weekly or monthly flow rate from the 
monitoring data obtained under Sec. 264.303(c), to an average daily flow 
rate (gallons per acre per day) for each sump. Unless the Regional 
Administrator approves a different calculation, the average daily flow 
rate for each sump must be calculated weekly during the active life and 
closure period, and monthly during the post-closure care period when 
monthly monitoring is required under Sec. 264.303(c).
[57 FR 3490, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.303  Monitoring and inspection.

    (a) During construction or installation, liners (except in the case 
of existing portions of landfills exempt from Sec. 264.301(a)) and cover 
systems (e.g., membranes, sheets, or coatings) must be inspected for 
uniformity, damage, and imperfections (e.g., holes, cracks, thin spots, 
or foreign materials). Immediately after construction or installation:
    (1) Synthetic liners and covers must be inspected to ensure tight 
seams and joints and the absence of tears, punctures, or blisters; and
    (2) Soil-based and admixed liners and covers must be inspected for 
imperfections including lenses, cracks, channels, root holes, or other 
structural non-uniformities that may cause an increase in the 
permeability of the liner or cover.

[[Page 288]]

    (b) While a landfill is in operation, it must be inspected weekly 
and after storms to detect evidence of any of the following:
    (1) Deterioration, malfunctions, or improper operation of run-on and 
run-off control systems;
    (2) Proper functioning of wind dispersal control systems, where 
present; and
    (3) The presence of leachate in and proper functioning of leachate 
collection and removal systems, where present.
    (c)(1) An owner or operator required to have a leak detection system 
under Sec. 264.301(c) or (d) must record the amount of liquids removed 
from each leak detection system sump at least once each week during the 
active life and closure period.
    (2) After the final cover is installed, the amount of liquids 
removed from each leak detection system sump must be recorded at least 
monthly. If the liquid level in the sump stays below the pump operating 
level for two consecutive months, the amount of liquids in the sumps 
must be recorded at least quarterly. If the liquid level in the sump 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive quarters, the 
amount of liquids in the sumps must be recorded at least semi-annually. 
If at any time during the post-closure care period the pump operating 
level is exceeded at units on quarterly or semi-annual recording 
schedules, the owner or operator must return to monthly recording of 
amounts of liquids removed from each sump until the liquid level again 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive months.
    (3) ``Pump operating level'' is a liquid level proposed by the owner 
or operator and approved by the Regional Administrator based on pump 
activation level, sump dimensions, and level that avoids backup into the 
drainage layer and minimizes head in the sump.
[47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 28748, July 15, 1985; 
57 FR 3490, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.304  Response actions.

    (a) The owner or operator of landfill units subject to 
Sec. 264.301(c) or (d) must have an approved response action plan before 
receipt of waste. The response action plan must set forth the actions to 
be taken if the action leakage rate has been exceeded. At a minimum, the 
response action plan must describe the actions specified in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (b) If the flow rate into the leak detection system exceeds the 
action leakage rate for any sump, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing of the exceedence 
within 7 days of the determination;
    (2) Submit a preliminary written assessment to the Regional 
Administrator within 14 days of the determination, as to the amount of 
liquids, likely sources of liquids, possible location, size, and cause 
of any leaks, and short-term actions taken and planned;
    (3) Determine to the extent practicable the location, size, and 
cause of any leak;
    (4) Determine whether waste receipt should cease or be curtailed, 
whether any waste should be removed from the unit for inspection, 
repairs, or controls, and whether or not the unit should be closed;
    (5) Determine any other short-term and longer-term actions to be 
taken to mitigate or stop any leaks; and
    (6) Within 30 days after the notification that the action leakage 
rate has been exceeded, submit to the Regional Administrator the results 
of the analyses specified in paragraphs (b)(3), (4), and (5) of this 
section, the results of actions taken, and actions planned. Monthly 
thereafter, as long as the flow rate in the leak detection system 
exceeds the action leakage rate, the owner or operator must submit to 
the Regional Administrator a report summarizing the results of any 
remedial actions taken and actions planned.
    (c) To make the leak and/or remediation determinations in paragraphs 
(b)(3), (4), and (5) of this section, the owner or operator must:
    (1)(i) Assess the source of liquids and amounts of liquids by 
source,
    (ii) Conduct a fingerprint, hazardous constituent, or other analyses 
of the liquids in the leak detection system to identify the source of 
liquids and possible location of any leaks, and the hazard and mobility 
of the liquid; and

[[Page 289]]

    (iii) Assess the seriousness of any leaks in terms of potential for 
escaping into the environment; or
    (2) Document why such assessments are not needed.
[57 FR 3491, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Secs. 264.305--264.308  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.309  Surveying and recordkeeping.

    The owner or operator of a landfill must maintain the following 
items in the operating record required under Sec. 264.73:
    (a) On a map, the exact location and dimensions, including depth, of 
each cell with respect to permanently surveyed benchmarks; and
    (b) The contents of each cell and the approximate location of each 
hazardous waste type within each cell.
[47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.310  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At final closure of the landfill or upon closure of any cell, 
the owner or operator must cover the landfill or cell with a final cover 
designed and constructed to:
    (1) Provide long-term minimization of migration of liquids through 
the closed landfill;
    (2) Function with minimum maintenance;
    (3) Promote drainage and minimize erosion or abrasion of the cover;
    (4) Accommodate settling and subsidence so that the cover's 
integrity is maintained; and
    (5) Have a permeability less than or equal to the permeability of 
any bottom liner system or natural subsoils present.
    (b) After final closure, the owner or operator must comply with all 
post-closure requirements contained in Secs. 264.117 through 264.120, 
including maintenance and monitoring throughout the post-closure care 
period (specified in the permit under Sec. 264.117). The owner or 
operator must:
    (1) Maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the final cover, 
including making repairs to the cap as necessary to correct the effects 
of settling, subsidence, erosion, or other events;
    (2) Continue to operate the leachate collection and removal system 
until leachate is no longer detected;
    (3) Maintain and monitor the leak detection system in accordance 
with Secs. 264.301(c)(3)(iv) and (4) and 264.303(c), and comply with all 
other applicable leak detection system requirements of this part;
    (4) Maintain and monitor the ground-water monitoring system and 
comply with all other applicable requirements of subpart F of this part;
    (5) Prevent run-on and run-off from eroding or otherwise damaging 
the final cover; and
    (6) Protect and maintain surveyed benchmarks used in complying with 
Sec. 264.309.
[47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 28748, July 15, 1985; 
57 FR 3491, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.311  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.312  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, and in 
Sec. 264.316, ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a 
landfill, unless the waste and landfill meet all applicable requirements 
of part 268, and:
    (1) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no 
longer meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under 
Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (2) Section 264.17(b) is complied with.
    (b) Except for prohibited wastes which remain subject to treatment 
standards in subpart D of part 268, ignitable wastes in containers may 
be landfilled without meeting the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section, provided that the wastes are disposed of in such a way that 
they are protected from any material or conditions which may cause them 
to ignite. At a minimum, ignitable wastes must be disposed of in non-
leaking containers which are carefully handled and placed so as to avoid 
heat, sparks, rupture, or any other condition that might cause ignition 
of the wastes; must be covered daily with soil or other non-combustible 
material to minimize the potential for ignition of the wastes; and must 
not be disposed of in cells that

[[Page 290]]

contain or will contain other wastes which may generate heat sufficient 
to cause ignition of the waste.
[47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, as amended at 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 264.313  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V of this part for examples) must not be placed in the same 
landfill cell, unless Sec. 264.17(b) is complied with.


<R05>
Sec. 264.314  Special requirements for bulk and containerized liquids.

    (a) Bulk or non-containerized liquid waste or waste containing free 
liquids may be placed in a landfill prior to May 8, 1985 only if:
    (1) The landfill has a liner and leachate collection and removal 
system that meet the requirements of Sec. 264.301(a); or
    (2) Before disposal, the liquid waste or waste containing free 
liquids is treated or stabilized, chemically or physically (e.g., by 
mixing with a sorbent solid), so that free liquids are no longer 
present.
    (b) Effective May 8, 1985, the placement of bulk or non-
containerized liquid hazardous waste or hazardous waste containing free 
liquids (whether or not sorbents have been added) in any landfill is 
prohibited.
    (c) To demonstrate the absence or presence of free liquids in either 
a containerized or a bulk waste, the following test must be used: Method 
9095 (Paint Filter Liquids Test) as described in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-
846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of this chapter.
    (d) Containers holding free liquids must not be placed in a landfill 
unless:
    (1) All free-standing liquid:
    (i) Has been removed by decanting, or other methods;
    (ii) Has been mixed with sorbent or solidified so that free-standing 
liquid is no longer observed; or
    (iii) Has been otherwise eliminated; or
    (2) The container is very small, such as an ampule; or
    (3) The container is designed to hold free liquids for use other 
than storage, such as a battery or capacitor; or
    (4) The container is a lab pack as defined in Sec. 264.316 and is 
disposed of in accordance with Sec. 264.316.
    (e) Sorbents used to treat free liquids to be disposed of in 
landfills must be nonbiodegradable. Nonbiodegradable sorbents are: 
materials listed or described in paragraph (e)(1) of this section; 
materials that pass one of the tests in paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section; or materials that are determined by EPA to be nonbiodegradable 
through the part 260 petition process.
    (1) Nonbiodegradable sorbents. (i) Inorganic minerals, other 
inorganic materials, and elemental carbon (e.g., aluminosilicates, 
clays, smectites, Fuller's earth, bentonite, calcium bentonite, 
montmorillonite, calcined montmorillonite, kaolinite, micas (illite), 
vermiculites, zeolites; calcium carbonate (organic free limestone); 
oxides/hydroxides, alumina, lime, silica (sand), diatomaceous earth; 
perlite (volcanic glass); expanded volcanic rock; volcanic ash; cement 
kiln dust; fly ash; rice hull ash; activated charcoal/activated carbon); 
or
    (ii) High molecular weight synthetic polymers (e.g., polyethylene, 
high density polyethylene (HDPE), polypropylene, polystyrene, 
polyurethane, polyacrylate, polynorborene, polyisobutylene, ground 
synthetic rubber, cross-linked allylstyrene and tertiary butyl 
copolymers). This does not include polymers derived from biological 
material or polymers specifically designed to be degradable; or
    (iii) Mixtures of these nonbiodegradable materials.
    (2) Tests for nonbiodegradable sorbents. (i) The sorbent material is 
determined to be nonbiodegradable under ASTM Method G21-70 (1984a)--
Standard Practice for Determining Resistance of Synthetic Polymer 
Materials to Fungi; or
    (ii) The sorbent material is determined to be nonbiodegradable under 
ASTM Method G22-76 (1984b)--Standard Practice for Determining Resistance 
of Plastics to Bacteria; or
    (iii) The sorbent material is determined to be non-biodegradable 
under

[[Page 291]]

OECD test 301B: [CO<INF>2</INF> Evolution (Modified Sturm Test)].
    (f) Effective November 8, 1985, the placement of any liquid which is 
not a hazardous waste in a landfill is prohibited unless the owner or 
operator of such landfill demonstrates to the Regional Administrator, or 
the Regional Administrator determines, that:
    (1) The only reasonably available alternative to the placement in 
such landfill is placement in a landfill or unlined surface impoundment, 
whether or not permitted or operating under interim status, which 
contains, or may reasonably be anticipated to contain, hazardous waste; 
and
    (2) Placement in such owner or operator's landfill will not present 
a risk of contamination of any underground source of drinking water (as 
that term is defined in Sec. 144.3 of this chapter.)
[47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 18374, Apr. 30, 1985; 
50 FR 28748, July 15, 1985; 57 FR 54460, Nov. 18, 1992; 58 FR 46050, 
Aug. 31, 1993; 60 FR 35705, July 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 264.315  Special requirements for containers.

    Unless they are very small, such as an ampule, containers must be 
either:
    (a) At least 90 percent full when placed in the landfill; or
    (b) Crushed, shredded, or similarly reduced in volume to the maximum 
practical extent before burial in the landfill.


<R05>
Sec. 264.316  Disposal of small containers of hazardous waste in overpacked drums (lab packs).

    Small containers of hazardous waste in overpacked drums (lab packs) 
may be placed in a landfill if the following requirements are met:
    (a) Hazardous waste must be packaged in non-leaking inside 
containers. The inside containers must be of a design and constructed of 
a material that will not react dangerously with, be decomposed by, or be 
ignited by the contained waste. Inside containers must be tightly and 
securely sealed. The inside containers must be of the size and type 
specified in the Department of Transportation (DOT) hazardous materials 
regulations (49 CFR parts 173, 178, and 179), if those regulations 
specify a particular inside container for the waste.
    (b) The inside containers must be overpacked in an open head DOT-
specification metal shipping container (49 CFR parts 178 and 179) of no 
more than 416-liter (110 gallon) capacity and surrounded by, at a 
minimum, a sufficient quantity of sorbent material, determined to be 
nonbiodegradable in accordance with Sec. 264.314(e), to completely sorb 
all of the liquid contents of the inside containers. The metal outer 
container must be full after it has been packed with inside containers 
and sorbent material.
    (c) The sorbent material used must not be capable of reacting 
dangerously with, being decomposed by, or being ignited by the contents 
of the inside containers, in accordance with Sec. 264.17(b).
    (d) Incompatible wastes, as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter, 
must not be placed in the same outside container.
    (e) Reactive wastes, other than cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste as 
defined in Sec. 261.23(a)(5) of this chapter, must be treated or 
rendered non-reactive prior to packaging in accordance with paragraphs 
(a) through (d) of this section. Cyanide- and sulfide-bearing reactive 
waste may be packed in accordance with paragraphs (a) through (d) of 
this section without first being treated or rendered non-reactive.
    (f) Such disposal is in compliance with the requirements of part 
268. Persons who incinerate lab packs according to the requirements in 
40 CFR 268.42(c)(1) may use fiber drums in place of metal outer 
containers. Such fiber drums must meet the DOT specifications in 49 CFR 
173.12 and be overpacked according to the requirements in paragraph (b) 
of this section.
[47 FR 32365, July 26, 1982, as amended at 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990; 57 
FR 54460, Nov. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.317  Special requirements for hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27.

    (a) Hazardous Wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27 must not 
be placed in a landfills unless the owner or operator operates the 
landfill in accord with a management plan for these wastes that is 
approved by the Regional Administrator pursuant to the standards set out 
in this paragraph, and in accord with all other applicable

[[Page 292]]

requirements of this part. The factors to be considered are:
    (1) The volume, physical, and chemical characteristics of the 
wastes, including their potential to migrate through the soil or to 
volatilize or escape into the atmosphere;
    (2) The attenuative properties of underlying and surrounding soils 
or other materials;
    (3) The mobilizing properties of other materials co-disposed with 
these wastes; and
    (4) The effectiveness of additional treatment, design, or monitoring 
requirements.
    (b) The Regional Administrator may determine that additional design, 
operating, and monitoring requirements are necessary for landfills 
managing hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, and FO27 in 
order to reduce the possibility of migration of these wastes to ground 
water, surface water, or air so as to protect human health and the 
environment.
[50 FR 2004, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R04>
                         Subpart O--Incinerators


<R05>
Sec. 264.340  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations of this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
hazardous waste incinerators (as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this 
chapter), except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise.
    (b) After consideration of the waste analysis included with part B 
of the permit application, the Regional Administrator, in establishing 
the permit conditions, must exempt the applicant from all requirements 
of this subpart except Sec. 264.341 (Waste analysis) and Sec. 264.351 
(Closure),
    (1) If the Regional Administrator finds that the waste to be burned 
is:
    (i) Listed as a hazardous waste in part 261, subpart D, of this 
chapter solely because it is ignitable (Hazard Code I), corrosive 
(Hazard Code C), or both; or
    (ii) Listed as a hazardous waste in part 261, subpart D, of this 
chapter solely because it is reactive (Hazard Code R) for 
characteristics other than those listed in Sec. 261.23(a) (4) and (5), 
and will not be burned when other hazardous wastes are present in the 
combustion zone; or
    (iii) A hazardous waste solely because it possesses the 
characteristic of ignitability, corrosivity, or both, as determined by 
the test for characteristics of hazardous wastes under part 261, subpart 
C, of this chapter; or
    (iv) A hazardous waste solely because it possesses any of the 
reactivity characteristics described by Sec. 261.23(a) (1), (2), (3), 
(6), (7), and (8) of this chapter, and will not be burned when other 
hazardous wastes are present in the combustion zone; and
    (2) If the waste analysis shows that the waste contains none of the 
hazardous constituents listed in part 261, appendix VIII, of this 
chapter, which would reasonably be expected to be in the waste.
    (c) If the waste to be burned is one which is described by 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this section and contains 
insignificant concentrations of the hazardous constituents listed in 
part 261, appendix VIII, of this chapter, then the Regional 
Administrator may, in establishing permit conditions, exempt the 
applicant from all requirements of this subpart, except Sec. 264.341 
(Waste analysis) and Sec. 264.351 (Closure), after consideration of the 
waste analysis included with part B of the permit application, unless 
the Regional Administrator finds that the waste will pose a threat to 
human health and the environment when burned in an incinerator.
    (d) The owner or operator of an incinerator may conduct trial burns 
subject only to the requirements of Sec. 270.62 of this chapter (Short 
term and incinerator permits).
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 27532, June 24, 1982; 48 
FR 14295, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 FR 665, Jan. 4, 1985; 50 FR 49203, Nov. 29, 
1985; 56 FR 7207, Feb. 21, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 264.341  Waste analysis.

    (a) As a portion of the trial burn plan required by Sec. 270.62 of 
this chapter, or with part B of the permit application, the owner or 
operator must have included an analysis of the waste feed sufficient to 
provide all information required by Sec. 270.62(b) or Sec. 270.19 of 
this chapter. Owners or operators of new

[[Page 293]]

hazardous waste incinerators must provide the information required by 
Sec. 270.62(c) or Sec. 270.19 of this chapter to the greatest extent 
possible.
    (b) Throughout normal operation the owner or operator must conduct 
sufficient waste analysis to verify that waste feed to the incinerator 
is within the physical and chemical composition limits specified in his 
permit (under Sec. 264.345(b)).
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 27532, June 24, 1982; 48 
FR 14295, Apr. 1, 1983; 48 FR 30115, June 30, 1983; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 
1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.342  Principal organic hazardous constituents (POHCs).

    (a) Principal Organic Hazardous Constituents (POHCs) in the waste 
feed must be treated to the extent required by the performance standard 
of Sec. 264.343.
    (b)(1) One or more POHCs will be specified in the facility's permit, 
from among those constituents listed in part 261, appendix VIII of this 
chapter, for each waste feed to be burned. This specification will be 
based on the degree of difficulty of incineration of the organic 
constituents in the waste and on their concentration or mass in the 
waste feed, considering the results of waste analyses and trial burns or 
alternative data submitted with part B of the facility's permit 
application. Organic constituents which represent the greatest degree of 
difficulty of incineration will be those most likely to be designated as 
POHCs. Constituents are more likely to be designated as POHCs if they 
are present in large quantities or concentrations in the waste.
    (2) Trial POHCs will be designated for performance of trial burns in 
accordance with the procedure specified in Sec. 270.62 of this chapter 
for obtaining trial burn permits.
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 48 FR 14295, Apr. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 264.343  Performance standards.

    An incinerator burning hazardous waste must be designed, 
constructed, and maintained so that, when operated in accordance with 
operating requirements specified under Sec. 264.345, it will meet the 
following performance standards:
    (a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, an 
incinerator burning hazardous waste must achieve a destruction and 
removal efficiency (DRE) of 99.99% for each principal organic hazardous 
constituent (POHC) designated (under Sec. 264.342) in its permit for 
each waste feed. DRE is determined for each POHC from the following 
equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.171

where:

W<INF>in</INF>=mass feed rate of one principal organic hazardous 
          constituent (POHC) in the waste stream feeding the incinerator

and

W<INF>out</INF>=mass emission rate of the same POHC present in exhaust 
          emissions prior to release to the atmosphere.

    (2) An incinerator burning hazardous wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, 
FO26, or FO27 must achieve a destruction and removal efficiency (DRE) of 
99.9999% for each principal organic hazardous constituent (POHC) 
designated (under Sec. 264.342) in its permit. This performance must be 
demonstrated on POHCs that are more difficult to incinerate than tetra-, 
penta-, and hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans. DRE is 
determined for each POHC from the equation in Sec. 264.343(a)(1). In 
addition, the owner or operator of the incinerator must notify the 
Regional Administrator of his intent to incinerate hazardous wastes 
FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, or FO27.
    (b) An incinerator burning hazardous waste and producing stack 
emissions of more than 1.8 kilograms per hour (4 pounds per hour) of 
hydrogen chloride (HCl) must control HCl emissions such that the rate of 
emission is no greater than the larger of either 1.8 kilograms per hour 
or 1% of the HCl in the stack gas prior to entering any pollution 
control equipment.
    (c) An incinerator burning hazardous waste must not emit particulate 
matter in excess of 180 milligrams per dry standard cubic meter (0.08 
grains per dry standard cubic foot) when corrected for the amount of 
oxygen in the stack gas according to the formula:


[[Page 294]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.172


Where P<INF>c</INF> is the corrected concentration of particulate 
matter, P<INF>m</INF> is the measured concentration of particulate 
matter, and Y is the measured concentration of oxygen in the stack gas, 
using the Orsat method for oxygen analysis of dry flue gas, presented in 
part 60, appendix A (Method 3), of this chapter. This correction 
procedure is to be used by all hazardous waste incinerators except those 
operating under conditions of oxygen enrichment. For these facilities, 
the Regional Administrator will select an appropriate correction 
procedure, to be specified in the facility permit.
    (d) For purposes of permit enforcement, compliance with the 
operating requirements specified in the permit (under Sec. 264.345) will 
be regarded as compliance with this section. However, evidence that 
compliance with those permit conditions is insufficient to ensure 
compliance with the performance requirements of this section may be 
``information'' justifying modification, revocation, or reissuance of a 
permit under Sec. 270.41 of this chapter.
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 27532, June 24, 1982; 48 
FR 14295, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 FR 2005, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.344  Hazardous waste incinerator permits.

    (a) The owner or operator of a hazardous waste incinerator may burn 
only wastes specified in his permit and only under operating conditions 
specified for those wastes under Sec. 264.345, except:
    (1) In approved trial burns under Sec. 270.62 of this chapter; or
    (2) Under exemptions created by Sec. 264.340.
    (b) Other hazardous wastes may be burned only after operating 
conditions have been specified in a new permit or a permit modification 
as applicable. Operating requirements for new wastes may be be based on 
either trial burn results or alternative data included with part B of a 
permit application under Sec. 270.19 of this chapter.
    (c) The permit for a new hazardous waste incinerator must establish 
appropriate conditions for each of the applicable requirements of this 
subpart, including but not limited to allowable waste feeds and 
operating conditions necessary to meet the requirements of Sec. 264.345, 
sufficient to comply with the following standards:
    (1) For the period beginning with initial introduction of hazardous 
waste to the incinerator and ending with initiation of the trial burn, 
and only for the minimum time required to establish operating conditions 
required in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, not to exceed a duration 
of 720 hours operating time for treatment of hazardous waste, the 
operating requirements must be those most likely to ensure compliance 
with the performance standards of Sec. 264.343, based on the Regional 
Administrator's engineering judgment. The Regional Administrator may 
extend the duration of this period once for up to 720 additional hours 
when good cause for the extension is demonstrated by the applicant.
    (2) For the duration of the trial burn, the operating requirements 
must be sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the performance 
standards of Sec. 264.343 and must be in accordance with the approved 
trial burn plan;
    (3) For the period immediately following completion of the trial 
burn, and only for the minimum period sufficient to allow sample 
analysis, data computation, and submission of the trial burn results by 
the applicant, and review of the trial burn results and modification of 
the facility permit by the Regional Administrator, the operating 
requirements must be those most likely to ensure compliance with the 
performance standards of Sec. 264.343, based on the Regional 
Administrator's engineering judgement.
    (4) For the remaining duration of the permit, the operating 
requirements must be those demonstrated, in a trial burn or by 
alternative data specified in Sec. 270.19(c) of this chapter, as 
sufficient to ensure compliance with the performance standards of 
Sec. 264.343.
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 27532, June 24, 1982; 48 
FR 14295, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]

[[Page 295]]


<R05>
Sec. 264.345  Operating requirements.

    (a) An incinerator must be operated in accordance with operating 
requirements specified in the permit. These will be specified on a case-
by-case basis as those demonstrated (in a trial burn or in alternative 
data as specified in Sec. 264.344(b) and included with part B of a 
facility's permit application) to be sufficient to comply with the 
performance standards of Sec. 264.343.
    (b) Each set of operating requirements will specify the composition 
of the waste feed (including acceptable variations in the physical or 
chemical properties of the waste feed which will not affect compliance 
with the performance requirement of Sec. 264.343) to which the operating 
requirements apply. For each such waste feed, the permit will specify 
acceptable operating limits including the following conditions:
    (1) Carbon monoxide (CO) level in the stack exhaust gas;
    (2) Waste feed rate;
    (3) Combustion temperature;
    (4) An appropriate indicator of combustion gas velocity;
    (5) Allowable variations in incinerator system design or operating 
procedures; and
    (6) Such other operating requirements as are necessary to ensure 
that the performance standards of Sec. 264.343 are met.
    (c) During start-up and shut-down of an incinerator, hazardous waste 
(except wastes exempted in accordance with Sec. 264.340) must not be fed 
into the incinerator unless the incinerator is operating within the 
conditions of operation (temperature, air feed rate, etc.) specified in 
the permit.
    (d) Fugitive emissions from the combustion zone must be controlled 
by:
    (1) Keeping the combustion zone totally sealed against fugitive 
emissions; or
    (2) Maintaining a combustion zone pressure lower than atmospheric 
pressure; or
    (3) An alternate means of control demonstrated (with part B of the 
permit application) to provide fugitive emissions control equivalent to 
maintenance of combustion zone pressure lower than atmospheric pressure.
    (e) An incinerator must be operated with a functioning system to 
automatically cut off waste feed to the incinerator when operating 
conditions deviate from limits established under paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (f) An incinerator must cease operation when changes in waste feed, 
incinerator design, or operating conditions exceed limits designated in 
its permit.
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 27532, June 24, 1982; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 264.346  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.347  Monitoring and inspections.

    (a) The owner or operator must conduct, as a minimum, the following 
monitoring while incinerating hazardous waste:
    (1) Combustion temperature, waste feed rate, and the indicator of 
combustion gas velocity specified in the facility permit must be 
monitored on a continuous basis.
    (2) CO must be monitored on a continuous basis at a point in the 
incinerator downstream of the combustion zone and prior to release to 
the atmosphere.
    (3) Upon request by the Regional Administrator, sampling and 
analysis of the waste and exhaust emissions must be conducted to verify 
that the operating requirements established in the permit achieve the 
performance standards of Sec. 264.343.
    (b) The incinerator and associated equipment (pumps, valves, 
conveyors, pipes, etc.) must be subjected to thorough visual inspection, 
at least daily, for leaks, spills, fugitive emissions, and signs of 
tampering.
    (c) The emergency waste feed cutoff system and associated alarms 
must be tested at least weekly to verify operability, unless the 
applicant demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that weekly 
inspections will unduly restrict or upset operations and that less 
frequent inspection will be adequate. At a minimum, operational testing 
must be conducted at least monthly.
    (d) This monitoring and inspection data must be recorded and the 
records

[[Page 296]]

must be placed in the operating log required by Sec. 264.73.
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 27533, June 24, 1982; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Secs. 264.348--264.350  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 264.351  Closure.

    At closure the owner or operator must remove all hazardous waste and 
hazardous waste residues (including, but not limited to, ash, scrubber 
waters, and scrubber sludges) from the incinerator site.

[Comment: At closure, as throughout the operating period, unless the 
owner or operator can demonstrate, in accordance with Sec. 261.3(d) of 
this chapter, that the residue removed from the incinerator is not a 
hazardous waste, the owner or operator becomes a generator of hazardous 
waste and must manage it in accordance with applicable requirements of 
parts 262 through 266 of this chapter.]
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981]

                        Subparts P-R  [Reserved]


<R04>
      Subpart S--Corrective Action for Solid Waste Management Units


<R05>
Sec. 264.552  Corrective Action Management Units (CAMU).

    (a) For the purpose of implementing remedies under Sec. 264.101 or 
RCRA Section 3008(h), the Regional Administrator may designate an area 
at the facility as a corrective action management unit, as defined in 
Sec. 260.10, in accordance with the requirements of this section. One or 
more CAMUs may be designated at a facility.
    (1) Placement of remediation wastes into or within a CAMU does not 
constitute land disposal of hazardous wastes.
    (2) Consolidation or placement of remediation wastes into or within 
a CAMU does not constitute creation of a unit subject to minimum 
technology requirements.
    (b)(1) The Regional Administrator may designate a regulated unit (as 
defined in Sec. 264.90(a)(2)) as a CAMU, or may incorporate a regulated 
unit into a CAMU, if:
    (i) The regulated unit is closed or closing, meaning it has begun 
the closure process under Sec. 264.113 or Sec. 265.113; and
    (ii) Inclusion of the regulated unit will enhance implementation of 
effective, protective and reliable remedial actions for the facility.
    (2) The subpart F, G, and H requirements and the unit-specific 
requirements of part 264 or 265 that applied to that regulated unit will 
continue to apply to that portion of the CAMU after incorporation into 
the CAMU.
    (c) The Regional Administrator shall designate a CAMU in accordance 
with the following:
    (1) The CAMU shall facilitate the implementation of reliable, 
effective, protective, and cost-effective remedies;
    (2) Waste management activities associated with the CAMU shall not 
create unacceptable risks to humans or to the environment resulting from 
exposure to hazardous wastes or hazardous constituents;
    (3) The CAMU shall include uncontaminated areas of the facility, 
only if including such areas for the purpose of managing remediation 
waste is more protective than management of such wastes at contaminated 
areas of the facility;
    (4) Areas within the CAMU, where wastes remain in place after 
closure of the CAMU, shall be managed and contained so as to minimize 
future releases, to the extent practicable;
    (5) The CAMU shall expedite the timing of remedial activity 
implementation, when appropriate and practicable;
    (6) The CAMU shall enable the use, when appropriate, of treatment 
technologies (including innovative technologies) to enhance the long-
term effectiveness of remedial actions by reducing the toxicity, 
mobility, or volume of wastes that will remain in place after closure of 
the CAMU; and
    (7) The CAMU shall, to the extent practicable, minimize the land 
area of the facility upon which wastes will remain in place after 
closure of the CAMU.
    (d) The owner/operator shall provide sufficient information to 
enable the Regional Administrator to designate a CAMU in accordance with 
the criteria in Sec. 264.552.

[[Page 297]]

    (e) The Regional Administrator shall specify, in the permit or 
order, requirements for CAMUs to include the following:
    (1) The areal configuration of the CAMU.
    (2) Requirements for remediation waste management to include the 
specification of applicable design, operation and closure requirements.
    (3) Requirements for ground water monitoring that are sufficient to:
    (i) Continue to detect and to characterize the nature, extent, 
concentration, direction, and movement of existing releases of hazardous 
constituents in ground water from sources located within the CAMU; and
    (ii) Detect and subsequently characterize releases of hazardous 
constituents to ground water that may occur from areas of the CAMU in 
which wastes will remain in place after closure of the CAMU.
    (4) Closure and post-closure requirements.
    (i) Closure of corrective action management units shall:
    (A) Minimize the need for further maintenance; and
    (B) Control, minimize, or eliminate, to the extent necessary to 
protect human health and the environment, for areas where wastes remain 
in place, post-closure escape of hazardous waste, hazardous 
constituents, leachate, contaminated runoff, or hazardous waste 
decomposition products to the ground, to surface waters, or to the 
atmosphere.
    (ii) Requirements for closure of CAMUs shall include the following, 
as appropriate and as deemed necessary by the Regional Administrator for 
a given CAMU:
    (A) Requirements for excavation, removal, treatment or containment 
of wastes;
    (B) For areas in which wastes will remain after closure of the CAMU, 
requirements for capping of such areas; and
    (C) Requirements for removal and decontamination of equipment, 
devices, and structures used in remediation waste management activities 
within the CAMU.
    (iii) In establishing specific closure requirements for CAMUs under 
Sec. 264.552(e), the Regional Administrator shall consider the following 
factors:
    (A) CAMU characteristics;
    (B) Volume of wastes which remain in place after closure;
    (C) Potential for releases from the CAMU;
    (D) Physical and chemical characteristics of the waste;
    (E) Hydrological and other relevant environmental conditions at the 
facility which may influence the migration of any potential or actual 
releases; and
    (F) Potential for exposure of humans and environmental receptors if 
releases were to occur from the CAMU.
    (iv) Post-closure requirements as necessary to protect human health 
and the environment, to include, for areas where wastes will remain in 
place, monitoring and maintenance activities, and the frequency with 
which such activities shall be performed to ensure the integrity of any 
cap, final cover, or other containment system.
    (f) The Regional Administrator shall document the rationale for 
designating CAMUs and shall make such documentation available to the 
public.
    (g) Incorporation of a CAMU into an existing permit must be approved 
by the Regional Administrator according to the procedures for Agency-
initiated permit modifications under Sec. 270.41 of this chapter, or 
according to the permit modification procedures of Sec. 270.42 of this 
chapter.
    (h) The designation of a CAMU does not change EPA's existing 
authority to address clean-up levels, media-specific points of 
compliance to be applied to remediation at a facility, or other remedy 
selection decisions.
[58 FR 8683, Feb. 16, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 264.553  Temporary Units (TU).

    (a) For temporary tanks and container storage areas used for 
treatment or storage of hazardous remediation wastes, during remedial 
activities required under Sec. 264.101 or RCRA section 3008(h), the 
Regional Administrator may determine that a design, operating, or 
closure standard applicable to such units may be replaced by alternative 
requirements which are protective of human health and the environment.

[[Page 298]]

    (b) Any temporary unit to which alternative requirements are applied 
in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section shall be:
    (1) Located within the facility boundary; and
    (2) Used only for treatment or storage of remediation wastes.
    (c) In establishing standards to be applied to a temporary unit, the 
Regional Administrator shall consider the following factors:
    (1) Length of time such unit will be in operation;
    (2) Type of unit;
    (3) Volumes of wastes to be managed;
    (4) Physical and chemical characteristics of the wastes to be 
managed in the unit;
    (5) Potential for releases from the unit;
    (6) Hydrogeological and other relevant environmental conditions at 
the facility which may influence the migration of any potential 
releases; and
    (7) Potential for exposure of humans and environmental receptors if 
releases were to occur from the unit.
    (d) The Regional Administrator shall specify in the permit or order 
the length of time a temporary unit will be allowed to operate, to be no 
longer than a period of one year. The Regional Administrator shall also 
specify the design, operating, and closure requirements for the unit.
    (e) The Regional Administrator may extend the operational period of 
a temporary unit once for no longer than a period of one year beyond 
that originally specified in the permit or order, if the Administrator 
determines that:
    (1) Continued operation of the unit will not pose a threat to human 
health and the environment; and
    (2) Continued operation of the unit is necessary to ensure timely 
and efficient implementation of remedial actions at the facility.
    (f) Incorporation of a temporary unit or a time extension for a 
temporary unit into an existing permit shall be:
    (1) Approved in accordance with the procedures for Agency-initiated 
permit modifications under Sec. 270.41; or
    (2) Requested by the owner/operator as a Class II modification 
according to the procedures under Sec. 270.42 of this chapter.
    (g) The Regional Administrator shall document the rationale for 
designating a temporary unit and for granting time extensions for 
temporary units and shall make such documentation available to the 
public.
[58 FR 8683, Feb. 16, 1993]

                        Subparts T-V  [Reserved]


<R04>
                          Subpart W--Drip Pads

    Source: 56 FR 30196, July 1, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.570  Applicability.

    (a) The requirements of this subpart apply to owners and operators 
of facilities that use new or existing drip pads to convey treated wood 
drippage, precipitation, and/or surface water run-off to an associated 
collection system. Existing drip pads are those constructed before 
December 6, 1990 and those for which the owner or operator has a design 
and has entered into binding financial or other agreements for 
construction prior to December 6, 1990. All other drip pads are new drip 
pads. The requirement at Sec. 264.573(b)(3) to install a leak collection 
system applies only to those drip pads that are constructed after 
December 24, 1992 except for those constructed after December 24, 1992 
for which the owner or operator has a design and has entered into 
binding financial or other agreements for construction prior to December 
24, 1992.
    (b) The owner or operator of any drip pad that is inside or under a 
structure that provides protection from precipitation so that neither 
run-off nor run-on is generated is not subject to regulation under 
Sec. 264.573(e) or Sec. 264.573(f), as appropriate.
    (c) The requirements of this subpart are not applicable to the 
management of infrequent and incidental drippage in storage yards 
provided that:
    (1) The owner or operator maintains and complies with a written 
contingency plan that describes how the owner or operator will respond 
immediately to the discharge of such infrequent and incidental drippage. 
At a minimum, the contingency plan must describe how the owner or 
operator will do the following:

[[Page 299]]

    (i) Clean up the drippage;
    (ii) Document the cleanup of the drippage;
    (iii) Retain documents regarding cleanup for three years; and
    (iv) Manage the contaminated media in a manner consistent with 
Federal regulations.
[56 FR 30196, July 1, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 61502, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.571  Assessment of existing drip pad integrity.

    (a) For each existing drip pad as defined in Sec. 264.570 of this 
subpart, the owner or operator must evaluate the drip pad and determine 
that it meets all of the requirements of this subpart, except the 
requirements for liners and leak detection systems of Sec. 264.573(b). 
No later than the effective date of this rule, the owner or operator 
must obtain and keep on file at the facility a written assessment of the 
drip pad, reviewed and certified by an independent, qualified registered 
professional engineer that attests to the results of the evaluation. The 
assessment must be reviewed, updated and re-certified annually until all 
upgrades, repairs, or modifications necessary to achieve compliance with 
all of the standards of Sec. 264.573 of this subpart are complete. The 
evaluation must document the extent to which the drip pad meets each of 
the design and operating standards of Sec. 264.573 of this subpart, 
except the standards for liners and leak detection systems, specified in 
Sec. 264.573(b) of this subpart.
    (b) The owner or operator must develop a written plan for upgrading, 
repairing, and modifying the drip pad to meet the requirements of 
Sec. 264.573(b) of this subpart, and submit the plan to the Regional 
Administrator no later than 2 years before the date that all repairs, 
upgrades, and modifications are complete. This written plan must 
describe all changes to be made to the drip pad in sufficient detail to 
document compliance with all the requirements of Sec. 264.573 of this 
subpart. The plan must be reviewed and certified by an independent 
qualified registered professional engineer.
    (c) Upon completion of all upgrades, repairs, and modifications, the 
owner or operator must submit to the Regional Administrator or State 
Director, the as-built drawings for the drip pad together with a 
certification by an independent qualified registered professional 
engineer attesting that the drip pad conforms to the drawings.
    (d) If the drip pad is found to be leaking or unfit for use, the 
owner or operator must comply with the provisions of Sec. 264.573 (m) of 
this subpart or close the drip pad in accordance with Sec. 264.575 of 
this subpart.
[56 FR 30196, July 1, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 61503, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.572  Design and installation of new drip pads.

    Owners and operators of new drip pads must ensure that the pads are 
designed, installed, and operated in accordance with one of the 
following:
    (a) all of the requirements of Secs. 264.573 (except 264.573(a)(4)), 
264.574 and 264.575 of this subpart, or
    (b) all of the requirements of Secs. 264.573 (except 
Sec. 264.573(b)), 264.574 and 264.575 of this subpart.
[57 FR 61503, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.573  Design and operating requirements.

    (a) Drip pads must: (1) Be constructed of non-earthern materials, 
excluding wood and non-structurally supported asphalt:
    (2) Be sloped to free-drain treated wood drippage, rain and other 
waters, or solutions of drippage and water or other wastes to the 
associated collection system;
    (3) Have a curb or berm around the perimeter;
    (4)(i) Have a hydraulic conductivity of less than or equal to 
1 x 10-\7\ centimeters per second, e.g., existing concrete drip pads 
must be sealed, coated, or covered with a surface material with a 
hydraulic conductivity of less than or equal to 1 x 10-\7\ centimeters 
per second such that the entire surface where drippage occurs or may run 
across is capable of containing such drippage and mixtures of drippage 
and precipitation, materials, or other wastes while being routed to an 
associated collection system. This surface material must be maintained 
free of cracks and

[[Page 300]]

gaps that could adversely affect its hydraulic conductivity, and the 
material must be chemically compatible with the preservatives that 
contact the drip pad. The requirements of this provision apply only to 
existing drip pads and those drip pads for which the owner or operator 
elects to comply with Sec. 264.572(a) instead of Sec. 264.572(b).
    (ii) The owner or operator must obtain and keep on file at the 
facility a written assessment of the drip pad, reviewed and certified by 
an independent, qualified registered professional engineer that attests 
to the results of the evaluation. The assessment must be reviewed, 
updated and recertified annually. The evaluation must document the 
extent to which the drip pad meets the design and operating standards of 
this section, except for paragraph (b) of this Section.
    (5) Be of sufficient structural strength and thickness to prevent 
failure due to physical contact, climatic conditions, the stress of 
daily perations, e.g., variable and moving loads such as vehicle 
traffic, movement of wood, etc.

[Note: EPA will generally consider applicable standards established by 
professional organizations generally recognized by the industry such as 
the American Concrete Institute (ACI) or the American Society of Testing 
and Materials (ASTM) in judging the structural integrity requirement of 
this paragraph.]

    (b) If an owner/operator elects to comply with Sec. 264.572(b) 
instead of Sec. 264.572(a), the drip pad must have:
    (1) A synthetic liner installed below the drip pad that is designed, 
constructed, and installed to prevent leakage from the drip pad into the 
adjacent subsurface soil or groundwater or surface water at any time 
during the active life (including the closure period) of the drip pad. 
The liner must be constructed of materials that will prevent waste from 
being absorbed into the liner and to prevent releases into the adjacent 
subsurface soil or groundwater or surface water during the active life 
of the facility. The liner must be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that have appropriate chemical 
properties and sufficient strength and thickness to prevent failure due 
to pressure gradients (including static head and external hydrogeologic 
forces), physical contact with the waste or drip pad leakage to which 
they are exposed, climatic conditions, the stress of installation, and 
the stress of daily operation (including stresses from vehicular traffic 
on the drip pad);
    (ii) Placed upon a foundation or base capable of providing support 
to the liner and resistance to pressure gradients above and below the 
liner to prevent failure of the liner due to settlement, compression or 
uplift; and
    (iii) Installed to cover all surrounding earth that could come in 
contact with the waste or leakage; and
    (2) A leakage detection system immediately above the liner that is 
designed, constructed, maintained and operated to detect leakage from 
the drip pad. The leakage detection system must be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that are:
    (A) Chemically resistant to the waste managed in the drip pad and 
the leakage that might be generated; and
    (B) Of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent collapse under 
the pressures exerted by overlaying materials and by any equipment used 
at the drip pad;
    (ii) Designed and operated to function without clogging through the 
scheduled closure of the drip pad; and
    (iii) Designed so that it will detect the failure of the drip pad or 
the presence of a release of hazardous waste or accumulated liquid at 
the earliest practicable time.
    (3) A leakage collection system immediately above the liner that is 
designed, constructed, maintained and operated to collect leakage from 
the drip pad such that it can be removed from below the drip pad. The 
date, time, and quantity of any leakage collected in this system and 
removed must be documented in the operating log.
    (c) Drip pads must be maintained such that they remain free of 
cracks, gaps, corrosion, or other deterioration that could cause 
hazardous waste to be released from the drip pad.

[Note:See Sec. 264.573(m) for remedial action required if deterioration 
or leakage is detected.]

    (d) The drip pad and associated collection system must be designed 
and

[[Page 301]]

operated to convey, drain, and collect liquid resulting from drippage or 
precipitation in order to prevent run-off.
    (e) Unless protected by a structure, as described in Sec. 264.570(b) 
of this subpart, the owner or operator must design, construct, operate 
and maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
drip pad during peak discharge from at least a 24-hour, 25-year storm, 
unless the system has sufficient excess capacity to contain any run-off 
that might enter the system.
    (f) Unless protected by a structure or cover as described in 
Sec. 264.570(b) of this subpart, the owner or operator must design, 
construct, operate and maintain a run-off management system to collect 
and control at least the water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-year 
storm.
    (g) The drip pad must be evaluated to determine that it meets the 
requirements of paragraphs (a) through (f) of this section and the owner 
or operator must obtain a statement from an independent, qualified 
registered professional engineer certifying that the drip pad design 
meets the requirements of this section.
    (h) Drippage and accumulated precipitation must be removed from the 
associated collection system as necessary to prevent overflow onto the 
drip pad.
    (i) The drip pad surface must be cleaned thoroughly in a manner and 
frequency such that accumulated residues of hazardous waste or other 
materials are removed, with residues being properly managed as hazardous 
waste, so as to allow weekly inspections of the entire drip pad surface 
without interference or hindrance from accumulated residues of hazardous 
waste or other materials on the drip pad. The owner or operator must 
document the date and time of each cleaning and the cleaning procedure 
used in the facility's operating log. The owner/operator must determine 
if the residues are hazardous as per 40 CFR 262.11 and, if so, must 
manage them under parts 261-268, 270, and section 3010 of RCRA.
    (j) Drip pads must be operated and maintained in a manner to 
minimize tracking of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents off 
the drip pad as a result of activities by personnel or equipment.
    (k) After being removed from the treatment vessel, treated wood from 
pressure and non-pressure processes must be held on the drip pad until 
drippage has ceased. The owner or operator must maintain records 
sufficient to document that all treated wood is held on the pad 
following treatment in accordance with this requirement.
    (l) Collection and holding units associated with run-on and run-off 
control systems must be emptied or otherwise managed as soon as possible 
after storms to maintain design capacity of the system.
    (m) Throughout the active life of the drip pad and as specified in 
the permit, if the owner or operator detects a condition that may have 
caused or has caused a release of hazardous waste, the condition must be 
repaired within a reasonably prompt period of time following discovery, 
in accordance with the following procedures:
    (1) Upon detection of a condition that may have caused or has caused 
a release of hazardous waste (e.g., upon detection of leakage in the 
leak detection system), the owner or operator must:
    (i) Enter a record of the discovery in the facility operating log;
    (ii) Immediately remove the portion of the drip pad affected by the 
condition from service;
    (iii) Determine what steps must be taken to repair the drip pad and 
clean up any leakage from below the drip pad, and establish a schedule 
for accomplishing the repairs;
    (iv) Within 24 hours after discovery of the condition, notify the 
Regional Administrator of the condition and, within 10 working days, 
provide written notice to the Regional Administrator with a description 
of the steps that will be taken to repair the drip pad and clean up any 
leakage, and the schedule for accomplishing this work.
    (2) The Regional Administrator will review the information 
submitted, make a determination regarding whether the pad must be 
removed from service completely or partially until repairs and clean up 
are complete and

[[Page 302]]

notify the owner or operator of the determination and the underlying 
rationale in writing.
    (3) Upon completing all repairs and clean up, the owner or operator 
must notify the Regional Administrator in writing and provide a 
certification signed by an independent, qualified registered 
professional engineer, that the repairs and clean up have been completed 
according to the written plan submitted in accordance with paragraph 
(m)(1)(iv) of this section.
    (n) Should a permit be necessary, the Regional Administrator will 
specify in the permit all design and operating practices that are 
necessary to ensure that the requirements of this section are satisfied.
    (o) The owner or operator must maintain, as part of the facility 
operating log, documentation of past operating and waste handling 
practices. This must include identification of preservative formulations 
used in the past, a description of drippage management practices, and a 
description of treated wood storage and handling practices.
[56 FR 30196, July 1, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 5861, Feb. 18, 1992; 57 
FR 61503, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 264.574  Inspections.

    (a) During construction or installation, liners and cover systems 
(e.g., membranes, sheets, or coatings) must be inspected for uniformity, 
damage and imperfections (e.g., holes, cracks, thin spots, or foreign 
materials). Immediately after construction or installation, liners must 
be inspected and certified as meeting the requirements of Sec. 264.573 
of this subpart by an independent qualified, registered professional 
engineer. This certification must be maintained at the facility as part 
of the facility operating record. After installation, liners and covers 
must be inspected to ensure tight seams and joints and the absence of 
tears, punctures, or blisters.
    (b) While a drip pad is in operation, it must be inspected weekly 
and after storms to detect evidence of any of the following:
    (1) Deterioration, malfunctions or improper operation of run-on and 
run-off control systems;
    (2) The presence of leakage in and proper functioning of leak 
detection system.
    (3) Deterioration or cracking of the drip pad surface.

    Note: See Sec. 264.573(m) for remedial action required if 
deterioration or leakage is detected.


<R05>
Sec. 264.575  Closure.

    (a) At closure, the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate 
all waste residues, contaminated containment system components (pad, 
liners, etc.), contaminated subsoils, and structures and equipment 
contaminated with waste and leakage, and manage them as hazardous waste.
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed or decontaminated, 
he must close the facility and perform post-closure care in accordance 
with closure and post-closure care requirements that apply to landfills 
(Sec. 264.310). For permitted units, the requirement to have a permit 
continues throughout the post-closure period. In addition, for the 
purpose of closure, post-closure, and financial responsibility, such a 
drip pad is then considered to be landfill, and the owner or operator 
must meet all of the requirements for landfills specified in subparts G 
and H of this part.
    (c)(1) The owner or operator of an existing drip pad, as defined in 
Sec. 264.570 of this subpart, that does not comply with the liner 
requirements of Sec. 264.573(b)(1) must:
    (i) Include in the closure plan for the drip pad under Sec. 264.112 
both a plan for complying with paragraph (a) of this section and a 
contingent plan for complying with paragraph (b) of this section in case 
not all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at closure; and

[[Page 303]]

    (ii) Prepare a contingent post-closure plan under Sec. 264.118 of 
this part for complying with paragraph (b) of this section in case not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at closure.
    (2) The cost estimates calculated under Secs. 264.112 and 264.144 of 
this part for closure and post-closure care of a drip pad subject to 
this paragraph must include the cost of complying with the contingent 
closure plan and the contingent post-closure plan, but are not required 
to include the cost of expected closure under paragraph (a) of this 
section.


<R04>
                     Subpart X--Miscellaneous Units

    Source: 52 FR 46964, Dec. 10, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.600  Applicability.

    The requirements in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste in 
miscellanenous units, except as Sec. 264.1 provide otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 264.601  Environmental performance standards.

    A miscellaneous unit must be located, designed, constructed, 
operated, maintained, and closed in a manner that will ensure protection 
of human health and the environment. Permits for miscellaneous units are 
to contain such terms and provisions as necessary to protect human 
health and the environment, including, but not limited to, as 
appropriate, design and operating requirements, detection and monitoring 
requirements, and requirements for responses to releases of hazardous 
waste or hazardous constituents from the unit. Permit terms and 
provisions shall include those requirements of subparts I through O and 
subparts AA through CC of this part, part 270, and part 146 that are 
appropriate for the miscellaneous unit being permitted. Protection of 
human health and the environment includes, but is not limited to:
    (a) Prevention of any releases that may have adverse effects on 
human heath or the environment due to migration of waste constituents in 
the ground water or subsurface environment, considering:
    (1) The volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the 
waste in the unit, including its potential for migration through soil, 
liners, or other containing structures;
    (2) The hydrologic and geologic characteristics of the unit and the 
surrounding area;
    (3) The existing quality of ground water, including other sources of 
contamination and their cumulative impact on the ground water;
    (4) The quantity and direction of ground-water flow;
    (5) The proximity to and withdrawal rates of current and potential 
ground-water users;
    (6) The patterns of land use in the region;
    (7) The potential for deposition or migration of waste constituents 
into subsurface physical structures, and into the root zone of food-
chain crops and other vegetation;
    (8) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to waste 
constituents; and
    (9) The potential for damage to domestic animals, wildlife, crops, 
vegetation, and physical structures caused by exposure to waste 
constituents;
    (b) Prevention of any releases that may have adverse effects on 
human health or the environment due to migration of waste constituents 
in surface water, or wetlands or on the soil surface considering:
    (1) The volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the 
waste in the unit;
    (2) The effectiveness and reliability of containing, confining, and 
collecting systems and structures in preventing migration;
    (3) The hydrologic characteristics of the unit and the surrounding 
area, including the topography of the land around the unit;
    (4) The patterns of precipitation in the region;
    (5) The quantity, quality, and direction of ground-water flow;
    (6) The proximity of the unit to surface waters;
    (7) The current and potential uses of nearby surface waters and any 
water

[[Page 304]]

quality standards established for those surface waters;
    (8) The existing quality of surface waters and surface soils, 
including other sources of contamination and their cumulative impact on 
surface waters and surface soils;
    (9) The patterns of land use in the region;
    (10) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to 
waste constituents; and
    (11) The potential for damage to domestic animals, wildlife, crops, 
vegetation, and physical structures caused by exposure to waste 
constitutents.
    (c) Prevention of any release that may have adverse effects on human 
health or the environment due to migration of waste constituents in the 
air, considering:
    (1) The volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the 
waste in the unit, including its potential for the emission and 
dispersal of gases, aerosols and particulates;
    (2) The effectiveness and reliability of systems and structures to 
reduce or prevent emissions of hazardous constituents to the air;
    (3) The operating characteristics of the unit;
    (4) The atmospheric, metorologic, and topographic characteristics of 
the unit and the surrounding area;
    (5) The existing quality of the air, including other sources of 
contamination and their cumulative impact on the air;
    (6) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to waste 
constituents; and
    (7) The potential for damage to domestic animals, wildlife, crops, 
vegetation, and physical structures caused by exposure to waste 
constituents.
[59 FR 62927, Dec. 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 264.602  Monitoring, analysis, inspection, response, reporting, and corrective action.

    Monitoring, testing, analytical data, inspections, response, and 
reporting procedures and frequencies must ensure compliance with 
Secs. 264.601, 264.15, 264.33, 264.75, 264.76, 264.77, and 264.101 as 
well as meet any additional requirements needed to protect human health 
and the environment as specified in the permit.


<R05>
Sec. 264.603  Post-closure care.

    A miscellaneous unit that is a disposal unit must be maintained in a 
manner that complies with Sec. 264.601 during the post-closure care 
period. In addition, if a treatment or storage unit has contaminated 
soils or ground water that cannot be completely removed or 
decontaminated during closure, then that unit must also meet the 
requirements of Sec. 264.601 during post-closure care. The post-closure 
plan under Sec. 264.118 must specify the procedures that will be used to 
satisfy this requirement.

                        Subparts Y--Z  [Reserved]


<R04>
          Subpart AA--Air Emission Standards for Process Vents

    Source: 55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1030  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that treat, store, or dispose of hazardous wastes (except as 
provided in Sec. 264.1).
    (b) Except for Sec. 264.1034, paragraphs (d) and (e), this subpart 
applies to process vents associated with distillation, fractionation, 
thin-film evaporation, solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping 
operations that manage hazardous wastes with organic concentrations of 
at least 10 ppmw, if these operations are conducted in one of the 
following:
    (1) A unit that is subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR 
part 270, or
    (2) A unit (including a hazardous waste recycling unit) that is not 
exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 CFR 262.34(a) (i.e., a 
hazardous waste recycling unit that is not a 90-day tank or container) 
and that is located at a hazardous waste management facility otherwise 
subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR part 270, or
    (3) A unit that is exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 
CFR

[[Page 305]]

262.34(a) (i.e., a ``90-day'' tank or container) and is not a recycling 
unit under the provisions of 40 CFR 261.6.
    (c) For the owner and operator of a facility subject to this subpart 
and who received a final permit under RCRA section 3005 prior to 
December 6, 1996, the requirements of this subpart shall be incorporated 
into the permit when the permit is reissued in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR 124.15 or reviewed in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR 270.50(d). Until such date when the owner and 
operator receives a final permit incorporating the requirements of this 
subpart, the owner and operator is subject to the requirements of 40 CFR 
265, subpart AA.

    [Note: The requirements of Secs. 264.1032 through 264.1036 apply to 
process vents on hazardous waste recycling units previously exempt under 
Sec. 261.6(c)(1). Other exemptions under Secs. 261.4, and 264.1(g) are 
not affected by these requirements.]

    (d) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the 
pharmaceutical manufacturing facility, commonly referred to as the 
Stonewall Plant, located at Route 340 South, Elkton, Virginia, provided 
that facility is operated in compliance with the requirements contained 
in a Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454. The 
requirements of this subpart shall apply to the facility upon 
termination of the Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 
52.2454.
    (e) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the process 
vents at a facility where the facility owner or operator certifies that 
all of the process vents that would otherwise be subject to this subpart 
are equipped with and operating air emission controls in accordance with 
the process vent requirements of an applicable Clean Air Act regulation 
codified under 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63. The documentation of 
compliance under regulations at 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63 
shall be kept with, or made readily available with, the facility 
operating record.
[55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 
61 FR 59950, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 52641, Oct. 8, 1997; 62 FR 64656, Dec. 
8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1031  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, all terms not defined herein shall have the 
meaning given them in the Act and parts 260-266.
    Air stripping operation is a desorption operation employed to 
transfer one or more volatile components from a liquid mixture into a 
gas (air) either with or without the application of heat to the liquid. 
Packed towers, spray towers, and bubble-cap, sieve, or valve-type plate 
towers are among the process configurations used for contacting the air 
and a liquid.
    Bottoms receiver means a container or tank used to receive and 
collect the heavier bottoms fractions of the distillation feed stream 
that remain in the liquid phase.
    Closed-vent system means a system that is not open to the atmosphere 
and that is composed of piping, connections, and, if necessary, flow-
inducing devices that transport gas or vapor from a piece or pieces of 
equipment to a control device.
    Condenser means a heat-transfer device that reduces a thermodynamic 
fluid from its vapor phase to its liquid phase.
    Connector means flanged, screwed, welded, or other joined fittings 
used to connect two pipelines or a pipeline and a piece of equipment. 
For the purposes of reporting and recordkeeping, connector means flanged 
fittings that are not covered by insulation or other materials that 
prevent location of the fittings.
    Continuous recorder means a data-recording device recording an 
instantaneous data value at least once every 15 minutes.
    Control device means an enclosed combustion device, vapor recovery 
system, or flare. Any device the primary function of which is the 
recovery or capture of solvents or other organics for use, reuse, or 
sale (e.g., a primary condenser on a solvent recovery unit) is not a 
control device.
    Control device shutdown means the cessation of operation of a 
control device for any purpose.
    Distillate receiver means a container or tank used to receive and 
collect liquid material (condensed) from the overhead condenser of a 
distillation

[[Page 306]]

unit and from which the condensed liquid is pumped to larger storage 
tanks or other process units.
    Distillation operation means an operation, either batch or 
continuous, separating one or more feed stream(s) into two or more exit 
streams, each exit stream having component concentrations different from 
those in the feed stream(s). The separation is achieved by the 
redistribution of the components between the liquid and vapor phase as 
they approach equilibrium within the distillation unit.
    Double block and bleed system means two block valves connected in 
series with a bleed valve or line that can vent the line between the two 
block valves.
    Equipment means each valve, pump, compressor, pressure relief 
device, sampling connection system, open-ended valve or line, or flange, 
and any control devices or systems required by this subpart.
    Flame zone means the portion of the combustion chamber in a boiler 
occupied by the flame envelope.
    Flow indicator means a device that indicates whether gas flow is 
present in a vent stream.
    First attempt at repair means to take rapid action for the purpose 
of stopping or reducing leakage of organic material to the atmosphere 
using best practices.
    Fractionation operation means a distillation operation or method 
used to separate a mixture of several volatile components of different 
boiling points in successive stages, each stage removing from the 
mixture some proportion of one of the components.
    Hazardous waste management unit shutdown means a work practice or 
operational procedure that stops operation of a hazardous waste 
management unit or part of a hazardous waste management unit. An 
unscheduled work practice or operational procedure that stops operation 
of a hazardous waste management unit or part of a hazardous waste 
management unit for less than 24 hours is not a hazardous waste 
management unit shutdown. The use of spare equipment and technically 
feasible bypassing of equipment without stopping operation are not 
hazardous waste management unit shutdowns.
    Hot well means a container for collecting condensate as in a steam 
condenser serving a vacuum-jet or steam-jet ejector.
    In gas/vapor service means that the piece of equipment contains or 
contacts a hazardous waste stream that is in the gaseous state at 
operating conditions.
    In heavy liquid service means that the piece of equipment is not in 
gas/vapor service or in light liquid service.
    In light liquid service means that the piece of equipment contains 
or contacts a waste stream where the vapor pressure of one or more of 
the organic components in the stream is greater than 0.3 kilopascals 
(kPa) at 20 deg.C, the total concentration of the pure organic 
components having a vapor pressure greater than 0.3 kilopascals (kPa) at 
20 deg.C is equal to or greater than 20 percent by weight, and the fluid 
is a liquid at operating conditions.
    In situ sampling systems means nonextractive samplers or in-line 
samplers.
    In vacuum service means that equipment is operating at an internal 
pressure that is at least 5 kPa below ambient pressure.
    Malfunction means any sudden failure of a control device or a 
hazardous waste management unit or failure of a hazardous waste 
management unit to operate in a normal or usual manner, so that organic 
emissions are increased.
    Open-ended valve or line means any valve, except pressure relief 
valves, having one side of the valve seat in contact with process fluid 
and one side open to the atmosphere, either directly or through open 
piping.
    Pressure release means the emission of materials resulting from the 
system pressure being greater than the set pressure of the pressure 
relief device.
    Process heater means a device that transfers heat liberated by 
burning fuel to fluids contained in tubes, including all fluids except 
water that are heated to produce steam.
    Process vent means any open-ended pipe or stack that is vented to 
the atmosphere either directly, through a vacuum-producing system, or 
through a tank (e.g., distillate receiver, condenser, bottoms receiver, 
surge control

[[Page 307]]

tank, separator tank, or hot well) associated with hazardous waste 
distillation, fractionation, thin-film evaporation, solvent extraction, 
or air or steam stripping operations.
    Repaired means that equipment is adjusted, or otherwise altered, to 
eliminate a leak.
    Sensor means a device that measures a physical quantity or the 
change in a physical quantity, such as temperature, pressure, flow rate, 
pH, or liquid level.
    Separator tank means a device used for separation of two immiscible 
liquids.
    Solvent extraction operation means an operation or method of 
separation in which a solid or solution is contacted with a liquid 
solvent (the two being mutually insoluble) to preferentially dissolve 
and transfer one or more components into the solvent.
    Startup means the setting in operation of a hazardous waste 
management unit or control device for any purpose.
    Steam stripping operation means a distillation operation in which 
vaporization of the volatile constituents of a liquid mixture takes 
place by the introduction of steam directly into the charge.
    Surge control tank means a large-sized pipe or storage reservoir 
sufficient to contain the surging liquid discharge of the process tank 
to which it is connected.
    Thin-film evaporation operation means a distillation operation that 
employs a heating surface consisting of a large diameter tube that may 
be either straight or tapered, horizontal or vertical. Liquid is spread 
on the tube wall by a rotating assembly of blades that maintain a close 
clearance from the wall or actually ride on the film of liquid on the 
wall.
    Vapor incinerator means any enclosed combustion device that is used 
for destroying organic compounds and does not extract energy in the form 
of steam or process heat.
    Vented means discharged through an opening, typically an open-ended 
pipe or stack, allowing the passage of a stream of liquids, gases, or 
fumes into the atmosphere. The passage of liquids, gases, or fumes is 
caused by mechanical means such as compressors or vacuum-producing 
systems or by process-related means such as evaporation produced by 
heating and not caused by tank loading and unloading (working losses) or 
by natural means such as diurnal temperature changes.
[55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990, as amended at 62 FR 64657, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1032  Standards: Process vents.

    (a) The owner or operator of a facility with process vents 
associated with distillation, fractionation, thin-film evaporation, 
solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping operations managing 
hazardous wastes with organic concentrations of at least 10 ppmw shall 
either:
    (1) Reduce total organic emissions from all affected process vents 
at the facility below 1.4 kg/h (3 lb/h) and 2.8 Mg/yr (3.1 tons/yr), or
    (2) Reduce, by use of a control device, total organic emissions from 
all affected process vents at the facility by 95 weight percent.
    (b) If the owner or operator installs a closed-vent system and 
control device to comply with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this 
section the closed-vent system and control device must meet the 
requirements of Sec. 264.1033.
    (c) Determinations of vent emissions and emission reductions or 
total organic compound concentrations achieved by add-on control devices 
may be based on engineering calculations or performance tests. If 
performance tests are used to determine vent emissions, emission 
reductions, or total organic compound concentrations achieved by add-on 
control devices, the performance tests must conform with the 
requirements of Sec. 264.1034(c).
    (d) When an owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree on determinations of vent emissions and/or emission reductions or 
total organic compound concentrations achieved by add-on control devices 
based on engineering calculations, the procedures in Sec. 264.1034(c) 
shall be used to resolve the disagreement.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1033  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.

    (a)(1) Owners or operators of closed-vent systems and control 
devices used

[[Page 308]]

to comply with provisions of this part shall comply with the provisions 
of this section.
    (2)(i) The owner or operator of an existing facility who cannot 
install a closed-vent system and control device to comply with the 
provisions of this subpart on the effective date that the facility 
becomes subject to the provisions of this subpart must prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes dates by which the closed-vent 
system and control device will be installed and in operation. The 
controls must be installed as soon as possible, but the implementation 
schedule may allow up to 30 months after the effective date that the 
facility becomes subject to this subpart for installation and startup.
    (ii) Any unit that begins operation after December 21, 1990, and is 
subject to the provisions of this subpart when operation begins, must 
comply with the rules immediately (i.e., must have control devices 
installed and operating on startup of the affected unit); the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply.
    (iii) The owner or operator of any facility in existence on the 
effective date of a statutory or EPA regulatory amendment that renders 
the facility subject to this subpart shall comply with all requirements 
of this subpart as soon as practicable but no later than 30 months after 
the amendment's effective date. When control equipment required by this 
subpart can not be installed and begin operation by the effective date 
of the amendment, the facility owner or operator shall prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes the following information: 
Specific calendar dates for award of contracts or issuance of purchase 
orders for the control equipment, initiation of on-site installation of 
the control equipment, completion of the control equipment installation, 
and performance of any testing to demonstrate that the installed 
equipment meets the applicable standards of this subpart. The owner or 
operator shall enter the implementation schedule in the operating record 
or in a permanent, readily available file located at the facility.
    (iv) Owners and operators of facilities and units that become newly 
subject to the requirements of this subpart after December 8, 1997, due 
to an action other than those described in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this 
section must comply with all applicable requirements immediately (i.e., 
must have control devices installed and operating on the date the 
facility or unit becomes subject to this subpart; the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply).
    (b) A control device involving vapor recovery (e.g., a condenser or 
adsorber) shall be designed and operated to recover the organic vapors 
vented to it with an efficiency of 95 weight percent or greater unless 
the total organic emission limits of Sec. 264.1032(a)(1) for all 
affected process vents can be attained at an efficiency less than 95 
weight percent.
    (c) An enclosed combustion device (e.g., a vapor incinerator, 
boiler, or process heater) shall be designed and operated to reduce the 
organic emissions vented to it by 95 weight percent or greater; to 
achieve a total organic compound concentration of 20 ppmv, expressed as 
the sum of the actual compounds, not carbon equivalents, on a dry basis 
corrected to 3 percent oxygen; or to provide a minimum residence time of 
0.50 seconds at a minimum temperature of 760  deg.C. If a boiler or 
process heater is used as the control device, then the vent stream shall 
be introduced into the flame zone of the boiler or process heater.
    (d)(1) A flare shall be designed for and operated with no visible 
emissions as determined by the methods specified in paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section, except for periods not to exceed a total of 5 minutes 
during any 2 consecutive hours.
    (2) A flare shall be operated with a flame present at all times, as 
determined by the methods specified in paragraph (f)(2)(iii) of this 
section.
    (3) A flare shall be used only if the net heating value of the gas 
being combusted is 11.2 MJ/scm (300 Btu/scf) or greater if the flare is 
steam-assisted or air-assisted; or if the net heating value of the gas 
being combusted is 7.45 MJ/scm (200 Btu/scf) or greater if the flare is 
nonassisted. The net heating value of the gas being combusted shall be 
determined by the methods specified in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.

[[Page 309]]

    (4)(i) A steam-assisted or nonassisted flare shall be designed for 
and operated with an exit velocity, as determined by the methods 
specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, less than 18.3 m/s (60 
ft/s), except as provided in paragraphs (d)(4) (ii) and (iii) of this 
section.
    (ii) A steam-assisted or nonassisted flare designed for and operated 
with an exit velocity, as determined by the methods specified in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section, equal to or greater than 18.3 m/s (60 
ft/s) but less than 122 m/s (400 ft/s) is allowed if the net heating 
value of the gas being combusted is greater than 37.3 MJ/scm (1,000 Btu/
scf).
    (iii) A steam-assisted or nonassisted flare designed for and 
operated with an exit velocity, as determined by the methods specified 
in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, less than the velocity, 
V<INF>max</INF>, as determined by the method specified in paragraph 
(e)(4) of this section and less than 122 m/s (400 ft/s) is allowed.
    (5) An air-assisted flare shall be designed and operated with an 
exit velocity less than the velocity, V<INF>max</INF>, as determined by 
the method specified in paragraph (e)(5) of this section.
    (6) A flare used to comply with this section shall be steam-
assisted, air-assisted, or nonassisted.
    (e)(1) Reference Method 22 in 40 CFR part 60 shall be used to 
determine the compliance of a flare with the visible emission provisions 
of this subpart. The observation period is 2 hours and shall be used 
according to Method 22.
    (2) The net heating value of the gas being combusted in a flare 
shall be calculated using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26OC93.010

where:

H<INF>T</INF>=Net heating value of the sample, MJ/scm; where the net 
          enthalpy per mole of offgas is based on combustion at 25 
          deg.C and 760 mm Hg, but the standard temperature for 
          determining the volume corresponding to 1 mol is 20  deg.C;
K=Constant, 1.74 x 10<SUP>-7</SUP> (1/ppm) (g mol/scm) (MJ/kcal) where 
          standard temperature for (g mol/scm) is 20  deg.C;
C<INF>i</INF>=Concentration of sample component i in ppm on a wet basis, 
          as measured for organics by Reference Method 18 in 40 CFR part 
          60 and measured for hydrogen and carbon monoxide by ASTM D 
          1946-82 (incorporated by reference as specified in 
          Sec. 260.11); and
H<INF>i</INF>=Net heat of combustion of sample component i, kcal/9 mol 
          at 25  deg.C and 760 mm Hg. The heats of combustion may be 
          determined using ASTM D 2382-83 (incorporated by reference as 
          specified in Sec. 260.11) if published values are not 
          available or cannot be calculated.

    (3) The actual exit velocity of a flare shall be determined by 
dividing the volumetric flow rate (in units of standard temperature and 
pressure), as determined by Reference Methods 2, 2A, 2C, or 2D in 40 CFR 
part 60 as appropriate, by the unobstructed (free) cross-sectional area 
of the flare tip.
    (4) The maximum allowed velocity in m/s, V<INF>max</INF>, for a 
flare complying with paragraph (d)(4)(iii) of this section shall be 
determined by the following equation:

Log<INF>10</INF>(V<INF>max</INF>)=(H<INF>T</INF>+28.8)/31.7

where:

28.8=Constant,
31.7=Constant,
H<INF>T</INF>=The net heating value as determined in paragraph (e)(2) of 
          this section.

    (5) The maximum allowed velocity in m/s, V<INF>max</INF>, for an 
air-assisted flare shall be determined by the following equation:

V<INF>max</INF>=8.706+0.7084 (H<INF>T</INF>)

where:
8.706=Constant,
0.7084=Constant,
H<INF>T</INF>=The net heating value as determined in paragraph (e)(2) of 
          this section.

    (f) The owner or operator shall monitor and inspect each control 
device required to comply with this section to ensure proper operation 
and maintenance of the control device by implementing the following 
requirements:
    (1) Install, calibrate, maintain, and operate according to the 
manufacturer's specifications a flow indicator that provides a record of 
vent stream flow from each affected process vent to the control device 
at least once every hour. The flow indicator sensor shall be installed 
in the vent stream at the nearest feasible point to the control device 
inlet but before the point at which the vent streams are combined.

[[Page 310]]

    (2) Install, calibrate, maintain, and operate according to the 
manufacturer's specifications a device to continuously monitor control 
device operation as specified below:
    (i) For a thermal vapor incinerator, a temperature monitoring device 
equipped with a continuous recorder. The device shall have an accuracy 
of <plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in  deg.C or 
<plus-minus>0.5  deg.C, whichever is greater. The temperature sensor 
shall be installed at a location in the combustion chamber downstream of 
the combustion zone.
    (ii) For a catalytic vapor incinerator, a temperature monitoring 
device equipped with a continuous recorder. The device shall be capable 
of monitoring temperature at two locations and have an accuracy of 
<plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in  deg.C or 
<plus-minus>0.5  deg.C, whichever is greater. One temperature sensor 
shall be installed in the vent stream at the nearest feasible point to 
the catalyst bed inlet and a second temperature sensor shall be 
installed in the vent stream at the nearest feasible point to the 
catalyst bed outlet.
    (iii) For a flare, a heat sensing monitoring device equipped with a 
continuous recorder that indicates the continuous ignition of the pilot 
flame.
    (iv) For a boiler or process heater having a design heat input 
capacity less than 44 MW, a temperature monitoring device equipped with 
a continuous recorder. The device shall have an accuracy of 
<plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in  deg.C or 
<plus-minus>0.5  deg.C, whichever is greater. The temperature sensor 
shall be installed at a location in the furnace downstream of the 
combustion zone.
    (v) For a boiler or process heater having a design heat input 
capacity greater than or equal to 44 MW, a monitoring device equipped 
with a continuous recorder to measure a parameter(s) that indicates good 
combustion operating practices are being used.
    (vi) For a condenser, either:
    (A) A monitoring device equipped with a continuous recorder to 
measure the concentration level of the organic compounds in the exhaust 
vent stream from the condenser, or
    (B) A temperature monitoring device equipped with a continuous 
recorder. The device shall be capable of monitoring temperature with an 
accuracy of <plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in 
degrees Celsius ( deg.C) or <plus-minus>0.5  deg.C, whichever is 
greater. The temperature sensor shall be installed at a location in the 
exhaust vent stream from the condenser exit (i.e., product side).
    (vii) For a carbon adsorption system that regenerates the carbon bed 
directly in the control device such as a fixed-bed carbon adsorber, 
either:
    (A) A monitoring device equipped with a continuous recorder to 
measure the concentration level of the organic compounds in the exhaust 
vent stream from the carbon bed, or
    (B) A monitoring device equipped with a continuous recorder to 
measure a parameter that indicates the carbon bed is regenerated on a 
regular. predetermined time cycle.
    (3) Inspect the readings from each monitoring device required by 
paragraphs (f)(1) and (2) of this section at least once each operating 
day to check control device operation and, if necessary, immediately 
implement the corrective measures necessary to ensure the control device 
operates in compliance with the requirements of this section.
    (g) An owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system such as a 
fixed-bed carbon adsorber that regenerates the carbon bed directly 
onsite in the control device shall replace the existing carbon in the 
control device with fresh carbon at a regular, predetermined time 
interval that is no longer than the carbon service life established as a 
requirement of Sec. 264.1035(b)(4)(iii)(F).
    (h) An owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system such as a 
carbon canister that does not regenerate the carbon bed directly onsite 
in the control device shall replace the existing carbon in the control 
device with fresh carbon on a regular basis by using one of the 
following procedures:
    (1) Monitor the concentration level of the organic compounds in the 
exhaust vent stream from the carbon adsorption system on a regular 
schedule, and replace the existing carbon with fresh carbon immediately 
when carbon

[[Page 311]]

breakthrough is indicated. The monitoring frequency shall be daily or at 
an interval no greater than 20 percent of the time required to consume 
the total carbon working capacity established as a requirement of 
Sec. 264.1035(b)(4)(iii)(G), whichever is longer.
    (2) Replace the existing carbon with fresh carbon at a regular, 
predetermined time interval that is less than the design carbon 
replacement interval established as a requirement of 
Sec. 264.1035(b)(4)(iii)(G).
    (i) An alternative operational or process parameter may be monitored 
if it can be demonstrated that another parameter will ensure that the 
control device is operated in conformance with these standards and the 
control device's design specifications.
    (j) An owner or operator of an affected facility seeking to comply 
with the provisions of this part by using a control device other than a 
thermal vapor incinerator, catalytic vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, 
process heater, condenser, or carbon adsorption system is required to 
develop documentation including sufficient information to describe the 
control device operation and identify the process parameter or 
parameters that indicate proper operation and maintenance of the control 
device.
    (k) A closed-vent system shall meet either of the following design 
requirements:
    (1) A closed-vent system shall be designed to operate with no 
detectable emissions, as indicated by an instrument reading of less than 
500 ppmv above background as determined by the procedure in 
Sec. 264.1034(b) of this subpart, and by visual inspections; or
    (2) A closed-vent system shall be designed to operate at a pressure 
below atmospheric pressure. The system shall be equipped with at least 
one pressure gauge or other pressure measurement device that can be read 
from a readily accessible location to verify that negative pressure is 
being maintained in the closed-vent system when the control device is 
operating.
    (l) The owner or operator shall monitor and inspect each closed-vent 
system required to comply with this section to ensure proper operation 
and maintenance of the closed-vent system by implementing the following 
requirements:
    (1) Each closed-vent system that is used to comply with paragraph 
(k)(1) of this section shall be inspected and monitored in accordance 
with the following requirements:
    (i) An initial leak detection monitoring of the closed-vent system 
shall be conducted by the owner or operator on or before the date that 
the system becomes subject to this section. The owner or operator shall 
monitor the closed-vent system components and connections using the 
procedures specified in Sec. 264.1034(b) of this subpart to demonstrate 
that the closed-vent system operates with no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppmv above 
background.
    (ii) After initial leak detection monitoring required in paragraph 
(l)(1)(i) of this section, the owner or operator shall inspect and 
monitor the closed-vent system as follows:
    (A) Closed-vent system joints, seams, or other connections that are 
permanently or semi-permanently sealed (e.g., a welded joint between two 
sections of hard piping or a bolted and gasketed ducting flange) shall 
be visually inspected at least once per year to check for defects that 
could result in air pollutant emissions. The owner or operator shall 
monitor a component or connection using the procedures specified in 
Sec. 264.1034(b) of this subpart to demonstrate that it operates with no 
detectable emissions following any time the component is repaired or 
replaced (e.g., a section of damaged hard piping is replaced with new 
hard piping) or the connection is unsealed (e.g., a flange is unbolted).
    (B) Closed-vent system components or connections other than those 
specified in paragraph (l)(1)(ii)(A) of this section shall be monitored 
annually and at other times as requested by the Regional Administrator, 
except as provided for in paragraph (o) of this section, using the 
procedures specified in Sec. 264.1034(b) of this subpart to demonstrate 
that the components or connections operate with no detectable emissions.

[[Page 312]]

    (iii) In the event that a defect or leak is detected, the owner or 
operator shall repair the defect or leak in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (l)(3) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
and monitoring in accordance with the requirements specified in 
Sec. 264.1035 of this subpart.
    (2) Each closed-vent system that is used to comply with paragraph 
(k)(2) of this section shall be inspected and monitored in accordance 
with the following requirements:
    (i) The closed-vent system shall be visually inspected by the owner 
or operator to check for defects that could result in air pollutant 
emissions. Defects include, but are not limited to, visible cracks, 
holes, or gaps in ductwork or piping or loose connections.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the closed-vent system on or before the date that the system becomes 
subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or operator shall perform 
the inspections at least once every year.
    (iii) In the event that a defect or leak is detected, the owner or 
operator shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (l)(3) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
and monitoring in accordance with the requirements specified in 
Sec. 264.1035 of this subpart.
    (3) The owner or operator shall repair all detected defects as 
follows:
    (i) Detectable emissions, as indicated by visual inspection, or by 
an instrument reading greater than 500 ppmv above background, shall be 
controlled as soon as practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days 
after the emission is detected, except as provided for in paragraph 
(l)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) A first attempt at repair shall be made no later than 5 
calendar days after the emission is detected.
    (iii) Delay of repair of a closed-vent system for which leaks have 
been detected is allowed if the repair is technically infeasible without 
a process unit shutdown, or if the owner or operator determines that 
emissions resulting from immediate repair would be greater than the 
fugitive emissions likely to result from delay of repair. Repair of such 
equipment shall be completed by the end of the next process unit 
shutdown.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the defect 
repair in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1035 of 
this subpart.
    (m) Closed-vent systems and control devices used to comply with 
provisions of this subpart shall be operated at all times when emissions 
may be vented to them.
    (n) The owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system to 
control air pollutant emissions shall document that all carbon that is a 
hazardous waste and that is removed from the control device is managed 
in one of the following manners, regardless of the average volatile 
organic concentration of the carbon:
    (1) Regenerated or reactivated in a thermal treatment unit that 
meets one of the following:
    (i) The owner or operator of the unit has been issued a final permit 
under 40 CFR part 270 which implements the requirements of subpart X of 
this part; or
    (ii) The unit is equipped with and operating air emission controls 
in accordance with the applicable requirements of subparts AA and CC of 
either this part or of 40 CFR part 265; or
    (iii) The unit is equipped with and operating air emission controls 
in accordance with a national emission standard for hazardous air 
pollutants under 40 CFR part 61 or 40 CFR part 63.
    (2) Incinerated in a hazardous waste incinerator for which the owner 
or operator either:
    (i) Has been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of subpart O of this part; or
    (ii) Has designed and operates the incinerator in accordance with 
the interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 265, subpart O.
    (3) Burned in a boiler or industrial furnace for which the owner or 
operator either:
    (i) Has been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H; or

[[Page 313]]

    (ii) Has designed and operates the boiler or industrial furnace in 
accordance with the interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 266, 
subpart H.
    (o) Any components of a closed-vent system that are designated, as 
described in Sec. 264.1035(c)(9) of this subpart, as unsafe to monitor 
are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (l)(1)(ii)(B) of this 
section if:
    (1) The owner or operator of the closed-vent system determines that 
the components of the closed-vent system are unsafe to monitor because 
monitoring personnel would be exposed to an immediate danger as a 
consequence of complying with paragraph (l)(1)(ii)(B) of this section; 
and
    (2) The owner or operator of the closed-vent system adheres to a 
written plan that requires monitoring the closed-vent system components 
using the procedure specified in paragraph (l)(1)(ii)(B) of this section 
as frequently as practicable during safe-to-monitor times.
[55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 
59 FR 62927, Dec. 6, 1994; 61 FR 4911, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 FR 59950, Nov. 
25, 1996; 62 FR 64657, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1034  Test methods and procedures.

    (a) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this subpart 
shall comply with the test methods and procedures requirements provided 
in this section.
    (b) When a closed-vent system is tested for compliance with no 
detectable emissions, as required in Sec. 264.1033(l) of this subpart, 
the test shall comply with the following requirements:
    (1) Monitoring shall comply with Reference Method 21 in 40 CFR part 
60.
    (2) (6) The detection instrument shall meet the performance criteria 
of Reference Method 21.
    (3) The instrument shall be calibrated before use on each day of its 
use by the procedures specified in Reference Method 21.
    (4) Calibration gases shall be:
    (i) Zero air (less than 10 ppm of hydrocarbon in air).
    (ii) A mixture of methane or n-hexane and air at a concentration of 
approximately, but less than, 10,000 ppm methane or n-hexane.
    (5) The background level shall be determined as set forth in 
Reference Method 21.
    (6) The instrument probe shall be traversed around all potential 
leak interfaces as close to the interface as possible as described in 
Reference Method 21.
    (7) The arithmetic difference between the maximum concentration 
indicated by the instrument and the background level is compared with 
500 ppm for determining compliance.
    (c) Performance tests to determine compliance with Sec. 264.1032(a) 
and with the total organic compound concentration limit of 
Sec. 264.1033(c) shall comply with the following:
    (1) Performance tests to determine total organic compound 
concentrations and mass flow rates entering and exiting control devices 
shall be conducted and data reduced in accordance with the following 
reference methods and calculation procedures:
    (i) Method 2 in 40 CFR part 60 for velocity and volumetric flow 
rate.
    (ii) Method 18 in 40 CFR part 60 for organic content.
    (iii) Each performance test shall consist of three separate runs; 
each run conducted for at least 1 hour under the conditions that exist 
when the hazardous waste management unit is operating at the highest 
load or capacity level reasonably expected to occur. For the purpose of 
determining total organic compound concentrations and mass flow rates, 
the average of results of all runs shall apply. The average shall be 
computed on a time-weighted basis.
    (iv) Total organic mass flow rates shall be determined by the 
following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.173

where:

E<INF>h</INF>=Total organic mass flow rate, kg/h;
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Volumetric flow rate of gases entering or exiting control 
          device, as determined by Method 2, dscm/h;
n=Number of organic compounds in the vent gas;
C<INF>i</INF>=Organic concentration in ppm, dry basis, of compound i in 
          the vent gas, as determined by Method 18;

[[Page 314]]

MW<INF>i</INF>=Molecular weight of organic compound i in the vent gas, 
          kg/kg-mol;
0.0416=Conversion factor for molar volume, kg-mol/m<SUP>3</SUP> (@ 293 K 
          and 760 mm Hg);
10<SUP>-6</SUP>=Conversion from ppm, ppm<SUP>-1</SUP>.

    (v) The annual total organic emission rate shall be determined by 
the following equation:

E<INF>A</INF>=(E<INF>h</INF>)(H)

where:

E<INF>A</INF>=Total organic mass emission rate, kg/y;
E<INF>h</INF>=Total organic mass flow rate for the process vent, kg/h;
H=Total annual hours of operations for the affected unit, h.

    (vi) Total organic emissions from all affected process vents at the 
facility shall be determined by summing the hourly total organic mass 
emission rates (E<INF>h</INF> as determined in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of 
this section) and by summing the annual total organic mass emission 
rates (E<INF>A</INF>, as determined in paragraph (c)(1)(v) of this 
section) for all affected process vents at the facility.
    (2) The owner or operator shall record such process information as 
may be necessary to determine the conditions of the performance tests. 
Operations during periods of startup, shutdown, and malfunction shall 
not constitute representative conditions for the purpose of a 
performance test.
    (3) The owner or operator of an affected facility shall provide, or 
cause to be provided, performance testing facilities as follows:
    (i) Sampling ports adequate for the test methods specified in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (ii) Safe sampling platform(s).
    (iii) Safe access to sampling platform(s).
    (iv) Utilities for sampling and testing equipment.
    (4) For the purpose of making compliance determinations, the time-
weighted average of the results of the three runs shall apply. In the 
event that a sample is accidentally lost or conditions occur in which 
one of the three runs must be discontinued because of forced shutdown, 
failure of an irreplaceable portion of the sample train, extreme 
meteorological conditions, or other circumstances beyond the owner or 
operator's control, compliance may, upon the Regional Administrator's 
approval, be determined using the average of the results of the two 
other runs.
    (d) To show that a process vent associated with a hazardous waste 
distillation, fractionation, thin-film evaporation, solvent extraction, 
or air or steam stripping operation is not subject to the requirements 
of this subpart, the owner or operator must make an initial 
determination that the time-weighted, annual average total organic 
concentration of the waste managed by the waste management unit is less 
than 10 ppmw using one of the following two methods:
    (1) Direct measurement of the organic concentration of the waste 
using the following procedures:
    (i) The owner or operator must take a minimum of four grab samples 
of waste for each waste stream managed in the affected unit under 
process conditions expected to cause the maximum waste organic 
concentration.
    (ii) For waste generated onsite, the grab samples must be collected 
at a point before the waste is exposed to the atmosphere such as in an 
enclosed pipe or other closed system that is used to transfer the waste 
after generation to the first affected distillation, fractionation, 
thin-film evaporation, solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping 
operation. For waste generated offsite, the grab samples must be 
collected at the inlet to the first waste management unit that receives 
the waste provided the waste has been transferred to the facility in a 
closed system such as a tank truck and the waste is not diluted or mixed 
with other waste.
    (iii) Each sample shall be analyzed and the total organic 
concentration of the sample shall be computed using Method 9060 or 8260 
of SW-846 (incorporated by reference under Sec. 260.11).
    (iv) The arithmetic mean of the results of the analyses of the four 
samples shall apply for each waste stream managed in the unit in 
determining the time-weighted, annual average total organic 
concentration of the waste. The time-weighted average is to be 
calculated using the annual quantity of each waste stream processed and 
the mean organic concentration of each waste stream managed in the unit.

[[Page 315]]

    (2) Using knowledge of the waste to determine that its total organic 
concentration is less than 10 ppmw. Documentation of the waste 
determination is required. Examples of documentation that shall be used 
to support a determination under this provision include production 
process information documenting that no organic compounds are used, 
information that the waste is generated by a process that is identical 
to a process at the same or another facility that has previously been 
demonstrated by direct measurement to generate a waste stream having a 
total organic content less than 10 ppmw, or prior speciation analysis 
results on the same waste stream where it can also be documented that no 
process changes have occurred since that analysis that could affect the 
waste total organic concentration.
    (e) The determination that distillation, fractionation, thin-film 
evaporation, solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping operations 
manage hazardous wastes with time-weighted, annual average total organic 
concentrations less than 10 ppmw shall be made as follows:
    (1) By the effective date that the facility becomes subject to the 
provisions of this subpart or by the date when the waste is first 
managed in a waste management unit, whichever is later, and
    (2) For continuously generated waste, annually, or
    (3) Whenever there is a change in the waste being managed or a 
change in the process that generates or treats the waste.
    (f) When an owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree on whether a distillation, fractionation, thin-film evaporation, 
solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping operation manages a 
hazardous waste with organic concentrations of at least 10 ppmw based on 
knowledge of the waste, the procedures in Method 8260 of SW-846 
(incorporated by reference under Sec. 260.11) may be used to resolve the 
dispute.
[55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 59951, Nov. 25, 1996; 
62 FR 32462, June 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1035  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a)(1) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this 
subpart shall comply with the recordkeeping requirements of this 
section.
    (2) An owner or operator of more than one hazardous waste management 
unit subject to the provisions of this subpart may comply with the 
recordkeeping requirements for these hazardous waste management units in 
one recordkeeping system if the system identifies each record by each 
hazardous waste management unit.
    (b) Owners and operators must record the following information in 
the facility operating record:
    (1) For facilities that comply with the provisions of 
Sec. 264.1033(a)(2), an implementation schedule that includes dates by 
which the closed-vent system and control device will be installed and in 
operation. The schedule must also include a rationale of why the 
installation cannot be completed at an earlier date. The implementation 
schedule must be in the facility operating record by the effective date 
that the facility becomes subject to the provisions of this subpart.
    (2) Up-to-date documentation of compliance with the process vent 
standards in Sec. 264.1032, including:
    (i) Information and data identifying all affected process vents, 
annual throughput and operating hours of each affected unit, estimated 
emission rates for each affected vent and for the overall facility 
(i.e., the total emissions for all affected vents at the facility), and 
the approximate location within the facility of each affected unit 
(e.g., identify the hazardous waste management units on a facility plot 
plan).
    (ii) Information and data supporting determinations of vent 
emissions and emission reductions achieved by add-on control devices 
based on engineering calculations or source tests. For the purpose of 
determining compliance, determinations of vent emissions and emission 
reductions must be made using operating parameter values (e.g., 
temperatures, flow rates, or vent stream organic compounds and 
concentrations) that represent the conditions that result in maximum 
organic

[[Page 316]]

emissions, such as when the waste management unit is operating at the 
highest load or capacity level reasonably expected to occur. If the 
owner or operator takes any action (e.g., managing a waste of different 
composition or increasing operating hours of affected waste management 
units) that would result in an increase in total organic emissions from 
affected process vents at the facility, then a new determination is 
required.
    (3) Where an owner or operator chooses to use test data to determine 
the organic removal efficiency or total organic compound concentration 
achieved by the control device, a performance test plan. The test plan 
must include:
    (i) A description of how it is determined that the planned test is 
going to be conducted when the hazardous waste management unit is 
operating at the highest load or capacity level reasonably expected to 
occur. This shall include the estimated or design flow rate and organic 
content of each vent stream and define the acceptable operating ranges 
of key process and control device parameters during the test program.
    (ii) A detailed engineering description of the closed-vent system 
and control device including:
    (A) Manufacturer's name and model number of control device.
    (B) Type of control device.
    (C) Dimensions of the control device.
    (D) Capacity.
    (E) Construction materials.
    (iii) A detailed description of sampling and monitoring procedures, 
including sampling and monitoring locations in the system, the equipment 
to be used, sampling and monitoring frequency, and planned analytical 
procedures for sample analysis.
    (4) Documentation of compliance with Sec. 264.1033 shall include the 
following information:
    (i) A list of all information references and sources used in 
preparing the documentation.
    (ii) Records, including the dates, of each compliance test required 
by Sec. 264.1033(k).
    (iii) If engineering calculations are used, a design analysis, 
specifications, drawings, schematics, and piping and instrumentation 
diagrams based on the appropriate sections of ``APTI Course 415: Control 
of Gaseous Emissions'' (incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 260.11) or other engineering texts acceptable to the Regional 
Administrator that present basic control device design information. 
Documentation provided by the control device manufacturer or vendor that 
describes the control device design in accordance with paragraphs 
(b)(4)(iii)(A) through (b)(4)(iii)(G) of this section may be used to 
comply with this requirement. The design analysis shall address the vent 
stream characteristics and control device operation parameters as 
specified below.
    (A) For a thermal vapor incinerator, the design analysis shall 
consider the vent stream composition, constituent concentrations, and 
flow rate. The design analysis shall also establish the design minimum 
and average temperature in the combustion zone and the combustion zone 
residence time.
    (B) For a catalytic vapor incinerator, the design analysis shall 
consider the vent stream composition, constituent concentrations, and 
flow rate. The design analysis shall also establish the design minimum 
and average temperatures across the catalyst bed inlet and outlet.
    (C) For a boiler or process heater, the design analysis shall 
consider the vent stream composition, constituent concentrations, and 
flow rate. The design analysis shall also establish the design minimum 
and average flame zone temperatures, combustion zone residence time, and 
description of method and location where the vent stream is introduced 
into the combustion zone.
    (D) For a flare, the design analysis shall consider the vent stream 
composition, constituent concentrations, and flow rate. The design 
analysis shall also consider the requirements specified in 
Sec. 264.1033(d).
    (E) For a condenser, the design analysis shall consider the vent 
stream composition, constituent concentrations, flow rate, relative 
humidity, and temperature. The design analysis shall also establish the 
design outlet organic compound concentration level, design average 
temperature of the condenser

[[Page 317]]

exhaust vent stream, and design average temperatures of the coolant 
fluid at the condenser inlet and outlet.
    (F) For a carbon adsorption system such as a fixed-bed adsorber that 
regenerates the carbon bed directly onsite in the control device, the 
design analysis shall consider the vent stream composition, constituent 
concentrations, flow rate, relative humidity, and temperature. The 
design analysis shall also establish the design exhaust vent stream 
organic compound concentration level, number and capacity of carbon 
beds, type and working capacity of activated carbon used for carbon 
beds, design total steam flow over the period of each complete carbon 
bed regeneration cycle, duration of the carbon bed steaming and cooling/
drying cycles, design carbon bed temperature after regeneration, design 
carbon bed regeneration time, and design service life of carbon.
    (G) For a carbon adsorption system such as a carbon canister that 
does not regenerate the carbon bed directly onsite in the control 
device, the design analysis shall consider the vent stream composition, 
constituent concentrations, flow rate, relative humidity, and 
temperature. The design analysis shall also establish the design outlet 
organic concentration level, capacity of carbon bed, type and working 
capacity of activated carbon used for carbon bed, and design carbon 
replacement interval based on the total carbon working capacity of the 
control device and source operating schedule.
    (iv) A statement signed and dated by the owner or operator 
certifying that the operating parameters used in the design analysis 
reasonably represent the conditions that exist when the hazardous waste 
management unit is or would be operating at the highest load or capacity 
level reasonably expected to occur.
    (v) A statement signed and dated by the owner or operator certifying 
that the control device is designed to operate at an efficiency of 95 
percent or greater unless the total organic concentration limit of 
Sec. 264.1032(a) is achieved at an efficiency less than 95 weight 
percent or the total organic emission limits of Sec. 264.1032(a) for 
affected process vents at the facility can be attained by a control 
device involving vapor recovery at an efficiency less than 95 weight 
percent. A statement provided by the control device manufacturer or 
vendor certifying that the control equipment meets the design 
specifications may be used to comply with this requirement.
    (vi) If performance tests are used to demonstrate compliance, all 
test results.
    (c) Design documentation and monitoring, operating, and inspection 
information for each closed-vent system and control device required to 
comply with the provisions of this part shall be recorded and kept up-
to-date in the facility operating record. The information shall include:
    (1) Description and date of each modification that is made to the 
closed-vent system or control device design.
    (2) Identification of operating parameter, description of monitoring 
device, and diagram of monitoring sensor location or locations used to 
comply with Sec. 264.1033 (f)(1) and (f)(2).
    (3) Monitoring, operating, and inspection information required by 
paragraphs (f) through (k) of Sec. 264.1033.
    (4) Date, time, and duration of each period that occurs while the 
control device is operating when any monitored parameter exceeds the 
value established in the control device design analysis as specified 
below:
    (i) For a thermal vapor incinerator designed to operate with a 
minimum residence time of 0.50 second at a minimum temperature of 760 
deg.C. period when the combustion temperature is below 760  deg.C.
    (ii) For a thermal vapor incinerator designed to operate with an 
organic emission reduction efficiency of 95 weight percent or greater 
period when the combustion zone temperature is more than 28  deg.C below 
the design average combustion zone temperature established as a 
requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(A) of this section.
    (iii) For a catalytic vapor incinerator, period when:
    (A) Temperature of the vent stream at the catalyst bed inlet is more 
than 28  deg.C below the average temperature of the inlet vent stream 
established as a

[[Page 318]]

requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(B) of this section, or
    (B) Temperature difference across the catalyst bed is less than 80 
percent of the design average temperature difference established as a 
requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(B) of this section.
    (iv) For a boiler or process heater, period when:
    (A) Flame zone temperature is more than 28  deg.C below the design 
average flame zone temperature established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(C) of this section, or
    (B) Position changes where the vent stream is introduced to the 
combustion zone from the location established as a requirement of 
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(C) of this section.
    (v) For a flare, period when the pilot flame is not ignited.
    (vi) For a condenser that complies with Sec. 264.1033(f)(2)(vi)(A), 
period when the organic compound concentration level or readings of 
organic compounds in the exhaust vent stream from the condenser are more 
than 20 percent greater than the design outlet organic compound 
concentration level established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(E) of this section.
    (vii) For a condenser that complies with Sec. 264.1033(f)(2)(vi)(B), 
period when:
    (A) Temperature of the exhaust vent stream from the condenser is 
more than 6  deg.C above the design average exhaust vent stream 
temperature established as a requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of 
this section; or
    (B) Temperature of the coolant fluid exiting the condenser is more 
than 6  deg.C above the design average coolant fluid temperature at the 
condenser outlet established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(E) of this section.
    (viii) For a carbon adsorption system such as a fixed-bed carbon 
adsorber that regenerates the carbon bed directly onsite in the control 
device and complies with Sec. 264.1033(f)(2)(vii)(A), period when the 
organic compound concentration level or readings of organic compounds in 
the exhaust vent stream from the carbon bed are more than 20 percent 
greater than the design exhaust vent stream organic compound 
concentration level established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(F) of this section.
    (ix) For a carbon adsorption system such as a fixed-bed carbon 
adsorber that regenerates the carbon bed directly onsite in the control 
device and complies with Sec. 264.1033(f)(2)(vii)(B), period when the 
vent stream continues to flow through the control device beyond the 
predetermined carbon bed regeneration time established as a requirement 
of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(F) of this section.
    (5) Explanation for each period recorded under paragraph (4) of the 
cause for control device operating parameter exceeding the design value 
and the measures implemented to correct the control device operation.
    (6) For a carbon adsorption system operated subject to requirements 
specified in Sec. 264.1033(g) or Sec. 264.1033(h)(2), date when existing 
carbon in the control device is replaced with fresh carbon.
    (7) For a carbon adsorption system operated subject to requirements 
specified in Sec. 264.1033(h)(1), a log that records:
    (i) Date and time when control device is monitored for carbon 
breakthrough and the monitoring device reading.
    (ii) Date when existing carbon in the control device is replaced 
with fresh carbon.
    (8) Date of each control device startup and shutdown.
    (9) An owner or operator designating any components of a closed-vent 
system as unsafe to monitor pursuant to Sec. 264.1033(o) of this subpart 
shall record in a log that is kept in the facility operating record the 
identification of closed-vent system components that are designated as 
unsafe to monitor in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1033(o) of this subpart, an explanation for each closed-vent 
system component stating why the closed-vent system component is unsafe 
to monitor, and the plan for monitoring each closed-vent system 
component.
    (10) When each leak is detected as specified in Sec. 264.1033(l) of 
this subpart, the following information shall be recorded:
    (i) The instrument identification number, the closed-vent system 
component identification number, and the operator name, initials, or 
identification number.

[[Page 319]]

    (ii) The date the leak was detected and the date of first attempt to 
repair the leak.
    (iii) The date of successful repair of the leak.
    (iv) Maximum instrument reading measured by Method 21 of 40 CFR part 
60, appendix A after it is successfully repaired or determined to be 
nonrepairable.
    (v) ``Repair delayed'' and the reason for the delay if a leak is not 
repaired within 15 calendar days after discovery of the leak.
    (A) The owner or operator may develop a written procedure that 
identifies the conditions that justify a delay of repair. In such cases, 
reasons for delay of repair may be documented by citing the relevant 
sections of the written procedure.
    (B) If delay of repair was caused by depletion of stocked parts, 
there must be documentation that the spare parts were sufficiently 
stocked on-site before depletion and the reason for depletion.
    (d) Records of the monitoring, operating, and inspection information 
required by paragraphs (c)(3) through (c)(10) of this section shall be 
maintained by the owner or operator for at least 3 years following the 
date of each occurrence, measurement, maintenance, corrective action, or 
record.
    (e) For a control device other than a thermal vapor incinerator, 
catalytic vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, process heater, condenser, 
or carbon adsorption system, the Regional Administrator will specify the 
appropriate recordkeeping requirements.
    (f) Up-to-date information and data used to determine whether or not 
a process vent is subject to the requirements in Sec. 264.1032 including 
supporting documentation as required by Sec. 264.1034(d)(2) when 
application of the knowledge of the nature of the hazardous waste stream 
or the process by which it was produced is used, shall be recorded in a 
log that is kept in the facility operating record.
[55 FR 25494, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 
61 FR 59952, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1036  Reporting requirements.

    (a) A semiannual report shall be submitted by owners and operators 
subject to the requirements of this subpart to the Regional 
Administrator by dates specified by the Regional Administrator. The 
report shall include the following information:
    (1) The Environmental Protection Agency identification number, name, 
and address of the facility.
    (2) For each month during the semiannual reporting period, dates 
when the control device exceeded or operated outside of the design 
specifications as defined in Sec. 264.1035(c)(4) and as indicated by the 
control device monitoring required by Sec. 264.1033(f) and such 
exceedances were not corrected within 24 hours, or that a flare operated 
with visible emissions as defined in Sec. 264.1033(d) and as determined 
by Method 22 monitoring, the duration and cause of each exceedance or 
visible emissions, and any corrective measures taken.
    (b) If, during the semiannual reporting period, the control device 
does not exceed or operate outside of the design specifications as 
defined in Sec. 264.1035(c)(4) for more than 24 hours or a flare does 
not operate with visible emissions as defined in Sec. 264.1033(d), a 
report to the Regional Administrator is not required.


<R05>
Secs. 264.1037--264.1049  [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart BB--Air Emission Standards for Equipment Leaks

    Source: 55 FR 25501, June 21, 1990, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1050  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that treat, store, or dispose of hazardous wastes (except as 
provided in Sec. 264.1).
    (b) Except as provided in Sec. 264.1064(k), this subpart applies to 
equipment that contains or contacts hazardous wastes with organic 
concentrations of at least 10 percent by weight that are managed in one 
of the following:
    (1) A unit that is subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR 
part 270, or

[[Page 320]]

    (2) A unit (including a hazardous waste recycling unit) that is not 
exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 CFR 262.34(a) (i.e., a 
hazardous waste recycling unit that is not a ``90-day'' tank or 
container) and that is located at a hazardous waste management facility 
otherwise subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR part 270, or
    (3) A unit that is exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 
CFR 262.34(a) (i.e., a ``90-day'' tank or container) and is not a 
recycling unit under the provisions of 40 CFR 261.6.
    (c) For the owner or operator of a facility subject to this subpart 
and who received a final permit under RCRA section 3005 prior to 
December 6, 1996, the requirements of this subpart shall be incorporated 
into the permit when the permit is reissued in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR 124.15 or reviewed in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR 270.50(d). Until such date when the owner or 
operator receives a final permit incorporating the requirements of this 
subpart, the owner or operator is subject to the requirements of 40 CFR 
part 265, subpart BB.
    (d) Each piece of equipment to which this subpart applies shall be 
marked in such a manner that it can be distinguished readily from other 
pieces of equipment.
    (e) Equipment that is in vacuum service is excluded from the 
requirements of Sec. 264.1052 to Sec. 264.1060 if it is identified as 
required in Sec. 264.1064(g)(5).
    (f) Equipment that contains or contacts hazardous waste with an 
organic concentration of at least 10 percent by weight for less than 300 
hours per calendar year is excluded from the requirements of 
Secs. 264.1052 through 264.1060 of this subpart if it is identified, as 
required in Sec. 264,1064(g)(6) of this subpart.
    (g) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the 
pharmaceutical manufacturing facility, commonly referred to as the 
Stonewall Plant, located at Route 340 South, Elkton, Virginia, provided 
that facility is operated in compliance with the requirements contained 
in a Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454. The 
requirements of this subpart shall apply to the facility upon 
termination of the Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 
52.2454.

    [Note: The requirements of Secs. 264.1052 through 264.1065 apply to 
equipment associated with hazardous waste recycling units previously 
exempt under Sec. 261.6(c)(1). Other exemptions under Secs. 261.4, and 
264.1(g) are not affected by these requirements.]

[55 FR 25501, June 21, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 59952, Nov. 25, 1996; 
62 FR 52641, Oct. 8, 1997; 62 FR 64657, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1051  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, all terms shall have the meaning given them 
in Sec. 264.1031, the Act, and parts 260-266.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1052  Standards: Pumps in light liquid service.

    (a)(1) Each pump in light liquid service shall be monitored monthly 
to detect leaks by the methods specified in Sec. 264.1063(b), except as 
provided in paragraphs (d), (e), and (f) of this section.
    (2) Each pump in light liquid service shall be checked by visual 
inspection each calendar week for indications of liquids dripping from 
the pump seal.
    (b)(1) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is 
measured, a leak is detected.
    (2) If there are indications of liquids dripping from the pump seal, 
a leak is detected.
    (c)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected, 
except as provided in Sec. 264.1059.
    (2) A first attempt at repair (e.g., tightening the packing gland) 
shall be made no later than 5 calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (d) Each pump equipped with a dual mechanical seal system that 
includes a barrier fluid system is exempt from the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section, provided the following requirements are 
met:
    (1) Each dual mechanical seal system must be:
    (i) Operated with the barrier fluid at a pressure that is at all 
times greater than the pump stuffing box pressure, or
    (ii) Equipped with a barrier fluid degassing reservoir that is 
connected by a closed-vent system to a control

[[Page 321]]

device that complies with the requirements of Sec. 264.1060, or
    (iii) Equipped with a system that purges the barrier fluid into a 
hazardous waste stream with no detectable emissions to the atmosphere.
    (2) The barrier fluid system must not be a hazardous waste with 
organic concentrations 10 percent or greater by weight.
    (3) Each barrier fluid system must be equipped with a sensor that 
will detect failure of the seal system, the barrier fluid system, or 
both.
    (4) Each pump must be checked by visual inspection, each calendar 
week, for indications of liquids dripping from the pump seals.
    (5)(i) Each sensor as described in paragraph (d)(3) of this section 
must be checked daily or be equipped with an audible alarm that must be 
checked monthly to ensure that it is functioning properly.
    (ii) The owner or operator must determine, based on design 
considerations and operating experience, a criterion that indicates 
failure of the seal system, the barrier fluid system, or both.
    (6)(i) If there are indications of liquids dripping from the pump 
seal or the sensor indicates failure of the seal system, the barrier 
fluid system, or both based on the criterion determined in paragraph 
(d)(5)(ii) of this section, a leak is detected.
    (ii) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected, 
except as provided in Sec. 264.1059.
    (iii) A first attempt at repair (e.g., relapping the seal) shall be 
made no later than 5 calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (e) Any pump that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 264.1064(g)(2), for no detectable emissions, as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background, is exempt from 
the requirements of paragraphs (a), (c), and (d) of this section if the 
pump meets the following requirements:
    (1) Must have no externally actuated shaft penetrating the pump 
housing.
    (2) Must operate with no detectable emissions as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background as measured by 
the methods specified in Sec. 264.1063(c).
    (3) Must be tested for compliance with paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section initially upon designation, annually, and at other times as 
requested by the Regional Administrator.
    (f) If any pump is equipped with a closed-vent system capable of 
capturing and transporting any leakage from the seal or seals to a 
control device that complies with the requirements of Sec. 264.1060, it 
is exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) through (e) of this 
section.
[55 FR 25501, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1053  Standards: Compressors.

    (a) Each compressor shall be equipped with a seal system that 
includes a barrier fluid system and that prevents leakage of total 
organic emissions to the atmosphere, except as provided in paragraphs 
(h) and (i) of this section.
    (b) Each compressor seal system as required in paragraph (a) of this 
section shall be:
    (1) Operated with the barrier fluid at a pressure that is at all 
times greater than the compressor stuffing box pressure, or
    (2) Equipped with a barrier fluid system that is connected by a 
closed-vent system to a control device that complies with the 
requirements of Sec. 264.1060, or
    (3) Equipped with a system that purges the barrier fluid into a 
hazardous waste stream with no detectable emissions to atmosphere.
    (c) The barrier fluid must not be a hazardous waste with organic 
concentrations 10 percent or greater by weight.
    (d) Each barrier fluid system as described in paragraphs (a) through 
(c) of this section shall be equipped with a sensor that will detect 
failure of the seal system, barrier fluid system, or both.
    (e)(1) Each sensor as required in paragraph (d) of this section 
shall be checked daily or shall be equipped with an audible alarm that 
must be checked monthly to ensure that it is functioning properly unless 
the compressor is

[[Page 322]]

located within the boundary of an unmanned plant site, in which case the 
sensor must be checked daily.
    (2) The owner or operator shall determine, based on design 
considerations and operating experience, a criterion that indicates 
failure of the seal system, the barrier fluid system, or both.
    (f) If the sensor indicates failure of the seal system, the barrier 
fluid system, or both based on the criterion determined under paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section, a leak is detected.
    (g)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected, 
except as provided in Sec. 264.1059.
    (2) A first attempt at repair (e.g., tightening the packing gland) 
shall be made no later than 5 calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (h) A compressor is exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this section if it is equipped with a closed-vent system 
capable of capturing and transporting any leakage from the seal to a 
control device that complies with the requirements of Sec. 264.1060, 
except as provided in paragraph (i) of this section.
    (i) Any compressor that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 264.1064(g)(2), for no detectable emissions as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background is exempt from 
the requirements of paragraphs (a) through (h) of this section if the 
compressor:
    (1) Is determined to be operating with no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above 
background, as measured by the method specified in Sec. 264.1063(c).
    (2) Is tested for compliance with paragraph (i)(1) of this section 
initially upon designation, annually, and at other times as requested by 
the Regional Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1054  Standards: Pressure relief devices in gas/vapor service.

    (a) Except during pressure releases, each pressure relief device in 
gas/vapor service shall be operated with no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above 
background, as measured by the method specified in Sec. 264.1063(c).
    (b)(1) After each pressure release, the pressure relief device shall 
be returned to a condition of no detectable emissions, as indicated by 
an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background, as soon as 
practicable, but no later than 5 calendar days after each pressure 
release, except as provided in Sec. 264.1059.
    (2) No later than 5 calendar days after the pressure release, the 
pressure relief device shall be monitored to confirm the condition of no 
detectable emissions, as indicated by an instrument reading of less than 
500 ppm above background, as measured by the method specified in 
Sec. 264.1063(c).
    (c) Any pressure relief device that is equipped with a closed-vent 
system capable of capturing and transporting leakage from the pressure 
relief device to a control device as described in Sec. 264.1060 is 
exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1055  Standards: Sampling connection systems.

    (a) Each sampling connection system shall be equipped with a closed-
purge, closed-loop, or closed-vent system. This system shall collect the 
sample purge for return to the process or for routing to the appropriate 
treatment system. Gases displaced during filling of the sample container 
are not required to be collected or captured.
    (b) Each closed-purge, closed-loop, or closed-vent system as 
required in paragraph (a) of this section shall meet one of the 
following requirements:
    (1) Return the purged process fluid directly to the process line;
    (2) Collect and recycle the purged process fluid; or
    (3) Be designed and operated to capture and transport all the purged 
process fluid to a waste management unit that complies with the 
applicable requirements of Sec. 264.1084 through Sec. 264.1086 of this 
subpart or a control device that complies with the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1060 of this subpart.

[[Page 323]]

    (c) In-situ sampling systems and sampling systems without purges are 
exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
[61 FR 59952, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1056  Standards: Open-ended valves or lines.

    (a)(1) Each open-ended valve or line shall be equipped with a cap, 
blind flange, plug, or a second valve.
    (2) The cap, blind flange, plug, or second valve shall seal the open 
end at all times except during operations requiring hazardous waste 
stream flow through the open-ended valve or line.
    (b) Each open-ended valve or line equipped with a second valve shall 
be operated in a manner such that the valve on the hazardous waste 
stream end is closed before the second valve is closed.
    (c) When a double block and bleed system is being used, the bleed 
valve or line may remain open during operations that require venting the 
line between the block valves but shall comply with paragraph (a) of 
this section at all other times.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1057  Standards: Valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid service.

    (a) Each valve in gas/vapor or light liquid service shall be 
monitored monthly to detect leaks by the methods specified in 
Sec. 264.1063(b) and shall comply with paragraphs (b) through (e) of 
this section, except as provided in paragraphs (f), (g), and (h) of this 
section, and Secs. 264.1061 and 264.1062.
    (b) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is measured, a 
leak is detected.
    (c)(1) Any valve for which a leak is not detected for two successive 
months may be monitored the first month of every succeeding quarter, 
beginning with the next quarter, until a leak is detected.
    (2) If a leak is detected, the valve shall be monitored monthly 
until a leak is not detected for two successive months,
    (d)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but no later than 15 calendar days after the leak is 
detected, except as provided in Sec. 264.1059.
    (2) A first attempt at repair shall be made no later than 5 calendar 
days after each leak is detected.
    (e) First attempts at repair include, but are not limited to, the 
following best practices where practicable:
    (1) Tightening of bonnet bolts.
    (2) Replacement of bonnet bolts.
    (3) Tightening of packing gland nuts.
    (4) Injection of lubricant into lubricated packing.
    (f) Any valve that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 264.1064(g)(2), for no detectable emissions, as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background, is exempt from 
the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if the valve:
    (1) Has no external actuating mechanism in contact with the 
hazardous waste stream.
    (2) Is operated with emissions less than 500 ppm above background as 
determined by the method specified in Sec. 264.1063(c).
    (3) Is tested for compliance with paragraph (f)(2) of this section 
initially upon designation, annually, and at other times as requested by 
the Regional Administrator.
    (g) Any valve that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 264.1064(h)(1), as an unsafe-to-monitor valve is exempt from the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if:
    (1) The owner or operator of the valve determines that the valve is 
unsafe to monitor because monitoring personnel would be exposed to an 
immediate danger as a consequence of complying with paragraph (a) of 
this section.
    (2) The owner or operator of the valve adheres to a written plan 
that requires monitoring of the valve as frequently as practicable 
during safe-to-monitor times.
    (h) Any valve that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 264.1064(h)(2), as a difficult-to-monitor valve is exempt from the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if:
    (1) The owner or operator of the valve determines that the valve 
cannot be monitored without elevating the monitoring personnel more than 
2 meters above a support surface.
    (2) The hazardous waste management unit within which the valve is 
located was in operation before June 21, 1990.

[[Page 324]]

    (3) The owner or operator of the valve follows a written plan that 
requires monitoring of the valve at least once per calendar year.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1058  Standards: Pumps and valves in heavy liquid service, pressure relief devices in light liquid or heavy liquid service, and flanges and other 
          connectors.

    (a) Pumps and valves in heavy liquid service, pressure relief 
devices in light liquid or heavy liquid service, and flanges and other 
connectors shall be monitored within 5 days by the method specified in 
Sec. 264.1063(b) if evidence of a potential leak is found by visual, 
audible, olfactory, or any other detection method.
    (b) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is measured, a 
leak is detected.
    (c)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected. 
except as provided in Sec. 264.1059.
    (2) The first attempt at repair shall be made no later than 5 
calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (d) First attempts at repair include, but are not limited to, the 
best practices described under Sec. 264.1057(e).
    (e) Any connector that is inaccessible or is ceramic or ceramic-
lined (e.g., porcelain, glass, or glass-lined) is exempt from the 
monitoring requirements of paragraph (a) of this section and from the 
recordkeeping requirements of Sec. 264.1064 of this subpart.
[55 FR 25501, June 21, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 59952, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1059  Standards: Delay of repair.

    (a) Delay of repair of equipment for which leaks have been detected 
will be allowed if the repair is technically infeasible without a 
hazardous waste management unit shutdown. In such a case, repair of this 
equipment shall occur before the end of the next hazardous waste 
management unit shutdown.
    (b) Delay of repair of equipment for which leaks have been detected 
will be allowed for equipment that is isolated from the hazardous waste 
management unit and that does not continue to contain or contact 
hazardous waste with organic concentrations at least 10 percent by 
weight.
    (c) Delay of repair for valves will be allowed if:
    (1) The owner or operator determines that emissions of purged 
material resulting from immediate repair are greater than the emissions 
likely to result from delay of repair.
    (2) When repair procedures are effected, the purged material is 
collected and destroyed or recovered in a control device complying with 
Sec. 264.1060.
    (d) Delay of repair for pumps will be allowed if:
    (1) Repair requires the use of a dual mechanical seal system that 
includes a barrier fluid system.
    (2) Repair is completed as soon as practicable, but not later than 6 
months after the leak was detected.
    (e) Delay of repair beyond a hazardous waste management unit 
shutdown will be allowed for a valve if valve assembly replacement is 
necessary during the hazardous waste management unit shutdown, valve 
assembly supplies have been depleted, and valve assembly supplies had 
been sufficiently stocked before the supplies were depleted. Delay of 
repair beyond the next hazardous waste management unit shutdown will not 
be allowed unless the next hazardous waste management unit shutdown 
occurs sooner than 6 months after the first hazardous waste management 
unit shutdown.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1060  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.

    (a) Owners and operators of closed-vent systems and control devices 
subject to this subpart shall comply with the provisions of 
Sec. 264.1033 of this part.
    (b)(1) The owner or operator of an existing facility who cannot 
install a closed-vent system and control device to comply with the 
provisions of this subpart on the effective date that the facility 
becomes subject to the provisions of this subpart must prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes dates by which the closed-vent 
system and control device will be installed and in operation. The 
controls must be installed as soon as possible, but the implementation 
schedule may allow up to 30 months after the effective date that

[[Page 325]]

the facility becomes subject to this subpart for installation and 
startup.
    (2) Any unit that begins operation after December 21, 1990, and is 
subject to the provisions of this subpart when operation begins, must 
comply with the rules immediately (i.e., must have control devices 
installed and operating on startup of the affected unit); the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply.
    (3) The owner or operator of any facility in existence on the 
effective date of a statutory or EPA regulatory amendment that renders 
the facility subject to this subpart shall comply with all requirements 
of this subpart as soon as practicable but no later than 30 months after 
the amendment's effective date. When control equipment required by this 
subpart can not be installed and begin operation by the effective date 
of the amendment, the facility owner or operator shall prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes the following information: 
Specific calendar dates for award or contracts or issuance of purchase 
orders for the control equipment, initiation of on-site installation of 
the control equipment, completion of the control equipment installation, 
and performance of any testing to demonstrate that the installed 
equipment meets the applicable standards of this subpart. The owner or 
operator shall enter the implementation schedule in the operating record 
or in a permanent, readily available file located at the facility.
    (4) Owners and operators of facilities and units that become newly 
subject to the requirements of this subpart after December 8, 1997, due 
to an action other than those described in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section must comply with all applicable requirements immediately (i.e., 
must have control devices installed and operating on the date the 
facility or unit becomes subject to this subpart; the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply).
[62 FR 64657, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1061  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid service: percentage of valves allowed to leak.

    (a) An owner or operator subject to the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1057 may elect to have all valves within a hazardous waste 
management unit comply with an alternative standard that allows no 
greater than 2 percent of the valves to leak.
    (b) The following requirements shall be met if an owner or operator 
decides to comply with the alternative standard of allowing 2 percent of 
valves to leak:
    (1) An owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator that 
the owner or operator has elected to comply with the requirements of 
this section.
    (2) A performance test as specified in paragraph (c) of this section 
shall be conducted initially upon designation, annually, and at other 
times requested by the Regional Administrator.
    (3) If a valve leak is detected, it shall be repaired in accordance 
with Sec. 264.1057(d) and (e).
    (c) Performance tests shall be conducted in the following manner:
    (1) All valves subject to the requirements in Sec. 264.1057 within 
the hazardous waste management unit shall be monitored within 1 week by 
the methods specified in Sec. 264.1063(b).
    (2) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is measured, a 
leak is detected.
    (3) The leak percentage shall be determined by dividing the number 
of valves subject to the requirements in Sec. 264.1057 for which leaks 
are detected by the total number of valves subject to the requirements 
in Sec. 264.1057 within the hazardous waste management unit.
    (d) If an owner or operator decides to comply with this section no 
longer, the owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator in 
writing that the work practice standard described in Sec. 264.1057(a) 
through (e) will be followed.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1062  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid service: skip period leak detection and repair.

    (a)(1) An owner or operator subject to the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1057 may elect for all valves within a hazardous waste 
management unit to comply with one of the alternative work practices 
specified in paragraphs (b) (2) and (3) of this section.

[[Page 326]]

    (2) An owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator 
before implementing one of the alternative work practices.
    (b)(1) An owner or operator shall comply with the requirements for 
valves, as described in Sec. 264.1057, except as described in paragraphs 
(b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section.
    (2) After two consecutive quarterly leak detection periods with the 
percentage of valves leaking equal to or less than 2 percent, an owner 
or operator may begin to skip one of the quarterly leak detection 
periods (i.e., monitor for leaks once every six months) for the valves 
subject to the requirements in Sec. 264.1057 of this subpart.
    (3) After five consecutive quarterly leak detection periods with the 
percentage of valves leaking equal to or less than 2 percent, an owner 
or operator may begin to skip three of the quarterly leak detection 
periods (i.e., monitor for leaks once every year) for the valves subject 
to the requirements in Sec. 264.1057 of this subpart.
    (4) If the percentage of valves leaking is greater than 2 percent, 
the owner or operator shall monitor monthly in compliance with the 
requirements in Sec. 264.1057, but may again elect to use this section 
after meeting the requirements of Sec. 264.1057(c)(1).
[55 FR 25501, June 21, 1990, as amended at 62 FR 64658, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1063  Test methods and procedures.

    (a) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this subpart 
shall comply with the test methods and procedures requirements provided 
in this section.
    (b) Leak detection monitoring, as required in Secs. 264.1052-
264.1062, shall comply with the following requirements:
    (1) Monitoring shall comply with Reference Method 21 in 40 CFR part 
60.
    (2) The detection instrument shall meet the performance criteria of 
Reference Method 21.
    (3) The instrument shall be calibrated before use on each day of its 
use by the procedures specified in Reference Method 21.
    (4) Calibration gases shall be:
    (i) Zero air (less than 10 ppm of hydrocarbon in air).
    (ii) A mixture of methane or n-hexane and air at a concentration of 
approximately, but less than, 10,000 ppm methane or n-hexane.
    (5) The instrument probe shall be traversed around all potential 
leak interfaces as close to the interface as possible as described in 
Reference Method 21.
    (c) When equipment is tested for compliance with no detectable 
emissions, as required in Secs. 264.1052(e), 264.1053(i), 264.1054, and 
264.1057(f), the test shall comply with the following requirements:
    (1) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(1) through (4) of this 
section shall apply.
    (2) The background level shall be determined as set forth in 
Reference Method 21.
    (3) The instrument probe shall be traversed around all potential 
leak interfaces as close to the interface as possible as described in 
Reference Method 21.
    (4) The arithmetic difference between the maximum concentration 
indicated by the instrument and the background level is compared with 
500 ppm for determining compliance.
    (d) In accordance with the waste analysis plan required by 
Sec. 264.13(b), an owner or operator of a facility must determine, for 
each piece of equipment, whether the equipment contains or contacts a 
hazardous waste with organic concentration that equals or exceeds 10 
percent by weight using the following:
    (1) Methods described in ASTM Methods D 2267-88, E 169-87, E 168-88, 
E 260-85 (incorporated by reference under Sec. 260.11);
    (2) Method 9060 or 8260 of SW-846 (incorporated by reference under 
Sec. 260.11); or
    (3) Application of the knowledge of the nature of the hazardous 
waste stream or the process by which it was produced. Documentation of a 
waste determination by knowledge is required. Examples of documentation 
that shall be used to support a determination under this provision 
include production process information documenting that no organic 
compounds are used, information that the waste is generated by a process 
that is identical

[[Page 327]]

to a process at the same or another facility that has previously been 
demonstrated by direct measurement to have a total organic content less 
than 10 percent, or prior speciation analysis results on the same waste 
stream where it can also be documented that no process changes have 
occurred since that analysis that could affect the waste total organic 
concentration.
    (e) If an owner or operator determines that a piece of equipment 
contains or contacts a hazardous waste with organic concentrations at 
least 10 percent by weight, the determination can be revised only after 
following the procedures in paragraph (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section.
    (f) When an owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree on whether a piece of equipment contains or contacts a hazardous 
waste with organic concentrations at least 10 percent by weight, the 
procedures in paragraph (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section can be used to 
resolve the dispute.
    (g) Samples used in determining the percent organic content shall be 
representative of the highest total organic content hazardous waste that 
is expected to be contained in or contact the equipment.
    (h) To determine if pumps or valves are in light liquid service, the 
vapor pressures of constituents may be obtained from standard reference 
texts or may be determined by ASTM D-2879-86 (incorporated by reference 
under Sec. 260.11).
    (i) Performance tests to determine if a control device achieves 95 
weight percent organic emission reduction shall comply with the 
procedures of Sec. 264.1034(c)(1) through (c)(4).
[55 FR 25501, June 21, 1990, as amended at 62 FR 32462, June 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1064  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a)(1) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this 
subpart shall comply with the recordkeeping requirements of this 
section.
    (2) An owner or operator of more than one hazardous waste management 
unit subject to the provisions of this subpart may comply with the 
recordkeeping requirements for these hazardous waste management units in 
one recordkeeping system if the system identifies each record by each 
hazardous waste management unit.
    (b) Owners and operators must record the following information in 
the facility operating record:
    (1) For each piece of equipment to which subpart BB of part 264 
applies:
    (i) Equipment identification number and hazardous waste management 
unit identification.
    (ii) Approximate locations within the facility (e.g., identify the 
hazardous waste management unit on a facility plot plan).
    (iii) Type of equipment (e.g.. a pump or pipeline valve).
    (iv) Percent-by-weight total organics in the hazardous waste stream 
at the equipment.
    (v) Hazardous waste state at the equipment (e.g., gas/vapor or 
liquid).
    (vi) Method of compliance with the standard (e.g., ``monthly leak 
detection and repair'' or ``equipped with dual mechanical seals'').
    (2) For facilities that comply with the provisions of 
Sec. 264.1033(a)(2), an implementation schedule as specified in 
Sec. 264.1033(a)(2).
    (3) Where an owner or operator chooses to use test data to 
demonstrate the organic removal efficiency or total organic compound 
concentration achieved by the control device, a performance test plan as 
specified in Sec. 264.1035(b)(3).
    (4) Documentation of compliance with Sec. 264.1060, including the 
detailed design documentation or performance test results specified in 
Sec. 264.1035(b)(4).
    (c) When each leak is detected as specified in Secs. 264.1052, 
264.1053, 264.1057, and 264.1058, the following requirements apply:
    (1) A weatherproof and readily visible identification, marked with 
the equipment identification number, the date evidence of a potential 
leak was found in accordance with Sec. 264.1058(a), and the date the 
leak was detected, shall be attached to the leaking equipment.
    (2) The identification on equipment, except on a valve, may be 
removed after it has been repaired.
    (3) The identification on a valve may be removed after it has been 
monitored for 2 successive months as specified in

[[Page 328]]

Sec. Sec. 264.1057(c) and no leak has been detected during those 2 
months.
    (d) When each leak is detected as specified in Secs. 264.1052, 
264.1053, 264.1057, and 264.1058, the following information shall be 
recorded in an inspection log and shall be kept in the facility 
operating record:
    (1) The instrument and operator identification numbers and the 
equipment identification number.
    (2) The date evidence of a potential leak was found in accordance 
with Sec. 264.1058(a).
    (3) The date the leak was detected and the dates of each attempt to 
repair the leak.
    (4) Repair methods applied in each attempt to repair the leak.
    (5) ``Above 10,000'' if the maximum instrument reading measured by 
the methods specified in Sec. 264.1063(b) after each repair attempt is 
equal to or greater than 10,000 ppm.
    (6) ``Repair delayed'' and the reason for the delay if a leak is not 
repaired within 15 calendar days after discovery of the leak.
    (7) Documentation supporting the delay of repair of a valve in 
compliance with Sec. 264.1059(c).
    (8) The signature of the owner or operator (or designate) whose 
decision it was that repair could not be effected without a hazardous 
waste management unit shutdown.
    (9) The expected date of successful repair of the leak if a leak is 
not repaired within 15 calendar days.
    (10) The date of successful repair of the leak.
    (e) Design documentation and monitoring, operating, and inspection 
information for each closed-vent system and control device required to 
comply with the provisions of Sec. 264.1060 shall be recorded and kept 
up-to-date in the facility operating record as specified in 
Sec. 264.1035(c). Design documentation is specified in Sec. 264.1035 
(c)(1) and (c)(2) and monitoring, operating, and inspection information 
in Sec. 264.1035 (c)(3)-(c)(8).
    (f) For a control device other than a thermal vapor incinerator, 
catalytic vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, process heater, condenser, 
or carbon adsorption system, the Regional Administrator will specify the 
appropriate recordkeeping requirements.
    (g) The following information pertaining to all equipment subject to 
the requirements in Secs. 264.1052 through 264.1060 shall be recorded in 
a log that is kept in the facility operating record:
    (1) A list of identification numbers for equipment (except welded 
fittings) subject to the requirements of this subpart.
    (2)(i) A list of identification numbers for equipment that the owner 
or operator elects to designate for no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above 
background, under the provisions of Secs. 264.1052(e), 264.1053(i), and 
264.1057(f).
    (ii) The designation of this equipment as subject to the 
requirements of Secs. 264.1052(e), 264.1053(i), or 264.1057(f) shall be 
signed by the owner or operator.
    (3) A list of equipment identification numbers for pressure relief 
devices required to comply with Sec. 264.1054(a).
    (4)(i) The dates of each compliance test required in 
Secs. 264.1052(e), 264.1053(i), 264.1054, and 264.1057(f).
    (ii) The background level measured during each compliance test.
    (iii) The maximum instrument reading measured at the equipment 
during each compliance test.
    (5) A list of identification numbers for equipment in vacuum 
service.
    (6) Identification, either by list or location (area or group) of 
equipment that contains or contacts hazardous waste with an organic 
concentration of at least 10 percent by weight for less than 300 hours 
per calendar year.
    (h) The following information pertaining to all valves subject to 
the requirements of Sec. 264.1057 (g) and (h) shall be recorded in a log 
that is kept in the facility operating record:
    (1) A list of identification numbers for valves that are designated 
as unsafe to monitor, an explanation for each valve stating why the 
valve is unsafe to monitor, and the plan for monitoring each valve.
    (2) A list of identification numbers for valves that are designated 
as difficult to monitor, an explanation for

[[Page 329]]

each valve stating why the valve is difficult to monitor, and the 
planned schedule for monitoring each valve.
    (i) The following information shall be recorded in the facility 
operating record for valves complying with Sec. 264.1062:
    (1) A schedule of monitoring.
    (2) The percent of valves found leaking during each monitoring 
period.
    (j) The following information shall be recorded in a log that is 
kept in the facility operating record:
    (1) Criteria required in Sec. 264.1052(d)(5)(ii) and 
Sec. 264.1053(e)(2) and an explanation of the design criteria.
    (2) Any changes to these criteria and the reasons for the changes.
    (k) The following information shall be recorded in a log that is 
kept in the facility operating record for use in determining exemptions 
as provided in the applicability section of this subpart and other 
specific subparts:
    (1) An analysis determining the design capacity of the hazardous 
waste management unit.
    (2) A statement listing the hazardous waste influent to and effluent 
from each hazardous waste management unit subject to the requirements in 
Secs. 264.1052 through 264.1060 and an analysis determining whether 
these hazardous wastes are heavy liquids.
    (3) An up-to-date analysis and the supporting information and data 
used to determine whether or not equipment is subject to the 
requirements in Secs. 264.1052 through 264.1060. The record shall 
include supporting documentation as required by Sec. 264.1063(d)(3) when 
application of the knowledge of the nature of the hazardous waste stream 
or the process by which it was produced is used. If the owner or 
operator takes any action (e.g., changing the process that produced the 
waste) that could result in an increase in the total organic content of 
the waste contained in or contacted by equipment determined not to be 
subject to the requirements in Secs. 264.1052 through 264.1060, then a 
new determination is required.
    (l) Records of the equipment leak information required by paragraph 
(d) of this section and the operating information required by paragraph 
(e) of this section need be kept only 3 years.
    (m) The owner or operator of a facility with equipment that is 
subject to this subpart and to regulations at 40 CFR part 60, part 61, 
or part 63 may elect to determine compliance with this subpart either by 
documentation pursuant to Sec. 264.1064 of this subpart, or by 
documentation of compliance with the regulations at 40 CFR part 60, part 
61, or part 63 pursuant to the relevant provisions of the regulations at 
40 part 60, part 61, or part 63. The documentation of compliance under 
regulations at 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63 shall be kept with or 
made readily available with the facility operating record.
[55 FR 25501, June 21, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 59952, Nov. 25, 1996; 
62 FR 64658, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1065  Reporting requirements.

    (a) A semiannual report shall be submitted by owners and operators 
subject to the requirements of this subpart to the Regional 
Administrator by dates specified by the Regional Administrator. The 
report shall include the following information:
    (1) The Environmental Protection Agency identification number, name, 
and address of the facility.
    (2) For each month during the semiannual reporting period:
    (i) The equipment identification number of each valve for which a 
leak was not repaired as required in Sec. 264.1057(d).
    (ii) The equipment identification number of each pump for which a 
leak was not repaired as required in Sec. 264.1052 (c) and (d)(6).
    (iii) The equipment identification number of each compressor for 
which a leak was not repaired as required in Sec. 264.1053(g).
    (3) Dates of hazardous waste management unit shutdowns that occurred 
within the semiannual reporting period.
    (4) For each month during the semiannual reporting period, dates 
when the control device installed as required by Sec. 264.1052, 
264.1053, 264.1054, or 264.1055 exceeded or operated outside of the 
design specifications as defined in Sec. 264.1064(e) and as indicated by 
the control device monitoring required by Sec. 264.1060 and was not 
corrected within 24 hours, the duration and cause of

[[Page 330]]

each exceedance, and any corrective measures taken.
    (b) If, during the semiannual reporting period, leaks from valves, 
pumps, and compressors are repaired as required in Secs. 264.1057 (d), 
264.1052 (c) and (d)(6), and 264.1053 (g), respectively, and the control 
device does not exceed or operate outside of the design specifications 
as defined in Sec. 264.1064(e) for more than 24 hours, a report to the 
Regional Administrator is not required.


<R05>
Secs. 264.1066--264.1079  [Reserved]


<R04>
Subpart CC--Air Emission Standards for Tanks, Surface Impoundments, and 
                               Containers

    Source: 59 FR 62927, Dec. 6, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1080  Applicability.

    (a) The requirements of this subpart apply to owners and operators 
of all facilities that treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste in 
tanks, surface impoundments, or containers subject to either subparts I, 
J, or K of this part except as Sec. 264.1 and paragraph (b) of this 
section provide otherwise.
    (b) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the following 
waste management units at the facility:
    (1) A waste management unit that holds hazardous waste placed in the 
unit before December 6, 1996, and in which no hazardous waste is added 
to the unit on or after December 6, 1996.
    (2) A container that has a design capacity less than or equal to 0.1 
m<SUP>3</SUP>.
    (3) A tank in which an owner or operator has stopped adding 
hazardous waste and the owner or operator has begun implementing or 
completed closure pursuant to an approved closure plan.
    (4) A surface impoundment in which an owner or operator has stopped 
adding hazardous waste (except to implement an approved closure plan) 
and the owner or operator has begun implementing or completed closure 
pursuant to an approved closure plan.
    (5) A waste management unit that is used solely for on-site 
treatment or storage of hazardous waste that is generated as the result 
of implementing remedial activities required under the corrective action 
authorities of RCRA sections 3004(u), 3004(v) or 3008(h), CERCLA 
authorities, or similar Federal or State authorities.
    (6) A waste management unit that is used solely for the management 
of radioactive mixed waste in accordance with all applicable regulations 
under the authority of the Atomic Energy Act and the Nuclear Waste 
Policy Act.
    (7) A hazardous waste management unit that the owner or operator 
certifies is equipped with and operating air emission controls in 
accordance with the requirements of an applicable Clean Air Act 
regulation codified under 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63. For the 
purpose of complying with this paragraph, a tank for which the air 
emission control includes an enclosure, as opposed to a cover, must be 
in compliance with the enclosure and control device requirements of 
Sec. 264.1084(i), except as provided in Sec. 264.1082(c)(5).
    (8) A tank that has a process vent as defined in 40 CFR 264.1031.
    (c) For the owner and operator of a facility subject to this subpart 
who received a final permit under RCRA section 3005 prior to December 6, 
1996, the requirements of this subpart shall be incorporated into the 
permit when the permit is reissued in accordance with the requirements 
of 40 CFR 124.15 of this chapter or reviewed in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR 270.50(d) of this chapter. Until such date when 
the permit is reissued in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 
124.15 or reviewed in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 
270.50(d), the owner and operator is subject to the requirements of 40 
CFR part 265, subpart CC.
    (d) The requirements of this subpart, except for the recordkeeping 
requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(i) of this subpart, are 
administratively stayed for a tank or a container used for the 
management of hazardous waste generated by organic peroxide 
manufacturing and its associated laboratory operations when the owner or 
operator of the unit meets all of the following conditions:
    (1) The owner or operator identifies that the tank or container 
receives hazardous waste generated by an organic peroxide manufacturing 
process

[[Page 331]]

producing more than one functional family of organic peroxides or 
multiple organic peroxides within one functional family, that one or 
more of these organic peroxides could potentially undergo self-
accelerating thermal decomposition at or below ambient temperatures, and 
that organic peroxides are the predominant products manufactured by the 
process. For the purpose of meeting the conditions of this paragraph, 
``organic peroxide'' means an organic compound that contains the 
bivalent --O--O-- structure and which may be considered to be a 
structural derivative of hydrogen peroxide where one or both of the 
hydrogen atoms has been replaced by an organic radical.
    (2) The owner or operator prepares documentation, in accordance with 
the requirements of Sec. 264.1089(i) of this subpart, explaining why an 
undue safety hazard would be created if air emission controls specified 
in Secs. 264.1084 through 264.1087 of this subpart are installed and 
operated on the tanks and containers used at the facility to manage the 
hazardous waste generated by the organic peroxide manufacturing process 
or processes meeting the conditions of paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
    (3) The owner or operator notifies the Regional Administrator in 
writing that hazardous waste generated by an organic peroxide 
manufacturing process or processes meeting the conditions of paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section are managed at the facility in tanks or 
containers meeting the conditions of paragraph (d)(2) of this section. 
The notification shall state the name and address of the facility, and 
be signed and dated by an authorized representative of the facility 
owner or operator.
    (e)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, the 
requirements of this subpart do not apply to the pharmaceutical 
manufacturing facility, commonly referred to as the Stonewall Plant, 
located at Route 340 South, Elkton, Virginia, provided that facility is 
operated in compliance with the requirements contained in a Clean Air 
Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454. The requirements of this 
subpart shall apply to the facility upon termination of the Clean Air 
Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454.
    (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (e)(1) of this section, any hazardous 
waste surface impoundment operated at the Stonewall Plant is subject to:
    (i) The standards in Sec. 264.1085 and all requirements related to 
hazardous waste surface impoundments that are referenced in or by 
Sec. 264.1085, including the closed-vent system and control device 
requirements of Sec. 264.1087 and the recordkeeping requirements of 
Sec. 264.1089(c); and
    (ii) The reporting requirements of Sec. 264.1090 that are applicable 
to surface impoundments and/or to closed-vent systems and control 
devices associated with a surface impoundment.
[59 FR 62927, Dec. 6, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 26828, May 19, 1995; 60 
FR 50428, Sept. 29, 1995; 60 FR 56953, Nov. 13, 1995; 61 FR 28509, June 
5, 1996; 61 FR 59952, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 52642, Oct. 8, 1997; 62 FR 
64658, Dec. 8, 1997; 63 FR 11131, Mar. 6, 1998; 63 FR 19838, Apr. 22, 
1998]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1081  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, all terms shall have the meaning given to 
them in 40 CFR 265.1081, the Act, and parts 260 through 266 of this 
chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1082  Standards: General.

    (a) This section applies to the management of hazardous waste in 
tanks, surface impoundments, and containers subject to this subpart.
    (b) The owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions from 
each hazardous waste management unit in accordance with standards 
specified in Secs. 264.1084 through 264.1087 of this subpart, as 
applicable to the hazardous waste management unit, except as provided 
for in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) A tank, surface impoundment, or container is exempt from 
standards specified in Sec. 264.1084 through Sec. 264.1087 of this 
subpart, as applicable, provided that the waste management unit is one 
of the following:
    (1) A tank, surface impoundment, or container for which all 
hazardous waste entering the unit has an average VO concentration at the 
point of waste origination of less than 500 parts per million by weight 
(ppmw). The average VO concentration shall be determined using the 
procedures specified in

[[Page 332]]

Sec. 264.1083(a) of this subpart. The owner or operator shall review and 
update, as necessary, this determination at least once every 12 months 
following the date of the initial determination for the hazardous waste 
streams entering the unit.
    (2) A tank, surface impoundment, or container for which the organic 
content of all the hazardous waste entering the waste management unit 
has been reduced by an organic destruction or removal process that 
achieves any one of the following conditions:
    (i) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in the 
hazardous waste to a level such that the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste at the point of waste treatment is less than the exit 
concentration limit (C<INF>t</INF>) established for the process. The 
average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point of waste 
treatment and the exit concentration limit for the process shall be 
determined using the procedures specified in Sec. 264.1083(b) of this 
subpart.
    (ii) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in 
the hazardous waste to a level such that the organic reduction 
efficiency (R) for the process is equal to or greater than 95 percent, 
and the average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point of 
waste treatment is less than 100 ppmw. The organic reduction efficiency 
for the process and the average VO concentration of the hazardous waste 
at the point of waste treatment shall be determined using the procedures 
specified in Sec. 264.1083(b) of this subpart.
    (iii) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in 
the hazardous waste to a level such that the actual organic mass removal 
rate (MR) for the process is equal to or greater than the required 
organic mass removal rate (RMR) established for the process. The 
required organic mass removal rate and the actual organic mass removal 
rate for the process shall be determined using the procedures specified 
in Sec. 264.1083(b) of this subpart.
    (iv) A biological process that destroys or degrades the organics 
contained in the hazardous waste, such that either of the following 
conditions is met:
    (A) The organic reduction efficiency (R) for the process is equal to 
or greater than 95 percent, and the organic biodegradation efficiency 
(R<INF>bio</INF>) for the process is equal to or greater than 95 
percent. The organic reduction efficiency and the organic biodegradation 
efficiency for the process shall be determined using the procedures 
specified in Sec. 264.1083(b) of this subpart.
    (B) The total actual organic mass biodegradation rate 
(MR<INF>bio</INF>) for all hazardous waste treated by the process is 
equal to or greater than the required organic mass removal rate (RMR). 
The required organic mass removal rate and the actual organic mass 
biodegradation rate for the process shall be determined using the 
procedures specified in Sec. 264.1083(b) of this subpart.
    (v) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in the 
hazardous waste and meets all of the following conditions:
    (A) From the point of waste origination through the point where the 
hazardous waste enters the treatment process, the hazardous waste is 
managed continuously in waste management units which use air emission 
controls in accordance with the standards specified in Sec. 264.1084 
through Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart, as applicable to the waste 
management unit.
    (B) From the point of waste origination through the point where the 
hazardous waste enters the treatment process, any transfer of the 
hazardous waste is accomplished through continuous hard-piping or other 
closed system transfer that does not allow exposure of the waste to the 
atmosphere. The EPA considers a drain system that meets the requirements 
of 40 CFR part 63, subpart RR--National Emission Standards for 
Individual Drain Systems to be a closed system.
    (C) The average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point 
of waste treatment is less than the lowest average VO concentration at 
the point of waste origination determined for each of the individual 
waste streams entering the process or 500 ppmw, whichever value is 
lower. The average VO concentration of each individual waste stream at 
the point of waste origination shall be determined using the procedures 
specified in Sec. 264.1083(a)

[[Page 333]]

of this subpart. The average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at 
the point of waste treatment shall be determined using the procedures 
specified in Sec. 264.1083(b) of this subpart.
    (vi) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in 
the hazardous waste to a level such that the organic reduction 
efficiency (R) for the process is equal to or greater than 95 percent 
and the owner or operator certifies that the average VO concentration at 
the point of waste origination for each of the individual waste streams 
entering the process is less than 10,000 ppmw. The organic reduction 
efficiency for the process and the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste at the point of waste origination shall be determined 
using the procedures specified in Sec. 264.1083(b) and Sec. 264.1083(a) 
of this subpart, respectively.
    (vii) A hazardous waste incinerator for which the owner or operator 
has either:
    (A) Been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of subpart O of this part; or
    (B) Has designed and operates the incinerator in accordance with the 
interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 265, subpart O.
    (viii) A boiler or industrial furnace for which the owner or 
operator has either:
    (A) Been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H, or
    (B) Has designed and operates the boiler or industrial furnace in 
accordance with the interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 266, 
subpart H.
    (ix) For the purpose of determining the performance of an organic 
destruction or removal process in accordance with the conditions in each 
of paragraphs (c)(2)(i) through (c)(2)(vi) of this section, the owner or 
operator shall account for VO concentrations determined to be below the 
limit of detection of the analytical method by using the following VO 
concentration:
    (A) If Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A is used for the 
analysis, one-half the blank value determined in the method at section 
4.4 of Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, or a value of 25 ppmw, 
whichever is less.
    (B) If any other analytical method is used, one-half the sum of the 
limits of detection established for each organic constituent in the 
waste that has a Henry's law constant value at least 0.1 mole-fraction-
in-the-gas-phase/mole-fraction-in-the-liquid-phase (0.1 Y/X) [which can 
also be expressed as 1.8 x 10<SUP>-6</SUP> atmospheres/gram-mole/m\3\] 
at 25 degrees Celsius.
    (3) A tank or surface impoundment used for biological treatment of 
hazardous waste in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (4) A tank, surface impoundment, or container for which all 
hazardous waste placed in the unit either:
    (i) Meets the numerical concentration limits for organic hazardous 
constituents, applicable to the hazardous waste, as specified in 40 CFR 
part 268--Land Disposal Restrictions under Table ``Treatment Standards 
for Hazardous Waste'' in 40 CFR 268.40; or
    (ii) The organic hazardous constituents in the waste have been 
treated by the treatment technology established by the EPA for the waste 
in 40 CFR 268.42(a), or have been removed or destroyed by an equivalent 
method of treatment approved by EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 268.42(b).
    (5) A tank used for bulk feed of hazardous waste to a waste 
incinerator and all of the following conditions are met:
    (i) The tank is located inside an enclosure vented to a control 
device that is designed and operated in accordance with all applicable 
requirements specified under 40 CFR part 61, subpart FF--National 
Emission Standards for Benzene Waste Operations for a facility at which 
the total annual benzene quantity from the facility waste is equal to or 
greater than 10 megagrams per year;
    (ii) The enclosure and control device serving the tank were 
installed and began operation prior to November 25, 1996 and
    (iii) The enclosure is designed and operated in accordance with the 
criteria for a permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure T--
Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' under 40

[[Page 334]]

CFR 52.741, appendix B. The enclosure may have permanent or temporary 
openings to allow worker access; passage of material into or out of the 
enclosure by conveyor, vehicles, or other mechanical or electrical 
equipment; or to direct air flow into the enclosure. The owner or 
operator shall perform the verification procedure for the enclosure as 
specified in Section 5.0 to ``Procedure T--Criteria for and Verification 
of a Permanent or Temporary Total Enclosure'' annually.
    (d) The Regional Administrator may at any time perform or request 
that the owner or operator perform a waste determination for a hazardous 
waste managed in a tank, surface impoundment, or container exempted from 
using air emission controls under the provisions of this section as 
follows:
    (1) The waste determination for average VO concentration of a 
hazardous waste at the point of waste origination shall be performed 
using direct measurement in accordance with the applicable requirements 
of Sec. 264.1083(a) of this subpart. The waste determination for a 
hazardous waste at the point of waste treatment shall be performed in 
accordance with the applicable requirements of Sec. 264.1083(b) of this 
subpart.
    (2) In performing a waste determination pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section, the sample preparation and analysis shall be conducted 
as follows:
    (i) In accordance with the method used by the owner or operator to 
perform the waste analysis, except in the case specified in paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) If the Regional Administrator determines that the method used 
by the owner or operator was not appropriate for the hazardous waste 
managed in the tank, surface impoundment, or container, then the 
Regional Administrator may choose an appropriate method.
    (3) In a case when the owner or operator is requested to perform the 
waste determination, the Regional Administrator may elect to have an 
authorized representative observe the collection of the hazardous waste 
samples used for the analysis.
    (4) In a case when the results of the waste determination performed 
or requested by the Regional Administrator do not agree with the results 
of a waste determination performed by the owner or operator using 
knowledge of the waste, then the results of the waste determination 
performed in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section shall be used to establish compliance with the requirements 
of this subpart.
    (5) In a case when the owner or operator has used an averaging 
period greater than 1 hour for determining the average VO concentration 
of a hazardous waste at the point of waste origination, the Regional 
Administrator may elect to establish compliance with this subpart by 
performing or requesting that the owner or operator perform a waste 
determination using direct measurement based on waste samples collected 
within a 1-hour period as follows:
    (i) The average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point 
of waste origination shall be determined by direct measurement in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1083(a) of this subpart.
    (ii) Results of the waste determination performed or requested by 
the Regional Administrator showing that the average VO concentration of 
the hazardous waste at the point of waste origination is equal to or 
greater than 500 ppmw shall constitute noncompliance with this subpart 
except in a case as provided for in paragraph (d)(5)(iii) of this 
section.
    (iii) For the case when the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste at the point of waste origination previously has been 
determined by the owner or operator using an averaging period greater 
than 1 hour to be less than 500 ppmw but because of normal operating 
process variations the VO concentration of the hazardous waste 
determined by direct measurement for any given 1-hour period may be 
equal to or greater than 500 ppmw, information that was used by the 
owner or operator to determine the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste (e.g., test results, measurements, calculations, and 
other documentation) and recorded in the facility records in accordance 
with the requirements of Sec. 264.1083(a) and Sec. 264.1089 of this 
subpart

[[Page 335]]

shall be considered by the Regional Administrator together with the 
results of the waste determination performed or requested by the 
Regional Administrator in establishing compliance with this subpart.
[61 FR 59953, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64658, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1083  Waste determination procedures.

    (a) Waste determination procedure to determine average volatile 
organic (VO) concentration of a hazardous waste at the point of waste 
origination.
    (1) An owner or operator shall determine the average VO 
concentration at the point of waste origination for each hazardous waste 
placed in a waste management unit exempted under the provisions of 
Sec. 264.1082(c)(1) of this subpart from using air emission controls in 
accordance with standards specified in Sec. 264.1084 through 
Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart, as applicable to the waste management 
unit.
    (2) For a waste determination that is required by paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section, the average VO concentration of a hazardous waste at 
the point of waste origination shall be determined in accordance with 
the procedures specified in 40 CFR 265.1084(a)(2) through (a)(4).
    (b) Waste determination procedures for treated hazardous waste.
    (1) An owner or operator shall perform the applicable waste 
determinations for each treated hazardous waste placed in waste 
management units exempted under the provisions of Sec. 264.1082(c)(2)(i) 
through (c)(2)(vi) of this subpart from using air emission controls in 
accordance with standards specified in Secs. 264.1084 through 264.1087 
of this subpart, as applicable to the waste management unit.
    (2) The waste determination for a treated hazardous waste shall be 
performed in accordance with the procedures specified in 40 CFR 265.1084 
(b)(2) through (b)(9), as applicable to the treated hazardous waste.
    (c) Procedure to determine the maximum organic vapor pressure of a 
hazardous waste in a tank.
    (1) An owner or operator shall determine the maximum organic vapor 
pressure for each hazardous waste placed in a tank using Tank Level 1 
controls in accordance with standards specified in Sec. 264.1084(c) of 
this subpart.
    (2) The maximum organic vapor pressure of the hazardous waste may be 
determined in accordance with the procedures specified in 40 CFR 
265.1084 (c)(2) through (c)(4).
    (d) The procedure for determining no detectable organic emissions 
for the purpose of complying with this subpart shall be conducted in 
accordance with the procedures specified in 40 CFR 265.1084(d).
[61 FR 59954, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64658, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1084  Standards: Tanks.

    (a) The provisions of this section apply to the control of air 
pollutant emissions from tanks for which Sec. 264.1082(b) of this 
subpart references the use of this section for such air emission 
control.
    (b) The owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions from 
each tank subject to this section in accordance with the following 
requirements as applicable:
    (1) For a tank that manages hazardous waste that meets all of the 
conditions specified in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) through (b)(1)(iii) of this 
section, the owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions 
from the tank in accordance with the Tank Level 1 controls specified in 
paragraph (c) of this section or the Tank Level 2 controls specified in 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (i) The hazardous waste in the tank has a maximum organic vapor 
pressure which is less than the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for 
the tank's design capacity category as follows:
    (A) For a tank design capacity equal to or greater than 151 m\3\, 
the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for the tank is 5.2 kPa.
    (B) For a tank design capacity equal to or greater than 75 m\3\ but 
less than 151 m\3\, the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for the 
tank is 27.6 kPa.
    (C) For a tank design capacity less than 75 m\3\, the maximum 
organic vapor pressure limit for the tank is 76.6 kPa.
    (ii) The hazardous waste in the tank is not heated by the owner or 
operator

[[Page 336]]

to a temperature that is greater than the temperature at which the 
maximum organic vapor pressure of the hazardous waste is determined for 
the purpose of complying with paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.
    (iii) The hazardous waste in the tank is not treated by the owner or 
operator using a waste stabilization process, as defined in 40 CFR 
265.1081.
    (2) For a tank that manages hazardous waste that does not meet all 
of the conditions specified in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) through (b)(1)(iii) 
of this section, the owner or operator shall control air pollutant 
emissions from the tank by using Tank Level 2 controls in accordance 
with the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section. Examples of 
tanks required to use Tank Level 2 controls include: A tank used for a 
waste stabilization process; and a tank for which the hazardous waste in 
the tank has a maximum organic vapor pressure that is equal to or 
greater than the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for the tank's 
design capacity category as specified in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this 
section.
    (c) Owners and operators controlling air pollutant emissions from a 
tank using Tank Level 1 controls shall meet the requirements specified 
in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(4) of this section:
    (1) The owner or operator shall determine the maximum organic vapor 
pressure for a hazardous waste to be managed in the tank using Tank 
Level 1 controls before the first time the hazardous waste is placed in 
the tank. The maximum organic vapor pressure shall be determined using 
the procedures specified in Sec. 264.1083(c) of this subpart. 
Thereafter, the owner or operator shall perform a new determination 
whenever changes to the hazardous waste managed in the tank could 
potentially cause the maximum organic vapor pressure to increase to a 
level that is equal to or greater than the maximum organic vapor 
pressure limit for the tank design capacity category specified in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, as applicable to the tank.
    (2) The tank shall be equipped with a fixed roof designed to meet 
the following specifications:
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be designed to form 
a continuous barrier over the entire surface area of the hazardous waste 
in the tank. The fixed roof may be a separate cover installed on the 
tank (e.g., a removable cover mounted on an open-top tank) or may be an 
integral part of the tank structural design (e.g., a horizontal 
cylindrical tank equipped with a hatch).
    (ii) The fixed roof shall be installed in a manner such that there 
are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces between roof 
section joints or between the interface of the roof edge and the tank 
wall.
    (iii) Each opening in the fixed roof, and any manifold system 
associated with the fixed roof, shall be either:
    (A) Equipped with a closure device designed to operate such that 
when the closure device is secured in the closed position there are no 
visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces in the closure device 
or between the perimeter of the opening and the closure device; or
    (B) Connected by a closed-vent system that is vented to a control 
device. The control device shall remove or destroy organics in the vent 
stream, and shall be operating whenever hazardous waste is managed in 
the tank, except as provided for in paragraphs (c)(2)(iii)(B) (1) and 
(2) of this section.
    (1) During periods when it is necessary to provide access to the 
tank for performing the activities of paragraph (c)(2)(iii)(B)(2) of 
this section, venting of the vapor headspace underneath the fixed roof 
to the control device is not required, opening of closure devices is 
allowed, and removal of the fixed roof is allowed. Following completion 
of the activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure 
device in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as applicable, and 
resume operation of the control device.
    (2) During periods of routine inspection, maintenance, or other 
activities needed for normal operations, and for removal of accumulated 
sludge or other residues from the bottom of the tank.
    (iv) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be made of 
suitable materials that will minimize exposure of the

[[Page 337]]

hazardous waste to the atmosphere, to the extent practical, and will 
maintain the integrity of the fixed roof and closure devices throughout 
their intended service life. Factors to be considered when selecting the 
materials for and designing the fixed roof and closure devices shall 
include: Organic vapor permeability, the effects of any contact with the 
hazardous waste or its vapors managed in the tank; the effects of 
outdoor exposure to wind, moisture, and sunlight; and the operating 
practices used for the tank on which the fixed roof is installed.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the tank, the fixed roof shall 
be installed with each closure device secured in the closed position 
except as follows:
    (i) Opening of closure devices or removal of the fixed roof is 
allowed at the following times:
    (A) To provide access to the tank for performing routine inspection, 
maintenance, or other activities needed for normal operations. Examples 
of such activities include those times when a worker needs to open a 
port to sample the liquid in the tank, or when a worker needs to open a 
hatch to maintain or repair equipment. Following completion of the 
activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure device 
in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as applicable, to the 
tank.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of tank.
    (ii) Opening of a spring-loaded pressure-vacuum relief valve, 
conservation vent, or similar type of pressure relief device which vents 
to the atmosphere is allowed during normal operations for the purpose of 
maintaining the tank internal pressure in accordance with the tank 
design specifications. The device shall be designed to operate with no 
detectable organic emissions when the device is secured in the closed 
position. The settings at which the device opens shall be established 
such that the device remains in the closed position whenever the tank 
internal pressure is within the internal pressure operating range 
determined by the owner or operator based on the tank manufacturer 
recommendations, applicable regulations, fire protection and prevention 
codes, standard engineering codes and practices, or other requirements 
for the safe handling of flammable, ignitable, explosive, reactive, or 
hazardous materials. Examples of normal operating conditions that may 
require these devices to open are during those times when the tank 
internal pressure exceeds the internal pressure operating range for the 
tank as a result of loading operations or diurnal ambient temperature 
fluctuations.
    (iii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, is 
allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an unsafe 
condition.
    (4) The owner or operator shall inspect the air emission control 
equipment in accordance with the following requirements.
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the roof sections or between the 
roof and the tank wall; broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or 
gaskets on closure devices; and broken or missing hatches, access 
covers, caps, or other closure devices.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the fixed roof and its closure devices on or before the date that the 
tank becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or operator 
shall perform the inspections at least once every year except under the 
special conditions provided for in paragraph (l) of this section.
    (iii) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(b) of 
this subpart.
    (d) Owners and operators controlling air pollutant emissions from a 
tank using Tank Level 2 controls shall use one of the following tanks:
    (1) A fixed-roof tank equipped with an internal floating roof in 
accordance with the requirements specified in paragraph (e) of this 
section;

[[Page 338]]

    (2) A tank equipped with an external floating roof in accordance 
with the requirements specified in paragraph (f) of this section;
    (3) A tank vented through a closed-vent system to a control device 
in accordance with the requirements specified in paragraph (g) of this 
section;
    (4) A pressure tank designed and operated in accordance with the 
requirements specified in paragraph (h) of this section; or
    (5) A tank located inside an enclosure that is vented through a 
closed-vent system to an enclosed combustion control device in 
accordance with the requirements specified in paragraph (i) of this 
section.
    (e) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a tank using a fixed roof with an internal floating roof shall meet the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (e)(1) through (e)(3) of this 
section.
    (1) The tank shall be equipped with a fixed roof and an internal 
floating roof in accordance with the following requirements:
    (i) The internal floating roof shall be designed to float on the 
liquid surface except when the floating roof must be supported by the 
leg supports.
    (ii) The internal floating roof shall be equipped with a continuous 
seal between the wall of the tank and the floating roof edge that meets 
either of the following requirements:
    (A) A single continuous seal that is either a liquid-mounted seal or 
a metallic shoe seal, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081; or
    (B) Two continuous seals mounted one above the other. The lower seal 
may be a vapor-mounted seal.
    (iii) The internal floating roof shall meet the following 
specifications:
    (A) Each opening in a noncontact internal floating roof except for 
automatic bleeder vents (vacuum breaker vents) and the rim space vents 
is to provide a projection below the liquid surface.
    (B) Each opening in the internal floating roof shall be equipped 
with a gasketed cover or a gasketed lid except for leg sleeves, 
automatic bleeder vents, rim space vents, column wells, ladder wells, 
sample wells, and stub drains.
    (C) Each penetration of the internal floating roof for the purpose 
of sampling shall have a slit fabric cover that covers at least 90 
percent of the opening.
    (D) Each automatic bleeder vent and rim space vent shall be 
gasketed.
    (E) Each penetration of the internal floating roof that allows for 
passage of a ladder shall have a gasketed sliding cover.
    (F) Each penetration of the internal floating roof that allows for 
passage of a column supporting the fixed roof shall have a flexible 
fabric sleeve seal or a gasketed sliding cover.
    (2) The owner or operator shall operate the tank in accordance with 
the following requirements:
    (i) When the floating roof is resting on the leg supports, the 
process of filling, emptying, or refilling shall be continuous and shall 
be completed as soon as practical.
    (ii) Automatic bleeder vents are to be set closed at all times when 
the roof is floating, except when the roof is being floated off or is 
being landed on the leg supports.
    (iii) Prior to filling the tank, each cover, access hatch, gauge 
float well or lid on any opening in the internal floating roof shall be 
bolted or fastened closed (i.e., no visible gaps). Rim space vents are 
to be set to open only when the internal floating roof is not floating 
or when the pressure beneath the rim exceeds the manufacturer's 
recommended setting.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect the internal floating roof 
in accordance with the procedures specified as follows:
    (i) The floating roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to: The internal floating roof is not floating on the surface of the 
liquid inside the tank; liquid has accumulated on top of the internal 
floating roof; any portion of the roof seals have detached from the roof 
rim; holes, tears, or other openings are visible in the seal fabric; the 
gaskets no longer close off the hazardous waste surface from the 
atmosphere; or the slotted membrane has more than 10 percent open area.

[[Page 339]]

    (ii) The owner or operator shall inspect the internal floating roof 
components as follows except as provided in paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of 
this section:
    (A) Visually inspect the internal floating roof components through 
openings on the fixed-roof (e.g., manholes and roof hatches) at least 
once every 12 months after initial fill, and
    (B) Visually inspect the internal floating roof, primary seal, 
secondary seal (if one is in service), gaskets, slotted membranes, and 
sleeve seals (if any) each time the tank is emptied and degassed and at 
least every 10 years.
    (iii) As an alternative to performing the inspections specified in 
paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section for an internal floating roof 
equipped with two continuous seals mounted one above the other, the 
owner or operator may visually inspect the internal floating roof, 
primary and secondary seals, gaskets, slotted membranes, and sleeve 
seals (if any) each time the tank is emptied and degassed and at least 
every 5 years.
    (iv) Prior to each inspection required by paragraph (e)(3)(ii) or 
(e)(3)(iii) of this section, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator in advance of each inspection to provide the 
Regional Administrator with the opportunity to have an observer present 
during the inspection. The owner or operator shall notify the Regional 
Administrator of the date and location of the inspection as follows:
    (A) Prior to each visual inspection of an internal floating roof in 
a tank that has been emptied and degassed, written notification shall be 
prepared and sent by the owner or operator so that it is received by the 
Regional Administrator at least 30 calendar days before refilling the 
tank except when an inspection is not planned as provided for in 
paragraph (e)(3)(iv)(B) of this section.
    (B) When a visual inspection is not planned and the owner or 
operator could not have known about the inspection 30 calendar days 
before refilling the tank, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator as soon as possible, but no later than 7 calendar 
days before refilling of the tank. This notification may be made by 
telephone and immediately followed by a written explanation for why the 
inspection is unplanned. Alternatively, written notification, including 
the explanation for the unplanned inspection, may be sent so that it is 
received by the Regional Administrator at least 7 calendar days before 
refilling the tank.
    (v) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (vi) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(b) of 
this subpart.
    (4) Safety devices, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, may be installed 
and operated as necessary on any tank complying with the requirements of 
paragraph (e) of this section.
    (f) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a tank using an external floating roof shall meet the requirements 
specified in paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(3) of this section.
    (1) The owner or operator shall design the external floating roof in 
accordance with the following requirements:
    (i) The external floating roof shall be designed to float on the 
liquid surface except when the floating roof must be supported by the 
leg supports.
    (ii) The floating roof shall be equipped with two continuous seals, 
one above the other, between the wall of the tank and the roof edge. The 
lower seal is referred to as the primary seal, and the upper seal is 
referred to as the secondary seal.
    (A) The primary seal shall be a liquid-mounted seal or a metallic 
shoe seal, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081. The total area of the gaps 
between the tank wall and the primary seal shall not exceed 212 square 
centimeters (cm<SUP>2</SUP>) per meter of tank diameter, and the width 
of any portion of these gaps shall not exceed 3.8 centimeters (cm). If a 
metallic shoe seal is used for the primary seal, the metallic shoe seal 
shall be designed so that one end extends into the liquid in the tank 
and the other end extends a vertical distance of at least 61 centimeters 
above the liquid surface.
    (B) The secondary seal shall be mounted above the primary seal and

[[Page 340]]

cover the annular space between the floating roof and the wall of the 
tank. The total area of the gaps between the tank wall and the secondary 
seal shall not exceed 21.2 square centimeters (cm<SUP>2</SUP>) per meter 
of tank diameter, and the width of any portion of these gaps shall not 
exceed 1.3 centimeters (cm).
    (iii) The external floating roof shall meet the following 
specifications:
    (A) Except for automatic bleeder vents (vacuum breaker vents) and 
rim space vents, each opening in a noncontact external floating roof 
shall provide a projection below the liquid surface.
    (B) Except for automatic bleeder vents, rim space vents, roof 
drains, and leg sleeves, each opening in the roof shall be equipped with 
a gasketed cover, seal, or lid.
    (C) Each access hatch and each gauge float well shall be equipped 
with a cover designed to be bolted or fastened when the cover is secured 
in the closed position.
    (D) Each automatic bleeder vent and each rim space vent shall be 
equipped with a gasket.
    (E) Each roof drain that empties into the liquid managed in the tank 
shall be equipped with a slotted membrane fabric cover that covers at 
least 90 percent of the area of the opening.
    (F) Each unslotted and slotted guide pole well shall be equipped 
with a gasketed sliding cover or a flexible fabric sleeve seal.
    (G) Each unslotted guide pole shall be equipped with a gasketed cap 
on the end of the pole.
    (H) Each slotted guide pole shall be equipped with a gasketed float 
or other device which closes off the liquid surface from the atmosphere.
    (I) Each gauge hatch and each sample well shall be equipped with a 
gasketed cover.
    (2) The owner or operator shall operate the tank in accordance with 
the following requirements:
    (i) When the floating roof is resting on the leg supports, the 
process of filling, emptying, or refilling shall be continuous and shall 
be completed as soon as practical.
    (ii) Except for automatic bleeder vents, rim space vents, roof 
drains, and leg sleeves, each opening in the roof shall be secured and 
maintained in a closed position at all times except when the closure 
device must be open for access.
    (iii) Covers on each access hatch and each gauge float well shall be 
bolted or fastened when secured in the closed position.
    (iv) Automatic bleeder vents shall be set closed at all times when 
the roof is floating, except when the roof is being floated off or is 
being landed on the leg supports.
    (v) Rim space vents shall be set to open only at those times that 
the roof is being floated off the roof leg supports or when the pressure 
beneath the rim seal exceeds the manufacturer's recommended setting.
    (vi) The cap on the end of each unslotted guide pole shall be 
secured in the closed position at all times except when measuring the 
level or collecting samples of the liquid in the tank.
    (vii) The cover on each gauge hatch or sample well shall be secured 
in the closed position at all times except when the hatch or well must 
be opened for access.
    (viii) Both the primary seal and the secondary seal shall completely 
cover the annular space between the external floating roof and the wall 
of the tank in a continuous fashion except during inspections.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect the external floating roof 
in accordance with the procedures specified as follows:
    (i) The owner or operator shall measure the external floating roof 
seal gaps in accordance with the following requirements:
    (A) The owner or operator shall perform measurements of gaps between 
the tank wall and the primary seal within 60 calendar days after initial 
operation of the tank following installation of the floating roof and, 
thereafter, at least once every 5 years.
    (B) The owner or operator shall perform measurements of gaps between 
the tank wall and the secondary seal within 60 calendar days after 
initial operation of the tank following installation of the floating 
roof and, thereafter, at least once every year.
    (C) If a tank ceases to hold hazardous waste for a period of 1 year 
or more,

[[Page 341]]

subsequent introduction of hazardous waste into the tank shall be 
considered an initial operation for the purposes of paragraphs 
(f)(3)(i)(A) and (f)(3)(i)(B) of this section.
    (D) The owner or operator shall determine the total surface area of 
gaps in the primary seal and in the secondary seal individually using 
the following procedure:
    (1) The seal gap measurements shall be performed at one or more 
floating roof levels when the roof is floating off the roof supports.
    (2) Seal gaps, if any, shall be measured around the entire perimeter 
of the floating roof in each place where a 0.32-centimeter (cm) diameter 
uniform probe passes freely (without forcing or binding against the 
seal) between the seal and the wall of the tank and measure the 
circumferential distance of each such location.
    (3) For a seal gap measured under paragraph (f)(3) of this section, 
the gap surface area shall be determined by using probes of various 
widths to measure accurately the actual distance from the tank wall to 
the seal and multiplying each such width by its respective 
circumferential distance.
    (4) The total gap area shall be calculated by adding the gap surface 
areas determined for each identified gap location for the primary seal 
and the secondary seal individually, and then dividing the sum for each 
seal type by the nominal diameter of the tank. These total gap areas for 
the primary seal and secondary seal are then compared to the respective 
standards for the seal type as specified in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this 
section.
    (E) In the event that the seal gap measurements do not conform to 
the specifications in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this section, the owner or 
operator shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (k) of this section.
    (F) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(b) of 
this subpart.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall visually inspect the external 
floating roof in accordance with the following requirements:
    (A) The floating roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to: Holes, tears, or other openings in the rim seal or seal fabric of 
the floating roof; a rim seal detached from the floating roof; all or a 
portion of the floating roof deck being submerged below the surface of 
the liquid in the tank; broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or 
gaskets on closure devices; and broken or missing hatches, access 
covers, caps, or other closure devices.
    (B) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of the 
external floating roof and its closure devices on or before the date 
that the tank becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or 
operator shall perform the inspections at least once every year except 
for the special conditions provided for in paragraph (l) of this 
section.
    (C) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (D) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(b) of 
this subpart.
    (iii) Prior to each inspection required by paragraph (f)(3)(i) or 
(f)(3)(ii) of this section, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator in advance of each inspection to provide the 
Regional Administrator with the opportunity to have an observer present 
during the inspection. The owner or operator shall notify the Regional 
Administrator of the date and location of the inspection as follows:
    (A) Prior to each inspection to measure external floating roof seal 
gaps as required under paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section, written 
notification shall be prepared and sent by the owner or operator so that 
it is received by the Regional Administrator at least 30 calendar days 
before the date the measurements are scheduled to be performed.
    (B) Prior to each visual inspection of an external floating roof in 
a tank that has been emptied and degassed, written

[[Page 342]]

notification shall be prepared and sent by the owner or operator so that 
it is received by the Regional Administrator at least 30 calendar days 
before refilling the tank except when an inspection is not planned as 
provided for in paragraph (f)(3)(iii)(C) of this section.
    (C) When a visual inspection is not planned and the owner or 
operator could not have known about the inspection 30 calendar days 
before refilling the tank, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator as soon as possible, but no later than 7 calendar 
days before refilling of the tank. This notification may be made by 
telephone and immediately followed by a written explanation for why the 
inspection is unplanned. Alternatively, written notification, including 
the explanation for the unplanned inspection, may be sent so that it is 
received by the Regional Administrator at least 7 calendar days before 
refilling the tank.
    (4) Safety devices, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, may be installed 
and operated as necessary on any tank complying with the requirements of 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (g) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a tank by venting the tank to a control device shall meet the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (g)(1) through (g)(3) of this 
section.
    (1) The tank shall be covered by a fixed roof and vented directly 
through a closed-vent system to a control device in accordance with the 
following requirements:
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be designed to form 
a continuous barrier over the entire surface area of the liquid in the 
tank.
    (ii) Each opening in the fixed roof not vented to the control device 
shall be equipped with a closure device. If the pressure in the vapor 
headspace underneath the fixed roof is less than atmospheric pressure 
when the control device is operating, the closure devices shall be 
designed to operate such that when the closure device is secured in the 
closed position there are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open 
spaces in the closure device or between the perimeter of the cover 
opening and the closure device. If the pressure in the vapor headspace 
underneath the fixed roof is equal to or greater than atmospheric 
pressure when the control device is operating, the closure device shall 
be designed to operate with no detectable organic emissions.
    (iii) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be made of 
suitable materials that will minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to 
the atmosphere, to the extent practical, and will maintain the integrity 
of the fixed roof and closure devices throughout their intended service 
life. Factors to be considered when selecting the materials for and 
designing the fixed roof and closure devices shall include: Organic 
vapor permeability, the effects of any contact with the liquid and its 
vapor managed in the tank; the effects of outdoor exposure to wind, 
moisture, and sunlight; and the operating practices used for the tank on 
which the fixed roof is installed.
    (iv) The closed-vent system and control device shall be designed and 
operated in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1087 of this 
subpart.
    (2) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the tank, the fixed roof shall 
be installed with each closure device secured in the closed position and 
the vapor headspace underneath the fixed roof vented to the control 
device except as follows:
    (i) Venting to the control device is not required, and opening of 
closure devices or removal of the fixed roof is allowed at the following 
times:
    (A) To provide access to the tank for performing routine inspection, 
maintenance, or other activities needed for normal operations. Examples 
of such activities include those times when a worker needs to open a 
port to sample liquid in the tank, or when a worker needs to open a 
hatch to maintain or repair equipment. Following completion of the 
activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure device 
in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as applicable, to the 
tank.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of a tank.
    (ii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, is 
allowed at

[[Page 343]]

any time conditions require doing so to avoid an unsafe condition.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor the air emission 
control equipment in accordance with the following procedures:
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the roof sections or between the 
roof and the tank wall; broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or 
gaskets on closure devices; and broken or missing hatches, access 
covers, caps, or other closure devices.
    (ii) The closed-vent system and control device shall be inspected 
and monitored by the owner or operator in accordance with the procedures 
specified in Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart.
    (iii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the air emission control equipment on or before the date that the tank 
becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or operator shall 
perform the inspections at least once every year except for the special 
conditions provided for in paragraph (l) of this section.
    (iv) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (v) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(b) of 
this subpart.
    (h) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions by 
using a pressure tank shall meet the following requirements.
    (1) The tank shall be designed not to vent to the atmosphere as a 
result of compression of the vapor headspace in the tank during filling 
of the tank to its design capacity.
    (2) All tank openings shall be equipped with closure devices 
designed to operate with no detectable organic emissions as determined 
using the procedure specified in Sec. 264.1083(d) of this subpart.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the tank, the tank shall be 
operated as a closed system that does not vent to the atmosphere except 
in the event that a safety device, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, is 
required to open to avoid an unsafe condition.
    (i) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions by 
using an enclosure vented through a closed-vent system to an enclosed 
combustion control device shall meet the requirements specified in 
paragraphs (i)(1) through (i)(4) of this section.
    (1) The tank shall be located inside an enclosure. The enclosure 
shall be designed and operated in accordance with the criteria for a 
permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure T--Criteria for 
and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total Enclosure'' under 40 
CFR 52.741, appendix B. The enclosure may have permanent or temporary 
openings to allow worker access; passage of material into or out of the 
enclosure by conveyor, vehicles, or other mechanical means; entry of 
permanent mechanical or electrical equipment; or direct airflow into the 
enclosure. The owner or operator shall perform the verification 
procedure for the enclosure as specified in Section 5.0 to ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' initially when the enclosure is first installed and, 
thereafter, annually.
    (2) The enclosure shall be vented through a closed-vent system to an 
enclosed combustion control device that is designed and operated in 
accordance with the standards for either a vapor incinerator, boiler, or 
process heater specified in Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart.
    (3) Safety devices, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, may be installed 
and operated as necessary on any enclosure, closed-vent system, or 
control device used to comply with the requirements of paragraphs (i)(1) 
and (i)(2) of this section.
    (4) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor the closed-vent 
system and control device as specified in Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart.
    (j) The owner or operator shall transfer hazardous waste to a tank 
subject to this section in accordance with the following requirements:
    (1) Transfer of hazardous waste, except as provided in paragraph 
(j)(2) of this section, to the tank from another

[[Page 344]]

tank subject to this section or from a surface impoundment subject to 
Sec. 264.1085 of this subpart shall be conducted using continuous hard-
piping or another closed system that does not allow exposure of the 
hazardous waste to the atmosphere. For the purpose of complying with 
this provision, an individual drain system is considered to be a closed 
system when it meets the requirements of 40 CFR part 63, subpart RR--
National Emission Standards for Individual Drain Systems.
    (2) The requirements of paragraph (j)(1) of this section do not 
apply when transferring a hazardous waste to the tank under any of the 
following conditions:
    (i) The hazardous waste meets the average VO concentration 
conditions specified in Sec. 264.1082(c)(1) of this subpart at the point 
of waste origination.
    (ii) The hazardous waste has been treated by an organic destruction 
or removal process to meet the requirements in Sec. 264.1082(c)(2) of 
this subpart.
    (iii) The hazardous waste meets the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1082(c)(4) of this subpart.
    (k) The owner or operator shall repair each defect detected during 
an inspection performed in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(4), (e)(3), (f)(3), or (g)(3) of this section as follows:
    (1) The owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 5 calendar days after detection, and repair shall 
be completed as soon as possible but no later than 45 calendar days 
after detection except as provided in paragraph (k)(2) of this section.
    (2) Repair of a defect may be delayed beyond 45 calendar days if the 
owner or operator determines that repair of the defect requires emptying 
or temporary removal from service of the tank and no alternative tank 
capacity is available at the site to accept the hazardous waste normally 
managed in the tank. In this case, the owner or operator shall repair 
the defect the next time the process or unit that is generating the 
hazardous waste managed in the tank stops operation. Repair of the 
defect shall be completed before the process or unit resumes operation.
    (l) Following the initial inspection and monitoring of the cover as 
required by the applicable provisions of this subpart, subsequent 
inspection and monitoring may be performed at intervals longer than 1 
year under the following special conditions:
    (1) In the case when inspecting or monitoring the cover would expose 
a worker to dangerous, hazardous, or other unsafe conditions, then the 
owner or operator may designate a cover as an ``unsafe to inspect and 
monitor cover'' and comply with all of the following requirements:
    (i) Prepare a written explanation for the cover stating the reasons 
why the cover is unsafe to visually inspect or to monitor, if required.
    (ii) Develop and implement a written plan and schedule to inspect 
and monitor the cover, using the procedures specified in the applicable 
section of this subpart, as frequently as practicable during those times 
when a worker can safely access the cover.
    (2) In the case when a tank is buried partially or entirely 
underground, an owner or operator is required to inspect and monitor, as 
required by the applicable provisions of this section, only those 
portions of the tank cover and those connections to the tank (e.g., fill 
ports, access hatches, gauge wells, etc.) that are located on or above 
the ground surface.
[61 FR 59955, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64659, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1085  Standards: Surface impoundments.

    (a) The provisions of this section apply to the control of air 
pollutant emissions from surface impoundments for which Sec. 264.1082(b) 
of this subpart references the use of this section for such air emission 
control.
    (b) The owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions from 
the surface impoundment by installing and operating either of the 
following:
    (1) A floating membrane cover in accordance with the provisions 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section; or
    (2) A cover that is vented through a closed-vent system to a control 
device in accordance with the provisions specified in paragraph (d) of 
this section.

[[Page 345]]

    (c) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a surface impoundment using a floating membrane cover shall meet the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this 
section.
    (1) The surface impoundment shall be equipped with a floating 
membrane cover designed to meet the following specifications:
    (i) The floating membrane cover shall be designed to float on the 
liquid surface during normal operations and form a continuous barrier 
over the entire surface area of the liquid.
    (ii) The cover shall be fabricated from a synthetic membrane 
material that is either:
    (A) High density polyethylene (HDPE) with a thickness no less than 
2.5 millimeters (mm); or
    (B) A material or a composite of different materials determined to 
have both organic permeability properties that are equivalent to those 
of the material listed in paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A) of this section and 
chemical and physical properties that maintain the material integrity 
for the intended service life of the material.
    (iii) The cover shall be installed in a manner such that there are 
no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces between cover 
section seams or between the interface of the cover edge and its 
foundation mountings.
    (iv) Except as provided for in paragraph (c)(1)(v) of this section, 
each opening in the floating membrane cover shall be equipped with a 
closure device designed to operate such that when the closure device is 
secured in the closed position there are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, 
or other open spaces in the closure device or between the perimeter of 
the cover opening and the closure device.
    (v) The floating membrane cover may be equipped with one or more 
emergency cover drains for removal of stormwater. Each emergency cover 
drain shall be equipped with a slotted membrane fabric cover that covers 
at least 90 percent of the area of the opening or a flexible fabric 
sleeve seal.
    (vi) The closure devices shall be made of suitable materials that 
will minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the atmosphere, to the 
extent practical, and will maintain the integrity of the closure devices 
throughout their intended service life. Factors to be considered when 
selecting the materials of construction and designing the cover and 
closure devices shall include: Organic vapor permeability; the effects 
of any contact with the liquid and its vapor managed in the surface 
impoundment; the effects of outdoor exposure to wind, moisture, and 
sunlight; and the operating practices used for the surface impoundment 
on which the floating membrane cover is installed.
    (2) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the surface impoundment, the 
floating membrane cover shall float on the liquid and each closure 
device shall be secured in the closed position except as follows:
    (i) Opening of closure devices or removal of the cover is allowed at 
the following times:
    (A) To provide access to the surface impoundment for performing 
routine inspection, maintenance, or other activities needed for normal 
operations. Examples of such activities include those times when a 
worker needs to open a port to sample the liquid in the surface 
impoundment, or when a worker needs to open a hatch to maintain or 
repair equipment. Following completion of the activity, the owner or 
operator shall promptly replace the cover and secure the closure device 
in the closed position, as applicable.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of surface impoundment.
    (ii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, is 
allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an unsafe 
condition.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect the floating membrane cover 
in accordance with the following procedures:
    (i) The floating membrane cover and its closure devices shall be 
visually inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that 
could result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not 
limited to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the cover section seams or 
between the interface of the cover edge and its foundation

[[Page 346]]

mountings; broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or gaskets on 
closure devices; and broken or missing hatches, access covers, caps, or 
other closure devices.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the floating membrane cover and its closure devices on or before the 
date that the surface impoundment becomes subject to this section. 
Thereafter, the owner or operator shall perform the inspections at least 
once every year except for the special conditions provided for in 
paragraph (g) of this section.
    (iii) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(f) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(c) of 
this subpart.
    (d) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a surface impoundment using a cover vented to a control device shall 
meet the requirements specified in paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(3) of 
this section.
    (1) The surface impoundment shall be covered by a cover and vented 
directly through a closed-vent system to a control device in accordance 
with the following requirements:
    (i) The cover and its closure devices shall be designed to form a 
continuous barrier over the entire surface area of the liquid in the 
surface impoundment.
    (ii) Each opening in the cover not vented to the control device 
shall be equipped with a closure device. If the pressure in the vapor 
headspace underneath the cover is less than atmospheric pressure when 
the control device is operating, the closure devices shall be designed 
to operate such that when the closure device is secured in the closed 
position there are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces 
in the closure device or between the perimeter of the cover opening and 
the closure device. If the pressure in the vapor headspace underneath 
the cover is equal to or greater than atmospheric pressure when the 
control device is operating, the closure device shall be designed to 
operate with no detectable organic emissions using the procedure 
specified in Sec. 264.1083(d) of this subpart.
    (iii) The cover and its closure devices shall be made of suitable 
materials that will minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the 
atmosphere, to the extent practical, and will maintain the integrity of 
the cover and closure devices throughout their intended service life. 
Factors to be considered when selecting the materials of construction 
and designing the cover and closure devices shall include: Organic vapor 
permeability; the effects of any contact with the liquid or its vapors 
managed in the surface impoundment; the effects of outdoor exposure to 
wind, moisture, and sunlight; and the operating practices used for the 
surface impoundment on which the cover is installed.
    (iv) The closed-vent system and control device shall be designed and 
operated in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1087 of this 
subpart.
    (2) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the surface impoundment, the 
cover shall be installed with each closure device secured in the closed 
position and the vapor headspace underneath the cover vented to the 
control device except as follows:
    (i) Venting to the control device is not required, and opening of 
closure devices or removal of the cover is allowed at the following 
times:
    (A) To provide access to the surface impoundment for performing 
routine inspection, maintenance, or other activities needed for normal 
operations. Examples of such activities include those times when a 
worker needs to open a port to sample liquid in the surface impoundment, 
or when a worker needs to open a hatch to maintain or repair equipment. 
Following completion of the activity, the owner or operator shall 
promptly secure the closure device in the closed position or reinstall 
the cover, as applicable, to the surface impoundment.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of the surface impoundment.
    (ii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, is 
allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an unsafe 
condition.

[[Page 347]]

    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor the air emission 
control equipment in accordance with the following procedures:
    (i) The surface impoundment cover and its closure devices shall be 
visually inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that 
could result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not 
limited to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the cover section seams or 
between the interface of the cover edge and its foundation mountings; 
broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or gaskets on closure 
devices; and broken or missing hatches, access covers, caps, or other 
closure devices.
    (ii) The closed-vent system and control device shall be inspected 
and monitored by the owner or operator in accordance with the procedures 
specified in Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart.
    (iii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the air emission control equipment on or before the date that the 
surface impoundment becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the 
owner or operator shall perform the inspections at least once every year 
except for the special conditions provided for in paragraph (g) of this 
section.
    (iv) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(f) of this section.
    (v) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1089(c) of 
this subpart.
    (e) The owner or operator shall transfer hazardous waste to a 
surface impoundment subject to this section in accordance with the 
following requirements:
    (1) Transfer of hazardous waste, except as provided in paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section, to the surface impoundment from another surface 
impoundment subject to this section or from a tank subject to 
Sec. 264.1084 of this subpart shall be conducted using continuous hard-
piping or another closed system that does not allow exposure of the 
waste to the atmosphere. For the purpose of complying with this 
provision, an individual drain system is considered to be a closed 
system when it meets the requirements of 40 CFR part 63, subpart RR--
National Emission Standards for Individual Drain Systems.
    (2) The requirements of paragraph (e)(1) of this section do not 
apply when transferring a hazardous waste to the surface impoundment 
under either of the following conditions:
    (i) The hazardous waste meets the average VO concentration 
conditions specified in Sec. 264.1082(c)(1) of this subpart at the point 
of waste origination.
    (ii) The hazardous waste has been treated by an organic destruction 
or removal process to meet the requirements in Sec. 264.1082(c)(2) of 
this subpart.
    (iii) The hazardous waste meets the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1082(c)(4) of this subpart.
    (f) The owner or operator shall repair each defect detected during 
an inspection performed in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(3) or (d)(3) of this section as follows:
    (1) The owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 5 calendar days after detection and repair shall be 
completed as soon as possible but no later than 45 calendar days after 
detection except as provided in paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
    (2) Repair of a defect may be delayed beyond 45 calendar days if the 
owner or operator determines that repair of the defect requires emptying 
or temporary removal from service of the surface impoundment and no 
alternative capacity is available at the site to accept the hazardous 
waste normally managed in the surface impoundment. In this case, the 
owner or operator shall repair the defect the next time the process or 
unit that is generating the hazardous waste managed in the surface 
impoundment stops operation. Repair of the defect shall be completed 
before the process or unit resumes operation.
    (g) Following the initial inspection and monitoring of the cover as 
required by the applicable provisions of this subpart, subsequent 
inspection and monitoring may be performed at intervals longer than 1 
year in the case when inspecting or monitoring the

[[Page 348]]

cover would expose a worker to dangerous, hazardous, or other unsafe 
conditions. In this case, the owner or operator may designate the cover 
as an ``unsafe to inspect and monitor cover'' and comply with all of the 
following requirements:
    (1) Prepare a written explanation for the cover stating the reasons 
why the cover is unsafe to visually inspect or to monitor, if required.
    (2) Develop and implement a written plan and schedule to inspect and 
monitor the cover using the procedures specified in the applicable 
section of this subpart as frequently as practicable during those times 
when a worker can safely access the cover.
[61 FR 59960, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64659, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1086  Standards: Containers.

    (a) The provisions of this section apply to the control of air 
pollutant emissions from containers for which Sec. 264.1082(b) of this 
subpart references the use of this section for such air emission 
control.
    (b) General requirements. (1) The owner or operator shall control 
air pollutant emissions from each container subject to this section in 
accordance with the following requirements, as applicable to the 
container, except when the special provisions for waste stabilization 
processes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section apply to the 
container.
    (i) For a container having a design capacity greater than 0.1 m\3\ 
and less than or equal to 0.46 m\3\, the owner or operator shall control 
air pollutant emissions from the container in accordance with the 
Container Level 1 standards specified in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (ii) For a container having a design capacity greater than 0.46 m\3\ 
that is not in light material service, the owner or operator shall 
control air pollutant emissions from the container in accordance with 
the Container Level 1 standards specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (iii) For a container having a design capacity greater than 0.46 
m\3\ that is in light material service, the owner or operator shall 
control air pollutant emissions from the container in accordance with 
the Container Level 2 standards specified in paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (2) When a container having a design capacity greater than 0.1 
m<SUP>3</SUP> is used for treatment of a hazardous waste by a waste 
stabilization process, the owner or operator shall control air pollutant 
emissions from the container in accordance with the Container Level 3 
standards specified in paragraph (e) of this section at those times 
during the waste stabilization process when the hazardous waste in the 
container is exposed to the atmosphere.
    (c) Container Level 1 standards. (1) A container using Container 
Level 1 controls is one of the following:
    (i) A container that meets the applicable U.S. Department of 
Transportation (DOT) regulations on packaging hazardous materials for 
transportation as specified in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (ii) A container equipped with a cover and closure devices that form 
a continuous barrier over the container openings such that when the 
cover and closure devices are secured in the closed position there are 
no visible holes, gaps, or other open spaces into the interior of the 
container. The cover may be a separate cover installed on the container 
(e.g., a lid on a drum or a suitably secured tarp on a roll-off box) or 
may be an integral part of the container structural design (e.g., a 
``portable tank'' or bulk cargo container equipped with a screw-type 
cap).
    (iii) An open-top container in which an organic-vapor suppressing 
barrier is placed on or over the hazardous waste in the container such 
that no hazardous waste is exposed to the atmosphere. One example of 
such a barrier is application of a suitable organic-vapor suppressing 
foam.
    (2) A container used to meet the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(1)(ii) or (c)(1)(iii) of this section shall be equipped with covers 
and closure devices, as applicable to the container, that are composed 
of suitable materials to minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the 
atmosphere and to maintain the equipment integrity, for as long as the 
container is in service. Factors to be considered in selecting

[[Page 349]]

the materials of construction and designing the cover and closure 
devices shall include: Organic vapor permeability; the effects of 
contact with the hazardous waste or its vapor managed in the container; 
the effects of outdoor exposure of the closure device or cover material 
to wind, moisture, and sunlight; and the operating practices for which 
the container is intended to be used.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in a container using Container 
Level 1 controls, the owner or operator shall install all covers and 
closure devices for the container, as applicable to the container, and 
secure and maintain each closure device in the closed position except as 
follows:
    (i) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of adding hazardous waste or other material to the container as follows:
    (A) In the case when the container is filled to the intended final 
level in one continuous operation, the owner or operator shall promptly 
secure the closure devices in the closed position and install the 
covers, as applicable to the container, upon conclusion of the filling 
operation.
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material 
intermittently are added to the container over a period of time, the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
either the container being filled to the intended final level; the 
completion of a batch loading after which no additional material will be 
added to the container within 15 minutes; the person performing the 
loading operation leaving the immediate vicinity of the container; or 
the shutdown of the process generating the material being added to the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (ii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of removing hazardous waste from the container as follows:
    (A) For the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section, an 
empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b) may be open to the 
atmosphere at any time (i.e., covers and closure devices are not 
required to be secured in the closed position on an empty container).
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material are 
removed from the container but the container does not meet the 
conditions to be an empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b), the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
the completion of a batch removal after which no additional material 
will be removed from the container within 15 minutes or the person 
performing the unloading operation leaves the immediate vicinity of the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (iii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed when access 
inside the container is needed to perform routine activities other than 
transfer of hazardous waste. Examples of such activities include those 
times when a worker needs to open a port to measure the depth of or 
sample the material in the container, or when a worker needs to open a 
manhole hatch to access equipment inside the container. Following 
completion of the activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure 
the closure device in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as 
applicable to the container.
    (iv) Opening of a spring-loaded pressure-vacuum relief valve, 
conservation vent, or similar type of pressure relief device which vents 
to the atmosphere is allowed during normal operations for the purpose of 
maintaining the internal pressure of the container in accordance with 
the container design specifications. The device shall be designed to 
operate with no detectable organic emissions when the device is secured 
in the closed position. The settings at which the device opens shall be 
established such that the device remains in the closed position whenever 
the internal pressure of the container is within the internal pressure 
operating range determined by the owner or operator based on container 
manufacturer recommendations, applicable regulations, fire protection 
and prevention codes, standard engineering codes and practices, or other 
requirements for the safe handling of flammable, ignitable,

[[Page 350]]

explosive, reactive, or hazardous materials. Examples of normal 
operating conditions that may require these devices to open are during 
those times when the internal pressure of the container exceeds the 
internal pressure operating range for the container as a result of 
loading operations or diurnal ambient temperature fluctuations.
    (v) Opening of a safety device, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, is 
allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an unsafe 
condition.
    (4) The owner or operator of containers using Container Level 1 
controls shall inspect the containers and their covers and closure 
devices as follows:
    (i) In the case when a hazardous waste already is in the container 
at the time the owner or operator first accepts possession of the 
container at the facility and the container is not emptied within 24 
hours after the container is accepted at the facility (i.e., does not 
meet the conditions for an empty container as specified in 40 CFR 
261.7(b)), the owner or operator shall visually inspect the container 
and its cover and closure devices to check for visible cracks, holes, 
gaps, or other open spaces into the interior of the container when the 
cover and closure devices are secured in the closed position. The 
container visual inspection shall be conducted on or before the date 
that the container is accepted at the facility (i.e., the date the 
container becomes subject to the subpart CC container standards). For 
purposes of this requirement, the date of acceptance is the date of 
signature that the facility owner or operator enters on Item 20 of the 
Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest in the appendix to 40 CFR part 262 (EPA 
Forms 8700-22 and 8700-22A), as required under subpart E of this part, 
at 40 CFR 264.71. If a defect is detected, the owner or operator shall 
repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) In the case when a container used for managing hazardous waste 
remains at the facility for a period of 1 year or more, the owner or 
operator shall visually inspect the container and its cover and closure 
devices initially and thereafter, at least once every 12 months, to 
check for visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces into the 
interior of the container when the cover and closure devices are secured 
in the closed position. If a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (iii) When a defect is detected for the container, cover, or closure 
devices, the owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 24 hours after detection and repair shall be 
completed as soon as possible but no later than 5 calendar days after 
detection. If repair of a defect cannot be completed within 5 calendar 
days, then the hazardous waste shall be removed from the container and 
the container shall not be used to manage hazardous waste until the 
defect is repaired.
    (5) The owner or operator shall maintain at the facility a copy of 
the procedure used to determine that containers with capacity of 0.46 
m<SUP>3</SUP> or greater, which do not meet applicable DOT regulations 
as specified in paragraph (f) of this section, are not managing 
hazardous waste in light material service.
    (d) Container Level 2 standards. (1) A container using Container 
Level 2 controls is one of the following:
    (i) A container that meets the applicable U.S. Department of 
Transportation (DOT) regulations on packaging hazardous materials for 
transportation as specified in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (ii) A container that operates with no detectable organic emissions 
as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081 and determined in accordance with the 
procedure specified in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (iii) A container that has been demonstrated within the preceding 12 
months to be vapor-tight by using 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 27 
in accordance with the procedure specified in paragraph (h) of this 
section.
    (2) Transfer of hazardous waste in or out of a container using 
Container Level 2 controls shall be conducted in such a manner as to 
minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the atmosphere, to the 
extent practical, considering the physical properties of the hazardous 
waste and good engineering

[[Page 351]]

and safety practices for handling flammable, ignitable, explosive, 
reactive, or other hazardous materials. Examples of container loading 
procedures that the EPA considers to meet the requirements of this 
paragraph include using any one of the following: A submerged-fill pipe 
or other submerged-fill method to load liquids into the container; a 
vapor-balancing system or a vapor-recovery system to collect and control 
the vapors displaced from the container during filling operations; or a 
fitted opening in the top of a container through which the hazardous 
waste is filled and subsequently purging the transfer line before 
removing it from the container opening.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in a container using Container 
Level 2 controls, the owner or operator shall install all covers and 
closure devices for the container, and secure and maintain each closure 
device in the closed position except as follows:
    (i) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of adding hazardous waste or other material to the container as follows:
    (A) In the case when the container is filled to the intended final 
level in one continuous operation, the owner or operator shall promptly 
secure the closure devices in the closed position and install the 
covers, as applicable to the container, upon conclusion of the filling 
operation.
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material 
intermittently are added to the container over a period of time, the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
either the container being filled to the intended final level; the 
completion of a batch loading after which no additional material will be 
added to the container within 15 minutes; the person performing the 
loading operation leaving the immediate vicinity of the container; or 
the shutdown of the process generating the material being added to the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (ii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of removing hazardous waste from the container as follows:
    (A) For the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section, an 
empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b) may be open to the 
atmosphere at any time (i.e., covers and closure devices are not 
required to be secured in the closed position on an empty container).
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material are 
removed from the container but the container does not meet the 
conditions to be an empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b), the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
the completion of a batch removal after which no additional material 
will be removed from the container within 15 minutes or the person 
performing the unloading operation leaves the immediate vicinity of the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (iii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed when access 
inside the container is needed to perform routine activities other than 
transfer of hazardous waste.
    Examples of such activities include those times when a worker needs 
to open a port to measure the depth of or sample the material in the 
container, or when a worker needs to open a manhole hatch to access 
equipment inside the container. Following completion of the activity, 
the owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure device in the 
closed position or reinstall the cover, as applicable to the container.
    (iv) Opening of a spring-loaded, pressure-vacuum relief valve, 
conservation vent, or similar type of pressure relief device which vents 
to the atmosphere is allowed during normal operations for the purpose of 
maintaining the internal pressure of the container in accordance with 
the container design specifications. The device shall be designed to 
operate with no detectable organic emission when the device is secured 
in the closed position. The settings at which the device opens shall be 
established such that the device remains in the closed position whenever 
the internal pressure of the container is within the internal pressure 
operating range determined by the owner or operator

[[Page 352]]

based on container manufacturer recommendations, applicable regulations, 
fire protection and prevention codes, standard engineering codes and 
practices, or other requirements for the safe handling of flammable, 
ignitable, explosive, reactive, or hazardous materials. Examples of 
normal operating conditions that may require these devices to open are 
during those times when the internal pressure of the container exceeds 
the internal pressure operating range for the container as a result of 
loading operations or diurnal ambient temperature fluctuations.
    (v) Opening of a safety device, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, is 
allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an unsafe 
condition.
    (4) The owner or operator of containers using Container Level 2 
controls shall inspect the containers and their covers and closure 
devices as follows:
    (i) In the case when a hazardous waste already is in the container 
at the time the owner or operator first accepts possession of the 
container at the facility and the container is not emptied within 24 
hours after the container is accepted at the facility (i.e., does not 
meet the conditions for an empty container as specified in 40 CFR 
261.7(b)), the owner or operator shall visually inspect the container 
and its cover and closure devices to check for visible cracks, holes, 
gaps, or other open spaces into the interior of the container when the 
cover and closure devices are secured in the closed position. The 
container visual inspection shall be conducted on or before the date 
that the container is accepted at the facility (i.e., the date the 
container becomes subject to the subpart CC container standards). For 
purposes of this requirement, the date of acceptance is the date of 
signature that the facility owner or operator enters on Item 20 of the 
Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest in the appendix to 40 CFR part 262 (EPA 
Forms 8700-22 and 8700-22A), as required under subpart E of this part, 
at 40 CFR 264.71. If a defect is detected, the owner or operator shall 
repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(d)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) In the case when a container used for managing hazardous waste 
remains at the facility for a period of 1 year or more, the owner or 
operator shall visually inspect the container and its cover and closure 
devices initially and thereafter, at least once every 12 months, to 
check for visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces into the 
interior of the container when the cover and closure devices are secured 
in the closed position. If a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(d)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (iii) When a defect is detected for the container, cover, or closure 
devices, the owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 24 hours after detection, and repair shall be 
completed as soon as possible but no later than 5 calendar days after 
detection. If repair of a defect cannot be completed within 5 calendar 
days, then the hazardous waste shall be removed from the container and 
the container shall not be used to manage hazardous waste until the 
defect is repaired.
    (e) Container Level 3 standards. (1) A container using Container 
Level 3 controls is one of the following:
    (i) A container that is vented directly through a closed-vent system 
to a control device in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(e)(2)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) A container that is vented inside an enclosure which is 
exhausted through a closed-vent system to a control device in accordance 
with the requirements of paragraphs (e)(2)(i) and (e)(2)(ii) of this 
section.
    (2) The owner or operator shall meet the following requirements, as 
applicable to the type of air emission control equipment selected by the 
owner or operator:
    (i) The container enclosure shall be designed and operated in 
accordance with the criteria for a permanent total enclosure as 
specified in ``Procedure T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent 
or Temporary Total Enclosure'' under 40 CFR 52.741, appendix B. The 
enclosure may have permanent or temporary openings to allow worker 
access; passage of containers through the enclosure by conveyor or other 
mechanical means; entry of permanent

[[Page 353]]

mechanical or electrical equipment; or direct airflow into the 
enclosure. The owner or operator shall perform the verification 
procedure for the enclosure as specified in Section 5.0 to ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' initially when the enclosure is first installed and, 
thereafter, annually.
    (ii) The closed-vent system and control device shall be designed and 
operated in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1087 of this 
subpart.
    (3) Safety devices, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, may be installed 
and operated as necessary on any container, enclosure, closed-vent 
system, or control device used to comply with the requirements of 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section.
    (4) Owners and operators using Container Level 3 controls in 
accordance with the provisions of this subpart shall inspect and monitor 
the closed-vent systems and control devices as specified in 
Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart.
    (5) Owners and operators that use Container Level 3 controls in 
accordance with the provisions of this subpart shall prepare and 
maintain the records specified in Sec. 264.1089(d) of this subpart.
    (f) For the purpose of compliance with paragraph (c)(1)(i) or 
(d)(1)(i) of this section, containers shall be used that meet the 
applicable U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) regulations on 
packaging hazardous materials for transportation as follows:
    (1) The container meets the applicable requirements specified in 49 
CFR part 178--Specifications for Packaging or 49 CFR part 179--
Specifications for Tank Cars.
    (2) Hazardous waste is managed in the container in accordance with 
the applicable requirements specified in 49 CFR part 107, subpart B--
Exemptions; 49 CFR part 172--Hazardous Materials Table, Special 
Provisions, Hazardous Materials Communications, Emergency Response 
Information, and Training Requirements; 49 CFR part 173--Shippers--
General Requirements for Shipments and Packages; and 49 CFR part 180--
Continuing Qualification and Maintenance of Packagings.
    (3) For the purpose of complying with this subpart, no exceptions to 
the 49 CFR part 178 or part 179 regulations are allowed except as 
provided for in paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
    (4) For a lab pack that is managed in accordance with the 
requirements of 49 CFR part 178 for the purpose of complying with this 
subpart, an owner or operator may comply with the exceptions for 
combination packagings specified in 49 CFR 173.12(b).
    (g) To determine compliance with the no detectable organic emissions 
requirement of paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section, the procedure 
specified in Sec. 264.1083(d) of this subpart shall be used.
    (1) Each potential leak interface (i.e., a location where organic 
vapor leakage could occur) on the container, its cover, and associated 
closure devices, as applicable to the container, shall be checked. 
Potential leak interfaces that are associated with containers include, 
but are not limited to: The interface of the cover rim and the container 
wall; the periphery of any opening on the container or container cover 
and its associated closure device; and the sealing seat interface on a 
spring-loaded pressure-relief valve.
    (2) The test shall be performed when the container is filled with a 
material having a volatile organic concentration representative of the 
range of volatile organic concentrations for the hazardous wastes 
expected to be managed in this type of container. During the test, the 
container cover and closure devices shall be secured in the closed 
position.
    (h) Procedure for determining a container to be vapor-tight using 
Method 27 of 40 CFR part 60, appendix A for the purpose of complying 
with paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section.
    (1) The test shall be performed in accordance with Method 27 of 40 
CFR part 60, appendix A of this chapter.
    (2) A pressure measurement device shall be used that has a precision 
of <plus-minus> 2.5 mm water and that is capable of measuring above the 
pressure at which the container is to be tested for vapor tightness.
    (3) If the test results determined by Method 27 indicate that the 
container sustains a pressure change less than or

[[Page 354]]

equal to 750 Pascals within 5 minutes after it is pressurized to a 
minimum of 4,500 Pascals, then the container is determined to be vapor-
tight.
[61 FR 59962, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64659, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1087  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.

    (a) This section applies to each closed-vent system and control 
device installed and operated by the owner or operator to control air 
emissions in accordance with standards of this subpart.
    (b) The closed-vent system shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) The closed-vent system shall route the gases, vapors, and fumes 
emitted from the hazardous waste in the waste management unit to a 
control device that meets the requirements specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section.
    (2) The closed-vent system shall be designed and operated in 
accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1033(k) of this 
part.
    (3) In the case when the closed-vent system includes bypass devices 
that could be used to divert the gas or vapor stream to the atmosphere 
before entering the control device, each bypass device shall be equipped 
with either a flow indicator as specified in paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this 
section or a seal or locking device as specified in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) 
of this section. For the purpose of complying with this paragraph, low 
leg drains, high point bleeds, analyzer vents, open-ended valves or 
lines, spring loaded pressure relief valves, and other fittings used for 
safety purposes are not considered to be bypass devices.
    (i) If a flow indicator is used to comply with paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section, the indicator shall be installed at the inlet to the 
bypass line used to divert gases and vapors from the closed-vent system 
to the atmosphere at a point upstream of the control device inlet. For 
this paragraph, a flow indicator means a device which indicates the 
presence of either gas or vapor flow in the bypass line.
    (ii) If a seal or locking device is used to comply with paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section, the device shall be placed on the mechanism by 
which the bypass device position is controlled (e.g., valve handle, 
damper lever) when the bypass device is in the closed position such that 
the bypass device cannot be opened without breaking the seal or removing 
the lock. Examples of such devices include, but are not limited to, a 
car-seal or a lock-and-key configuration valve. The owner or operator 
shall visually inspect the seal or closure mechanism at least once every 
month to verify that the bypass mechanism is maintained in the closed 
position.
    (4) The closed-vent system shall be inspected and monitored by the 
owner or operator in accordance with the procedure specified in 
Sec. 264.1033(l).
    (c) The control device shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) The control device shall be one of the following devices:
    (i) A control device designed and operated to reduce the total 
organic content of the inlet vapor stream vented to the control device 
by at least 95 percent by weight;
    (ii) An enclosed combustion device designed and operated in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1033(c) of this part; or
    (iii) A flare designed and operated in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 264.1033(d) of this part.
    (2) The owner or operator who elects to use a closed-vent system and 
control device to comply with the requirements of this section shall 
comply with the requirements specified in paragraphs (c)(2)(i) through 
(c)(2)(vi) of this section.
    (i) Periods of planned routine maintenance of the control device, 
during which the control device does not meet the specifications of 
paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or (c)(1)(iii) of this section, as 
applicable, shall not exceed 240 hours per year.
    (ii) The specifications and requirements in paragraphs (c)(1)(i), 
(c)(1)(ii), and (c)(1)(iii) of this section for control devices do not 
apply during periods of planned routine maintenance.
    (iii) The specifications and requirements in paragraphs (c)(1)(i), 
(c)(1)(ii), and (c)(1)(iii) of this section for control devices do not 
apply during a control device system malfunction.

[[Page 355]]

    (iv) The owner or operator shall demonstrate compliance with the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section (i.e., planned 
routine maintenance of a control device, during which the control device 
does not meet the specifications of paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or 
(c)(1)(iii) of this section, as applicable, shall not exceed 240 hours 
per year) by recording the information specified in 
Sec. 264.1089(e)(1)(v) of this subpart.
    (v) The owner or operator shall correct control device system 
malfunctions as soon as practicable after their occurrence in order to 
minimize excess emissions of air pollutants.
    (vi) The owner or operator shall operate the closed-vent system such 
that gases, vapors, or fumes are not actively vented to the control 
device during periods of planned maintenance or control device system 
malfunction (i.e., periods when the control device is not operating or 
not operating normally) except in cases when it is necessary to vent the 
gases, vapors, and/or fumes to avoid an unsafe condition or to implement 
malfunction corrective actions or planned maintenance actions.
    (3) The owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system to comply 
with paragraph (c)(1) of this section shall operate and maintain the 
control device in accordance with the following requirements:
    (i) Following the initial startup of the control device, all 
activated carbon in the control device shall be replaced with fresh 
carbon on a regular basis in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1033(g) or Sec. 264.1033(h) of this part.
    (ii) All carbon that is a hazardous waste and that is removed from 
the control device shall be managed in accordance with the requirements 
of 40 CFR 264.1033(n), regardless of the average volatile organic 
concentration of the carbon.
    (4) An owner or operator using a control device other than a thermal 
vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, process heater, condenser, or carbon 
adsorption system to comply with paragraph (c)(1) of this section shall 
operate and maintain the control device in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 264.1033(j) of this part.
    (5) The owner or operator shall demonstrate that a control device 
achieves the performance requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section as follows:
    (i) An owner or operator shall demonstrate using either a 
performance test as specified in paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section 
or a design analysis as specified in paragraph (c)(5)(iv) of this 
section the performance of each control device except for the following:
    (A) A flare;
    (B) A boiler or process heater with a design heat input capacity of 
44 megawatts or greater;
    (C) A boiler or process heater into which the vent stream is 
introduced with the primary fuel;
    (D) A boiler or industrial furnace burning hazardous waste for which 
the owner or operator has been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 
270 and has designed and operates the unit in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H; or
    (E) A boiler or industrial furnace burning hazardous waste for which 
the owner or operator has designed and operates in accordance with the 
interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H.
    (ii) An owner or operator shall demonstrate the performance of each 
flare in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 264.1033(e).
    (iii) For a performance test conducted to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section, the owner or operator shall use the 
test methods and procedures specified in Sec. 264.1034(c)(1) through 
(c)(4).
    (iv) For a design analysis conducted to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section, the design analysis shall meet the 
requirements specified in Sec. 264.1035(b)(4)(iii).
    (v) The owner or operator shall demonstrate that a carbon adsorption 
system achieves the performance requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section based on the total quantity of organics vented to the atmosphere 
from all carbon adsorption system equipment that is used for organic 
adsorption, organic desorption or carbon regeneration, organic recovery, 
and carbon disposal.
    (6) If the owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree

[[Page 356]]

on a demonstration of control device performance using a design analysis 
then the disagreement shall be resolved using the results of a 
performance test performed by the owner or operator in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section. The Regional 
Administrator may choose to have an authorized representative observe 
the performance test.
    (7) The closed-vent system and control device shall be inspected and 
monitored by the owner or operator in accordance with the procedures 
specified in 40 CFR 264.1033(f)(2) and 40 CFR 264.1033(l). The readings 
from each monitoring device required by 40 CFR 264.1033(f)(2) shall be 
inspected at least once each operating day to check control device 
operation. Any necessary corrective measures shall be immediately 
implemented to ensure the control device is operated in compliance with 
the requirements of this section.
[59 FR 62927, Dec. 6, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 4913, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 
FR 59965, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 64660, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1088  Inspection and monitoring requirements.

    (a) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor air emission 
control equipment used to comply with this subpart in accordance with 
the applicable requirements specified in Sec. 264.1084 through 
Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart.
    (b) The owner or operator shall develop and implement a written plan 
and schedule to perform the inspections and monitoring required by 
paragraph (a) of this section. The owner or operator shall incorporate 
this plan and schedule into the facility inspection plan required under 
40 CFR 264.15.
[61 FR 59966, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1089  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a) Each owner or operator of a facility subject to requirements of 
this subpart shall record and maintain the information specified in 
paragraphs (b) through (j) of this section, as applicable to the 
facility. Except for air emission control equipment design documentation 
and information required by paragraphs (i) and (j) of this section, 
records required by this section shall be maintained in the operating 
record for a minimum of 3 years. Air emission control equipment design 
documentation shall be maintained in the operating record until the air 
emission control equipment is replaced or otherwise no longer in 
service. Information required by paragraphs (i) and (j) of this section 
shall be maintained in the operating record for as long as the waste 
management unit is not using air emission controls specified in 
Secs. 264.1084 through 264.1087 of this subpart in accordance with the 
conditions specified in Sec. 264.1080(d) or Sec. 264.1080(b)(7) of this 
subpart, respectively.
    (b) The owner or operator of a tank using air emission controls in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1084 of this subpart shall 
prepare and maintain records for the tank that include the following 
information:
    (1) For each tank using air emission controls in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 264.1084 of this subpart, the owner or operator 
shall record:
    (i) A tank identification number (or other unique identification 
description as selected by the owner or operator).
    (ii) A record for each inspection required by Sec. 264.1084 of this 
subpart that includes the following information:
    (A) Date inspection was conducted.
    (B) For each defect detected during the inspection: The location of 
the defect, a description of the defect, the date of detection, and 
corrective action taken to repair the defect. In the event that repair 
of the defect is delayed in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1084 of this subpart, the owner or operator shall also record 
the reason for the delay and the date that completion of repair of the 
defect is expected.
    (2) In addition to the information required by paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, the owner or operator shall record the following 
information, as applicable to the tank:
    (i) The owner or operator using a fixed roof to comply with the Tank 
Level 1 control requirements specified in Sec. 264.1084(c) of this 
subpart shall prepare and maintain records for each determination for 
the maximum organic vapor pressure of the hazardous waste in the tank 
performed in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1084(c) of 
this subpart. The records shall include the date and time the samples 
were

[[Page 357]]

collected, the analysis method used, and the analysis results.
    (ii) The owner or operator using an internal floating roof to comply 
with the Tank Level 2 control requirements specified in Sec. 264.1084(e) 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain documentation describing the 
floating roof design.
    (iii) Owners and operators using an external floating roof to comply 
with the Tank Level 2 control requirements specified in Sec. 264.1084(f) 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain the following records:
    (A) Documentation describing the floating roof design and the 
dimensions of the tank.
    (B) Records for each seal gap inspection required by 
Sec. 264.1084(f)(3) of this subpart describing the results of the seal 
gap measurements. The records shall include the date that the 
measurements were performed, the raw data obtained for the measurements, 
and the calculations of the total gap surface area. In the event that 
the seal gap measurements do not conform to the specifications in 
Sec. 264.1084(f)(1) of this subpart, the records shall include a 
description of the repairs that were made, the date the repairs were 
made, and the date the tank was emptied, if necessary.
    (iv) Each owner or operator using an enclosure to comply with the 
Tank Level 2 control requirements specified in Sec. 264.1084(i) of this 
subpart shall prepare and maintain the following records:
    (A) Records for the most recent set of calculations and measurements 
performed by the owner or operator to verify that the enclosure meets 
the criteria of a permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' under 40 CFR 52.741, appendix B.
    (B) Records required for the closed-vent system and control device 
in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (e) of this section.
    (c) The owner or operator of a surface impoundment using air 
emission controls in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1085 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain records for the surface 
impoundment that include the following information:
    (1) A surface impoundment identification number (or other unique 
identification description as selected by the owner or operator).
    (2) Documentation describing the floating membrane cover or cover 
design, as applicable to the surface impoundment, that includes 
information prepared by the owner or operator or provided by the cover 
manufacturer or vendor describing the cover design, and certification by 
the owner or operator that the cover meets the specifications listed in 
Sec. 264.1085(c) of this subpart.
    (3) A record for each inspection required by Sec. 264.1085 of this 
subpart that includes the following information:
    (i) Date inspection was conducted.
    (ii) For each defect detected during the inspection the following 
information: The location of the defect, a description of the defect, 
the date of detection, and corrective action taken to repair the defect. 
In the event that repair of the defect is delayed in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 264.1085(f) of this subpart, the owner or operator 
shall also record the reason for the delay and the date that completion 
of repair of the defect is expected.
    (4) For a surface impoundment equipped with a cover and vented 
through a closed-vent system to a control device, the owner or operator 
shall prepare and maintain the records specified in paragraph (e) of 
this section.
    (d) The owner or operator of containers using Container Level 3 air 
emission controls in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1086 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain records that include the 
following information:
    (1) Records for the most recent set of calculations and measurements 
performed by the owner or operator to verify that the enclosure meets 
the criteria of a permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' under 40 CFR 52.741, appendix B.
    (2) Records required for the closed-vent system and control device 
in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (e) of this section.
    (e) The owner or operator using a closed-vent system and control 
device in accordance with the requirements of

[[Page 358]]

Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart shall prepare and maintain records that 
include the following information:
    (1) Documentation for the closed-vent system and control device that 
includes:
    (i) Certification that is signed and dated by the owner or operator 
stating that the control device is designed to operate at the 
performance level documented by a design analysis as specified in 
paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section or by performance tests as 
specified in paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this section when the tank, 
surface impoundment, or container is or would be operating at capacity 
or the highest level reasonably expected to occur.
    (ii) If a design analysis is used, then design documentation as 
specified in 40 CFR 264.1035(b)(4). The documentation shall include 
information prepared by the owner or operator or provided by the control 
device manufacturer or vendor that describes the control device design 
in accordance with 40 CFR 264.1035(b)(4)(iii) and certification by the 
owner or operator that the control equipment meets the applicable 
specifications.
    (iii) If performance tests are used, then a performance test plan as 
specified in 40 CFR 264.1035(b)(3) and all test results.
    (iv) Information as required by 40 CFR 264.1035(c)(1) and 40 CFR 
264.1035(c)(2), as applicable.
    (v) An owner or operator shall record, on a semiannual basis, the 
information specified in paragraphs (e)(1)(v)(A) and (e)(1)(v)(B) of 
this section for those planned routine maintenance operations that would 
require the control device not to meet the requirements of 
Sec. 264.1087(c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or (c)(1)(iii) of this subpart, as 
applicable.
    (A) A description of the planned routine maintenance that is 
anticipated to be performed for the control device during the next 6-
month period. This description shall include the type of maintenance 
necessary, planned frequency of maintenance, and lengths of maintenance 
periods.
    (B) A description of the planned routine maintenance that was 
performed for the control device during the previous 6-month period. 
This description shall include the type of maintenance performed and the 
total number of hours during those 6 months that the control device did 
not meet the requirements of Sec. 264.1087 (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or 
(c)(1)(iii) of this subpart, as applicable, due to planned routine 
maintenance.
    (vi) An owner or operator shall record the information specified in 
paragraphs (e)(1)(vi)(A) through (e)(1)(vi)(C) of this section for those 
unexpected control device system malfunctions that would require the 
control device not to meet the requirements of Sec. 264.1087 (c)(1)(i), 
(c)(1)(ii), or (c)(1)(iii) of this subpart, as applicable.
    (A) The occurrence and duration of each malfunction of the control 
device system.
    (B) The duration of each period during a malfunction when gases, 
vapors, or fumes are vented from the waste management unit through the 
closed-vent system to the control device while the control device is not 
properly functioning.
    (C) Actions taken during periods of malfunction to restore a 
malfunctioning control device to its normal or usual manner of 
operation.
    (vii) Records of the management of carbon removed from a carbon 
adsorption system conducted in accordance with Sec. 264.1087(c)(3)(ii) 
of this subpart.
    (f) The owner or operator of a tank, surface impoundment, or 
container exempted from standards in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 264.1082(c) of this subpart shall prepare and maintain the 
following records, as applicable:
    (1) For tanks, surface impoundments, and containers exempted under 
the hazardous waste organic concentration conditions specified in 
Sec. 264.1082(c)(1) or Secs. 264.1082(c)(2)(i) through (c)(2)(vi) of 
this subpart, the owner or operator shall record the information used 
for each waste determination (e.g., test results, measurements, 
calculations, and other documentation) in the facility operating log. If 
analysis results for waste samples are used for the waste determination, 
then the owner or operator shall record the date, time, and location 
that each waste sample is collected in accordance with applicable 
requirements of Sec. 264.1083 of this subpart.

[[Page 359]]

    (2) For tanks, surface impoundments, or containers exempted under 
the provisions of Sec. 264.1082(c)(2)(vii) or Sec. 264.1082(c)(2)(viii) 
of this subpart, the owner or operator shall record the identification 
number for the incinerator, boiler, or industrial furnace in which the 
hazardous waste is treated.
    (g) An owner or operator designating a cover as ``unsafe to inspect 
and monitor'' pursuant to Sec. 264.1084(l) or Sec. 264.1085(g) of this 
subpart shall record in a log that is kept in the facility operating 
record the following information: The identification numbers for waste 
management units with covers that are designated as ``unsafe to inspect 
and monitor,'' the explanation for each cover stating why the cover is 
unsafe to inspect and monitor, and the plan and schedule for inspecting 
and monitoring each cover.
    (h) The owner or operator of a facility that is subject to this 
subpart and to the control device standards in 40 CFR part 60, subpart 
VV, or 40 CFR part 61, subpart V, may elect to demonstrate compliance 
with the applicable sections of this subpart by documentation either 
pursuant to this subpart, or pursuant to the provisions of 40 CFR part 
60, subpart VV or 40 CFR part 61, subpart V, to the extent that the 
documentation required by 40 CFR parts 60 or 61 duplicates the 
documentation required by this section.
    (i) For each tank or container not using air emission controls 
specified in Secs. 264.1084 through 264.1087 of this subpart in 
accordance with the conditions specified in Sec. 264.1080(d) of this 
subpart, the owner or operator shall record and maintain the following 
information:
    (1) A list of the individual organic peroxide compounds manufactured 
at the facility that meet the conditions specified in 
Sec. 264.1080(d)(1).
    (2) A description of how the hazardous waste containing the organic 
peroxide compounds identified in paragraph (i)(1) of this section are 
managed at the facility in tanks and containers. This description shall 
include:
    (i) For the tanks used at the facility to manage this hazardous 
waste, sufficient information shall be provided to describe for each 
tank: A facility identification number for the tank; the purpose and 
placement of this tank in the management train of this hazardous waste; 
and the procedures used to ultimately dispose of the hazardous waste 
managed in the tanks.
    (ii) For containers used at the facility to manage these hazardous 
wastes, sufficient information shall be provided to describe: A facility 
identification number for the container or group of containers; the 
purpose and placement of this container, or group of containers, in the 
management train of this hazardous waste; and the procedures used to 
ultimately dispose of the hazardous waste handled in the containers.
    (3) An explanation of why managing the hazardous waste containing 
the organic peroxide compounds identified in paragraph (i)(1) of this 
section in the tanks and containers as described in paragraph (i)(2) of 
this section would create an undue safety hazard if the air emission 
controls, as required under Secs. 264.1084 through 264.1087 of this 
subpart, are installed and operated on these waste management units. 
This explanation shall include the following information:
    (i) For tanks used at the facility to manage these hazardous wastes, 
sufficient information shall be provided to explain: How use of the 
required air emission controls on the tanks would affect the tank design 
features and facility operating procedures currently used to prevent an 
undue safety hazard during the management of this hazardous waste in the 
tanks; and why installation of safety devices on the required air 
emission controls, as allowed under this subpart, will not address those 
situations in which evacuation of tanks equipped with these air emission 
controls is necessary and consistent with good engineering and safety 
practices for handling organic peroxides.
    (ii) For containers used at the facility to manage these hazardous 
wastes, sufficient information shall be provided to explain: How use of 
the required air emission controls on the containers would affect the 
container design features and handling procedures currently used to 
prevent an undue safety hazard during the management of this hazardous 
waste in the containers; and why installation of

[[Page 360]]

safety devices on the required air emission controls, as allowed under 
this subpart, will not address those situations in which evacuation of 
containers equipped with these air emission controls is necessary and 
consistent with good engineering and safety practices for handling 
organic peroxides.
    (j) For each hazardous waste management unit not using air emission 
controls specified in Secs. 264.1084 through 264.1087 of this subpart in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 264.1080(b)(7) of this subpart, 
the owner and operator shall record and maintain the following 
information:
    (1) Certification that the waste management unit is equipped with 
and operating air emission controls in accordance with the requirements 
of an applicable Clean Air Act regulation codified under 40 CFR part 60, 
part 61, or part 63.
    (2) Identification of the specific requirements codified under 40 
CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63 with which the waste management unit is 
in compliance.
[61 FR 59966, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64660, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1090  Reporting requirements.

    (a) Each owner or operator managing hazardous waste in a tank, 
surface impoundment, or container exempted from using air emission 
controls under the provisions of Sec. 264.1082(c) of this subpart shall 
report to the Regional Administrator each occurrence when hazardous 
waste is placed in the waste management unit in noncompliance with the 
conditions specified in Sec. 264.1082 (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this subpart, 
as applicable. Examples of such occurrences include placing in the waste 
management unit a hazardous waste having an average VO concentration 
equal to or greater than 500 ppmw at the point of waste origination; or 
placing in the waste management unit a treated hazardous waste of which 
the organic content has been reduced by an organic destruction or 
removal process that fails to achieve the applicable conditions 
specified in Sec. 264.1082 (c)(2)(i) through (c)(2)(vi) of this subpart. 
The owner or operator shall submit a written report within 15 calendar 
days of the time that the owner or operator becomes aware of the 
occurrence. The written report shall contain the EPA identification 
number, facility name and address, a description of the noncompliance 
event and the cause, the dates of the noncompliance, and the actions 
taken to correct the noncompliance and prevent recurrence of the 
noncompliance. The report shall be signed and dated by an authorized 
representative of the owner or operator.
    (b) Each owner or operator using air emission controls on a tank in 
accordance with the requirements Sec. 264.1084(c) of this subpart shall 
report to the Regional Administrator each occurrence when hazardous 
waste is managed in the tank in noncompliance with the conditions 
specified in Sec. 264.1084(b) of this subpart. The owner or operator 
shall submit a written report within 15 calendar days of the time that 
the owner or operator becomes aware of the occurrence. The written 
report shall contain the EPA identification number, facility name and 
address, a description of the noncompliance event and the cause, the 
dates of the noncompliance, and the actions taken to correct the 
noncompliance and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. The report 
shall be signed and dated by an authorized representative of the owner 
or operator.
    (c) Each owner or operator using a control device in accordance with 
the requirements of Sec. 264.1087 of this subpart shall submit a 
semiannual written report to the Regional Administrator excepted as 
provided for in paragraph (d) of this section. The report shall describe 
each occurrence during the previous 6-month period when either: (1) A 
control device is operated continuously for 24 hours or longer in 
noncompliance with the applicable operating values defined in 
Sec. 264.1035(c)(4); or (2) A flare is operated with visible emissions 
for 5 minutes or longer in a two-hour period, as defined in 
Sec. 264.1033(d). The report shall describe each occurrence during the 
previous 6-month period when a control device is operated continuously 
for 24 hours or longer in noncompliance with the applicable operating 
values defined in Sec. 264.1035(c)(4) or when a flare is operated with 
visible emissions as

[[Page 361]]

defined in Sec. 264.1033(d). The written report shall include the EPA 
identification number, facility name and address, and an explanation why 
the control device could not be returned to compliance within 24 hours, 
and actions taken to correct the noncompliance. The report shall be 
signed and dated by an authorized representative of the owner or 
operator.
    (d) A report to the Regional Administrator in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (c) of this section is not required for a 6-
month period during which all control devices subject to this subpart 
are operated by the owner or operator such that:
    (1) During no period of 24 hours or longer did a control device 
operate continuously in noncompliance with the applicable operating 
values defined in Sec. 264.1035(c)(4); and
    (2) No flare was operated with visible emissions for 5 minutes or 
longer in a two-hour period, as defined in Sec. 264.1033(d).
[59 FR 62927, Dec. 6, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 4913, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 
FR 59968, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1091  [Reserved]


<R04>
                    Subpart DD--Containment Buildings

    Source: 57 FR 37265, Aug. 18, 1992, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1100  Applicability.

    The requirements of this subpart apply to owners or operators who 
store or treat hazardous waste in units designed and operated under 
Sec. 264.1101 of this subpart. These provisions will become effective on 
February 18, 1993, although owner or operator may notify the Regional 
Administrator of his intent to be bound by this subpart at an earlier 
time. The owner or operator is not subject to the definition of land 
disposal in RCRA section 3004(k) provided that the unit:
    (a) Is a completely enclosed, self-supporting structure that is 
designed and constructed of manmade materials of sufficient strength and 
thickness to support themselves, the waste contents, and any personnel 
and heavy equipment that operate within the unit, and to prevent failure 
due to pressure gradients, settlement, compression, or uplift, physical 
contact with the hazardous wastes to which they are exposed; climatic 
conditions; and the stresses of daily operation, including the movement 
of heavy equipment within the unit and contact of such equipment with 
containment walls;
    (b) Has a primary barrier that is designed to be sufficiently 
durable to withstand the movement of personnel, wastes, and handling 
equipment within the unit;
    (c) If the unit is used to manage liquids, has:
    (1) A primary barrier designed and constructed of materials to 
prevent migration of hazardous constituents into the barrier;
    (2) A liquid collection system designed and constructed of materials 
to minimize the accumulation of liquid on the primary barrier; and
    (3) A secondary containment system designed and constructed of 
materials to prevent migration of hazardous constituents into the 
barrier, with a leak detection and liquid collection system capable of 
detecting, collecting, and removing leaks of hazardous constituents at 
the earliest practicable time, unless the unit has been granted a 
variance from the secondary containment system requirements under 
Sec. 264.1101(b)(4);
    (d) Has controls sufficient to prevent fugitive dust emissions to 
meet the no visible emission standard in Sec. 264.1101(c)(1)(iv); and
    (e) Is designed and operated to ensure containment and prevent the 
tracking of materials from the unit by personnel or equipment.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1101  Design and operating standards.

    (a) All containment buildings must comply with the following design 
standards:
    (1) The containment building must be completely enclosed with a 
floor, walls, and a roof to prevent exposure to the elements, (e.g., 
precipitation, wind, run-on), and to assure containment of managed 
wastes.
    (2) The floor and containment walls of the unit, including the 
secondary containment system if required under paragraph (b) of this 
section, must be

[[Page 362]]

designed and constructed of materials of sufficient strength and 
thickness to support themselves, the waste contents, and any personnel 
and heavy equipment that operate within the unit, and to prevent failure 
due to pressure gradients, settlement, compression, or uplift, physical 
contact with the hazardous wastes to which they are exposed; climatic 
conditions; and the stresses of daily operation, including the movement 
of heavy equipment within the unit and contact of such equipment with 
containment walls. The unit must be designed so that it has sufficient 
structural strength to prevent collapse or other failure. All surfaces 
to be in contact with hazardous wastes must be chemically compatible 
with those wastes. EPA will consider standards established by 
professional organizations generally recognized by the industry such as 
the American Concrete Institute (ACI) and the American Society of 
Testing Materials (ASTM) in judging the structural integrity 
requirements of this paragraph. If appropriate to the nature of the 
waste management operation to take place in the unit, an exception to 
the structural strength requirement may be made for light-weight doors 
and windows that meet these criteria:
    (i) They provide an effective barrier against fugitive dust 
emissions under paragraph (c)(1)(iv); and
    (ii) The unit is designed and operated in a fashion that assures 
that wastes will not actually come in contact with these openings.
    (3) Incompatible hazardous wastes or treatment reagents must not be 
placed in the unit or its secondary containment system if they could 
cause the unit or secondary containment system to leak, corrode, or 
otherwise fail.
    (4) A containment building must have a primary barrier designed to 
withstand the movement of personnel, waste, and handling equipment in 
the unit during the operating life of the unit and appropriate for the 
physical and chemical characteristics of the waste to be managed.
    (b) For a containment building used to manage hazardous wastes 
containing free liquids or treated with free liquids (the presence of 
which is determined by the paint filter test, a visual examination, or 
other appropriate means), the owner or operator must include:
    (1) A primary barrier designed and constructed of materials to 
prevent the migration of hazardous constituents into the barrier (e.g., 
a geomembrane covered by a concrete wear surface).
    (2) A liquid collection and removal system to minimize the 
accumulation of liquid on the primary barrier of the containment 
building:
    (i) The primary barrier must be sloped to drain liquids to the 
associated collection system; and
    (ii) Liquids and waste must be collected and removed to minimize 
hydraulic head on the containment system at the earliest practicable 
time.
    (3) A secondary containment system including a secondary barrier 
designed and constructed to prevent migration of hazardous constituents 
into the barrier, and a leak detection system that is capable of 
detecting failure of the primary barrier and collecting accumulated 
hazardous wastes and liquids at the earliest practicable time.
    (i) The requirements of the leak detection component of the 
secondary containment system are satisfied by installation of a system 
that is, at a minimum:
    (A) Constructed with a bottom slope of 1 percent or more; and
    (B) Constructed of a granular drainage material with a hydraulic 
conductivity of 1 x 10<SUP>-2</SUP> cm/sec or more and a thickness of 12 
inches (30.5 cm) or more, or constructed of synthetic or geonet drainage 
materials with a transmissivity of 3 x 10<SUP>-5</SUP> m\2\/sec or more.
    (ii) If treatment is to be conducted in the building, an area in 
which such treatment will be conducted must be designed to prevent the 
release of liquids, wet materials, or liquid aerosols to other portions 
of the building.
    (iii) The secondary containment system must be constructed of 
materials that are chemically resistant to the waste and liquids managed 
in the containment building and of sufficient strength and thickness to 
prevent collapse under the pressure exerted by overlaying materials and 
by any equipment used in the containment building. (Containment 
buildings can serve as secondary containment systems for

[[Page 363]]

tanks placed within the building under certain conditions. A containment 
building can serve as an external liner system for a tank, provided it 
meets the requirements of Sec. 264.193(d)(1). In addition, the 
containment building must meet the requirements of Sec. 264.193(b) and 
Secs. 264.193(c) (1) and (2) to be considered an acceptable secondary 
containment system for a tank.)
    (4) For existing units other than 90-day generator units, the 
Regional Administrator may delay the secondary containment requirement 
for up to two years, based on a demonstration by the owner or operator 
that the unit substantially meets the standards of this subpart. In 
making this demonstration, the owner or operator must:
    (i) Provide written notice to the Regional Administrator of their 
request by November 16, 1992. This notification must describe the unit 
and its operating practices with specific reference to the performance 
of existing containment systems, and specific plans for retrofitting the 
unit with secondary containment;
    (ii) Respond to any comments from the Regional Administrator on 
these plans within 30 days; and
    (iii) Fulfill the terms of the revised plans, if such plans are 
approved by the Regional Administrator.
    (c) Owners or operators of all containment buildings must:
    (1) Use controls and practices to ensure containment of the 
hazardous waste within the unit; and, at a minimum:
    (i) Maintain the primary barrier to be free of significant cracks, 
gaps, corrosion, or other deterioration that could cause hazardous waste 
to be released from the primary barrier;
    (ii) Maintain the level of the stored/treated hazardous waste within 
the containment walls of the unit so that the height of any containment 
wall is not exceeded;
    (iii) Take measures to prevent the tracking of hazardous waste out 
of the unit by personnel or by equipment used in handling the waste. An 
area must be designated to decontaminate equipment and any rinsate must 
be collected and properly managed; and
    (iv) Take measures to control fugitive dust emissions such that any 
openings (doors, windows, vents, cracks, etc.) exhibit no visible 
emissions (see 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 22--Visual 
Determination of Fugitive Emissions from Material Sources and Smoke 
Emissions from Flares). In addition, all associated particulate 
collection devices (e.g., fabric filter, electrostatic precipitator) 
must be operated and maintained with sound air pollution control 
practices (see 40 CFR part 60 subpart 292 for guidance). This state of 
no visible emissions must be maintained effectively at all times during 
routine operating and maintenance conditions, including when vehicles 
and personnel are entering and exiting the unit.
    (2) Obtain certification by a qualified registered professional 
engineer that the containment building design meets the requirements of 
paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section. For units placed into 
operation prior to February 18, 1993, this certification must be placed 
in the facility's operating record (on-site files for generators who are 
not formally required to have operating records) no later than 60 days 
after the date of initial operation of the unit. After February 18, 
1993, PE certification will be required prior to operation of the unit.
    (3) Throughout the active life of the containment building, if the 
owner or operator detects a condition that could lead to or has caused a 
release of hazardous waste, must repair the condition promptly, in 
accordance with the following procedures.
    (i) Upon detection of a condition that has lead to a release of 
hazardous waste (e.g., upon detection of leakage from the primary 
barrier) the owner or operator must:
    (A) Enter a record of the discovery in the facility operating 
record;
    (B) Immediately remove the portion of the containment building 
affected by the condition from service;
    (C) Determine what steps must be taken to repair the containment 
building, remove any leakage from the secondary collection system, and 
establish a schedule for accomplishing the cleanup and repairs; and
    (D) Within 7 days after the discovery of the condition, notify the 
Regional Administrator of the condition, and

[[Page 364]]

within 14 working days, provide a written notice to the Regional 
Administrator with a description of the steps taken to repair the 
containment building, and the schedule for accomplishing the work.
    (ii) The Regional Administrator will review the information 
submitted, make a determination regarding whether the containment 
building must be removed from service completely or partially until 
repairs and cleanup are complete, and notify the owner or operator of 
the determination and the underlying rationale in writing.
    (iii) Upon completing all repairs and cleanup the owner or operator 
must notify the Regional Administrator in writing and provide a 
verification, signed by a qualified, registered professional engineer, 
that the repairs and cleanup have been completed according to the 
written plan submitted in accordance with paragraph (c)(3)(i)(D) of this 
section.
    (4) Inspect and record in the facility's operating record, at least 
once every seven days, data gathered from monitoring equipment and leak 
detection equipment as well as the containment building and the area 
immediately surrounding the containment building to detect signs of 
releases of hazardous waste.
    (d) For containment buildings that contain areas both with and 
without secondary containment, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Design and operate each area in accordance with the requirements 
enumerated in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section;
    (2) Take measures to prevent the release of liquids or wet materials 
into areas without secondary containment; and
    (3) Maintain in the facility's operating log a written description 
of the operating procedures used to maintain the integrity of areas 
without secondary containment.
    (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subpart the Regional 
Administrator may waive requirements for secondary containment for a 
permitted containment building where the owner operator demonstrates 
that the only free liquids in the unit are limited amounts of dust 
suppression liquids required to meet occupational health and safety 
requirements, and where containment of managed wastes and liquids can be 
assured without a secondary containment system.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1102  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure of a containment building, the owner or operator must 
remove or decontaminate all waste residues, contaminated containment 
system components (liners, etc.,) contaminated subsoils, and structures 
and equipment contaminated with waste and leachate, and manage them as 
hazardous waste unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this chapter applies. The 
closure plan, closure activities, cost estimates for closure, and 
financial responsibility for containment buildings must meet all of the 
requirements specified in subparts G and H of this part.
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed or decontaminated, 
he must close the facility and perform post-closure care in accordance 
with the closure and post-closure requirements that apply to landfills 
(Sec. 264.310). In addition, for the purposes of closure, post-closure, 
and financial responsibility, such a containment building is then 
considered to be a landfill, and the owner or operator must meet all of 
the requirements for landfills specified in subparts G and H of this 
part.


<R05>
Secs. 264.1103--264.1110  [Reserved]


<R04>
      Subpart EE--Hazardous Waste Munitions and Explosives Storage

    Source: 62 FR 6652, Feb. 12, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 264.1200  Applicability.

    The requirements of this subpart apply to owners or operators who 
store munitions and explosive hazardous

[[Page 365]]

wastes, except as Sec. 264.1 provides otherwise. (NOTE: Depending on 
explosive hazards, hazardous waste munitions and explosives may also be 
managed in other types of storage units, including containment buildings 
(40 CFR part 264, subpart DD), tanks (40 CFR part 264, subpart J), or 
containers (40 CFR part 264, subpart I); See 40 CFR 266.205 for storage 
of waste military munitions).


<R05>
Sec. 264.1201  Design and operating standards.

    (a) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives storage units must be 
designed and operated with containment systems, controls, and 
monitoring, that:
    (1) Minimize the potential for detonation or other means of release 
of hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, hazardous decomposition 
products, or contaminated run-off, to the soil, ground water, surface 
water, and atmosphere;
    (2) Provide a primary barrier, which may be a container (including a 
shell) or tank, designed to contain the hazardous waste;
    (3) For wastes stored outdoors, provide that the waste and 
containers will not be in standing precipitation;
    (4) For liquid wastes, provide a secondary containment system that 
assures that any released liquids are contained and promptly detected 
and removed from the waste area, or vapor detection system that assures 
that any released liquids or vapors are promptly detected and an 
appropriate response taken (e.g., additional containment, such as 
overpacking, or removal from the waste area); and
    (5) Provide monitoring and inspection procedures that assure the 
controls and containment systems are working as designed and that 
releases that may adversely impact human health or the environment are 
not escaping from the unit.
    (b) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives stored under this 
subpart may be stored in one of the following:
    (1) Earth-covered magazines. Earth-covered magazines must be:
    (i) Constructed of waterproofed, reinforced concrete or structural 
steel arches, with steel doors that are kept closed when not being 
accessed;
    (ii) Designed and constructed:
    (A) To be of sufficient strength and thickness to support the weight 
of any explosives or munitions stored and any equipment used in the 
unit;
    (B) To provide working space for personnel and equipment in the 
unit; and
    (C) To withstand movement activities that occur in the unit; and
    (iii) Located and designed, with walls and earthen covers that 
direct an explosion in the unit in a safe direction, so as to minimize 
the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other 
effects of any explosion.
    (2) Above-ground magazines. Above-ground magazines must be located 
and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to 
adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
    (3) Outdoor or open storage areas. Outdoor or open storage areas 
must be located and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an 
explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any 
explosion.
    (c) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives must be stored in 
accordance with a Standard Operating Procedure specifying procedures to 
ensure safety, security, and environmental protection. If these 
procedures serve the same purpose as the security and inspection 
requirements of 40 CFR 264.14, the preparedness and prevention 
procedures of 40 CFR part 264, subpart C, and the contingency plan and 
emergency procedures requirements of 40 CFR part 264, subpart D, then 
these procedures will be used to fulfill those requirements.
    (d) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives must be packaged to 
ensure safety in handling and storage.
    (e) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives must be inventoried at 
least annually.
    (f) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives and their storage units 
must be inspected and monitored as necessary to ensure explosives safety 
and to ensure that there is no migration of contaminants out of the 
unit.

[[Page 366]]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1202  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure of a magazine or unit which stored hazardous waste 
under this subpart, the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate 
all waste residues, contaminated containment system components, 
contaminated subsoils, and structures and equipment contaminated with 
waste, and manage them as hazardous waste unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this 
chapter applies. The closure plan, closure activities, cost estimates 
for closure, and financial responsibility for magazines or units must 
meet all of the requirements specified in subparts G and H of this part, 
except that the owner or operator may defer closure of the unit as long 
as it remains in service as a munitions or explosives magazine or 
storage unit.
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed or decontaminated, 
he or she must close the facility and perform post-closure care in 
accordance with the closure and post-closure requirements that apply to 
landfills (Sec. 264.310).

                         Appendices to Part 264

           Appendix I to Part 264--Recordkeeping Instructions

    The recordkeeping provisions of Sec. 264.73 specify that an owner or 
operator must keep a written operating record at his facility. This 
appendix provides additional instructions for keeping portions of the 
operating record. See Sec. 264.73(b) for additional recordkeeping 
requirements.
    The following information must be recorded, as it becomes available, 
and maintained in the operating record until closure of the facility in 
the following manner:
    Records of each hazardous waste received, treated, stored, or 
disposed of at the facility which include the following:
    (1) A description by its common name and the EPA Hazardous Waste 
Number(s) from part 261 of this chapter which apply to the waste. The 
waste description also must include the waste's physical form, i.e., 
liquid, sludge, solid, or contained gas. If the waste is not listed in 
part 261, subpart D, of this chapter, the description also must include 
the process that produced it (for example, solid filter cake from 
production of ----, EPA Hazardous Waste Number W051).
    Each hazardous waste listed in part 261, subpart D, of this chapter, 
and each hazardous waste characteristic defined in part 261, subpart C, 
of this chapter, has a four-digit EPA Hazardous Waste Number assigned to 
it. This number must be used for recordkeeping and reporting purposes. 
Where a hazardous waste contains more than one listed hazardous waste, 
or where more than one hazardous waste characteristic applies to the 
waste, the waste description must include all applicable EPA Hazardous 
Waste Numbers.
    (2) The estimated or manifest-reported weight, or volume and 
density, where applicable, in one of the units of measure specified in 
Table 1;

                                 Table 1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Unit of measure                          Code \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gallons....................................  G
Gallons per Hour...........................  E
Gallons per Day............................  U
Liters.....................................  L
Liters per Hour............................  H
Liters per Day.............................  V
Short Tons per Hour........................  D
Metric Tons per Hour.......................  W
Short Tons per Day.........................  N
Metric Tons per Day........................  S
Pounds per Hour............................  J
Kilograms per Hour.........................  R
Cubic Yards................................  Y
Cubic Meters...............................  C
Acres......................................  B
Acre-feet..................................  A
Hectares...................................  Q
Hectare-meter..............................  F
Btu's per Hour.............................  I
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Single digit symbols are used here for data processing purposes.

    (3) The method(s) (by handling code(s) as specified in Table 2) and 
date(s) of treatment, storage, or disposal.

Table 2.--Handling Codes for Treatment, Storage and Disposal Methods

    Enter the handling code(s) listed below that most closely represents 
the technique(s) used at the facility to treat, store or dispose of each 
quantity of hazardous waste received.

                               1. Storage

S01  Container (barrel, drum, etc.)
S02  Tank
S03  Waste Pile
S04  Surface Impoundment
S05  Drip Pad
S06  Containment Building (Storage)
S99  Other Storage (specify)

[[Page 367]]

                              2. Treatment

(a)  Thermal Treatment--

T06  Liquid injection incinerator
T07  Rotary kiln incinerator
T08  Fluidized bed incinerator
T09  Multiple hearth incinerator
T10  Infrared furnace incinerator
T11  Molten salt destructor
T12  Pyrolysis
T13  Wet air oxidation
T14  Calcination
T15  Microwave discharge
T18  Other (specify)

(b)  Chemical Treatment--

T19  Absorption mound
T20  Absorption field
T21  Chemical fixation
T22  Chemical oxidation
T23  Chemical precipitation
T24  Chemical reduction
T25  Chlorination
T26  Chlorinolysis
T27  Cyanide destruction
T28  Degradation
T29  Detoxification
T30  Ion exchange
T31  Neutralization
T32  Ozonation
T33  Photolysis
T34  Other (specify)

(c)  Physical Treatment--

                      (1) Separation of components:

T35  Centrifugation
T36  Clarification
T37  Coagulation
T38  Decanting
T39  Encapsulation
T40  Filtration
T41  Flocculation
T42  Flotation
T43  Foaming
T44  Sedimentation
T45  Thickening
T46  Ultrafiltration
T47  Other (specify)

                   (2) Removal of Specific Components:

T48  Absorption-molecular sieve
T49  Activated carbon
T50  Blending
T51  Catalysis
T52  Crystallization
T53  Dialysis
T54  Distillation
T55  Electrodialysis
T56  Electrolysis
T57  Evaporation
T58  High gradient magnetic separation
T59  Leaching
T60  Liquid ion exchange
T61  Liquid-liquid extraction
T62  Reverse osmosis
T63  Solvent recovery
T64  Stripping
T65  Sand filter
T66  Other (specify)

(d)  Biological Treatment

T67  Activated sludge
T68  Aerobic lagoon
T69  Aerobic tank
T70  Anaerobic tank
T71  Composting
T72  Septic tank
T73  Spray irrigation
T74  Thickening filter
T75  Tricking filter
T76  Waste stabilization pond
T77  Other (specify)
T78  [Reserved]
T79  [Reserved]

(e)  Boilers and Industrial Furnaces

T80  Boiler
T81  Cement Kiln
T82  Lime Kiln
T83  Aggregate Kiln
T84  Phosphate Kiln
T85  Coke Oven
T86  Blast Furnace
T87  Smelting, Melting, or Refining Furnace
T88  Titanium Dioxide Chloride Process Oxidation Reactor
T89  Methane Reforming Furnace
T90  Pulping Liquor Recovery Furnace
T91  Combustion Device Used in the Recovery of Sulfur Values from Spent 
          Sulfuric Acid
T92  Halogen Acid Furnaces
T93  Other Industrial Furnaces Listed in 40 CFR 260.10 (specify)

(f)  Other Treatment

T94  Containment Building (Treatment)

                               3. Disposal

D79  Underground Injection
D80  Landfill
D81  Land Treatment
D82  Ocean Disposal
D83  Surface Impoundment (to be closed as a landfill)
D99  Other Disposal (specify)

                      4. Miscellaneous (Subpart X)

X01  Open Burning/Open Detonation
X02  Mechanical Processing
X03  Thermal Unit
X04  Geologic Repository
X99  Other Subpart X (specify)
[45 FR 33221, May 19, 1980, as amended at 59 FR 13891, Mar. 24, 1994]

[[Page 368]]

               Appendices II--III to Part 264--[Reserved]

 Appendix IV to Part 264--Cochran's Approximation to the Behrens-Fisher 
                            Students' t-test

    Using all the available background data (n<INF>b</INF> readings), 
calculate the background mean (X<INF>b</INF>) and background variance 
(s<INF>b</INF>2). For the single monitoring well under investigation 
(n<INF>m</INF> reading), calculate the monitoring mean (X<INF>m</INF>) 
and monitoring variance (s<INF>m</INF>2).
    For any set of data (X<INF>1</INF>, X<INF>2</INF>, . . ., 
X<INF>n</INF>) the mean is calculated by:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.174

and the variance is calculated by:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.175


where ``n'' denotes the number of
observations in the set of data.

    The t-test uses these data summary measures to calculate a t-
statistic (t*) and a comparison t-statistic (t<INF>c</INF>). The t* 
value is compared to the t<INF>c</INF> value and a conclusion reached as 
to whether there has been a statistically significant change in any 
indicator parameter.
    The t-statistic for all parameters except pH and similar monitoring 
parameters is:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26OC93.011


If the value of this t-statistic is negative then there is no 
significant difference between the monitoring data and background data. 
It should be noted that significantly small negative values may be 
indicative of a failure of the assumption made for test validity or 
errors have been made in collecting the background data.
    The t-statistic (t<INF>c</INF>), against which t* will be compared, 
necessitates finding t<INF>b</INF> and t<INF>m</INF> from standard (one-
tailed) tables where,
t<INF>b</INF>=t-tables with (n<INF>b</INF>-1) degrees of freedom, at the 
0.05 level of significance.
t<INF>m</INF>=t-tables with (n<INF>m</INF>-1) degrees of freedom, at the 
0.05 level of significance.

    Finally, the special weightings W<INF>b</INF> and W<INF>m</INF> are 
defined as:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.176

and so the comparison t-statistic is:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.177

    The t-statistic (t*) is now compared with the comparison t-statistic 
(t<INF>c</INF>) using the following decision-rule:
  If t* is equal to or larger than t<INF>c</INF>, then conclude that 
there most likely has been a significant increase in this specific 
parameter.
  If t* is less than t<INF>c</INF>, then conclude that most likely there 
has not been a change in this specific parameter.

    The t-statistic for testing pH and similar monitoring parameters is 
constructed in the same manner as previously described except the 
negative sign (if any) is discarded and the caveat concerning the 
negative value is ignored. The standard (two-tailed) tables are used in 
the construction t<INF>c</INF> for pH and similar monitoring parameters.
    If t* is equal to or larger than t<INF>c,</INF> then conclude that 
there most likely has been a significant increase (if the initial t* had 
been negative, this would imply a significant decrease). If t* is less 
than t<INF>c</INF>, then conclude that there most likely has been no 
change.
    A further discussion of the test may be found in Statistical Methods 
(6th Edition, Section 4.14) by G. W. Snedecor and W. G. Cochran, or 
Principles and Procedures of Statistics (1st Edition, Section 5.8) by R. 
G. D. Steel and J. H. Torrie.

              Standard T--Tables 0.05 Level of Significance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     t-values   t-values
                Degrees of freedom                    (one-      (two-
                                                      tail)      tail)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.................................................      6.314     12.706
2.................................................      2.920      4.303
3.................................................      2.353      3.182
4.................................................      2.132      2.776
5.................................................      2.015      2.571
6.................................................      1.943      2.447
7.................................................      1.895      2.365
8.................................................      1.860      2.306
9.................................................      1.833      2.262
10................................................      1.812      2.228
11................................................      1.796      2.201
12................................................      1.782      2.179
13................................................      1.771      2.160
14................................................      1.761      2.145
15................................................      1.753      2.131
16................................................      1.746      2.120
17................................................      1.740      2.110
18................................................      1.734      2.101
19................................................      1.729      2.093
20................................................      1.725      2.086
21................................................      1.721      2.080
22................................................      1.717      2.074
23................................................      1.714      2.069
24................................................      1.711      2.064

[[Page 369]]

25................................................      1.708      2.060
30................................................      1.697      2.042
40................................................      1.684      2.021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Adopted from Table III of ``Statistical Tables for Biological,
  Agricultural, and Medical Research'' (1947, R. A. Fisher and F.
  Yates).

[47 FR 32367, July 26, 1982]

   Appendix V to Part 264--Examples of Potentially Incompatible Waste

    Many hazardous wastes, when mixed with other waste or materials at a 
hazardous waste facility, can produce effects which are harmful to human 
health and the environment, such as (1) heat or pressure, (2) fire or 
explosion, (3) violent reaction, (4) toxic dusts, mists, fumes, or 
gases, or (5) flammable fumes or gases.
    Below are examples of potentially incompatible wastes, waste 
components, and materials, along with the harmful consequences which 
result from mixing materials in one group with materials in another 
group. The list is intended as a guide to owners or operators of 
treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, and to enforcement and 
permit granting officials, to indicate the need for special precautions 
when managing these potentially incompatible waste materials or 
components.
    This list is not intended to be exhaustive. An owner or operator 
must, as the regulations require, adequately analyze his wastes so that 
he can avoid creating uncontrolled substances or reactions of the type 
listed below, whether they are listed below or not.
    It is possible for potentially incompatible wastes to be mixed in a 
way that precludes a reaction (e.g., adding acid to water rather than 
water to acid) or that neutralizes them (e.g., a strong acid mixed with 
a strong base), or that controls substances produced (e.g., by 
generating flammable gases in a closed tank equipped so that ignition 
cannot occur, and burning the gases in an incinerator).
    In the lists below, the mixing of a Group A material with a Group B 
material may have the potential consequence as noted.

                                Group 1-A

Acetylene sludge
Alkaline caustic liquids
Alkaline cleaner
Alkaline corrosive liquids
Alkaline corrosive battery fluid
Caustic wastewater
Lime sludge and other corrosive alkalies
Lime wastewater
Lime and water
Spent caustic

                                Group 1-B

Acid sludge
Acid and water
Battery acid
Chemical cleaners
Electrolyte, acid
Etching acid liquid or solvent
Pickling liquor and other corrosive acids
Spent acid
Spent mixed acid
Spent sulfuric acid

    Potential consequences: Heat generation; violent reaction.

                                Group 2-A

Aluminum
Beryllium
Calcium
Lithium
Magnesium
Potassium
Sodium
Zinc powder
Other reactive metals and metal hydrides

                                Group 2-B

Any waste in Group 1-A or
    1-B
    Potential consequences: Fire or explosion; generation of flammable 
hydrogen gas.

                                Group 3-A

Alcohols
Water

                                Group 3-B

Any concentrated waste in Groups 1-A or 1-B
Calcium
Lithium
Metal hydrides
Potassium
SO<INF>2</INF> Cl<INF>2</INF>, SOCl<INF>2</INF>, PCl<INF>3</INF>, 
CH<INF>3</INF> SiCl<INF>3
</INF>Other water-reactive waste
    Potential consequences: Fire, explosion, or heat generation; 
generation of flammable or toxic gases.

                                Group 4-A

Alcohols
Aldehydes
Halogenated hydrocarbons
Nitrated hydrocarbons
Unsaturated hydrocarbons
Other reactive organic compounds and solvents

                                Group 4-B

Concentrated Group 1-A or 1-B wastes
Group 2-A wastes
    Potential consequences: Fire, explosion, or violent reaction.

[[Page 370]]

                                Group 5-A

Spent cyanide and sulfide solutions

                                Group 5-B

Group 1-B wastes
    Potential consequences: Generation of toxic hydrogen cyanide or 
hydrogen sulfide gas.

                                Group 6-A

Chlorates
Chlorine
Chlorites
Chromic acid
Hypochlorites
Nitrates
Nitric acid, fuming
Perchlorates
Permanganates
Peroxides
Other strong oxidizers

                                Group 6-B

Acetic acid and other organic acids
Concentrated mineral acids
Group 2-A wastes
Group 4-A wastes
Other flammable and combustible wastes
    Potential consequences: Fire, explosion, or violent reaction.


    Source: ``Law, Regulations, and Guidelines for Handling of Hazardous 
Waste.'' California Department of Health, February 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


    \1\ These include counties, city-county consolidations, and 
independent cities. In the case of Alaska, the political jurisdictions 
are election districts, and, in the case of Hawaii, the political 
jurisdiction listed is the island of Hawaii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[46 FR 2872, Jan. 12, 1981]

Appendix VI to Part 264--Political Jurisdictions\1\ in Which Compliance 
                With Sec. 264.18(a) Must Be Demonstrated

                                 Alaska

Aleutian Islands
Anchorage
Bethel
Bristol Bay
Cordova-Valdez
Fairbanks-Fort Yukon
Juneau
Kenai-Cook Inlet
Ketchikan-Prince of Wales
Kodiak
Lynn Canal-Icy Straits
Palmer-Wasilla-Talkeena
Seward
Sitka
Wade Hampton
Wrangell Petersburg
Yukon-Kuskokwim

                                 Arizona

Cochise
Graham
Greenlee
Yuma

                               California

All
  

                                Colorado

Archuleta
Conejos
Hinsdale
Mineral
Rio Grande
Saguache

                                 Hawaii

Hawaii
  

                                  Idaho

Bannock
Bear Lake
Bingham
Bonneville
Caribou
Cassia
Clark
Franklin
Fremont
Jefferson
Madison
Oneida
Power
Teton

                                 Montana

Beaverhead
Broadwater
Cascade
Deer Lodge
Flathead
Gallatin
Granite
Jefferson
Lake
Lewis and Clark
Madison
Meagher
Missoula
Park
Powell
Sanders
Silver Bow
Stillwater
Sweet Grass
Teton
Wheatland

                                 Nevada

All
  

                               New Mexico

Bernalillo
Catron
Grant
Hidalgo
Los Alamos
Rio Arriba
Sandoval
Sante Fe
Sierra
Socorro
Taos
Torrance
Valencia

                                  Utah

Beaver
Box Elder
Cache
Carbon
Davis
Duchesne
Emery
Garfield
Iron
Juab
Millard
Morgan
Piute
Rich
Salt Lake
Sanpete
Sevier
Summit
Tooele
Utah
Wasatch
Washington
Wayne
Weber

[[Page 371]]



                               Washington

Chelan
Clallam
Clark
Cowlitz
Douglas
Ferry
Grant
Grays Harbor
Jefferson
King
Kitsap
Kittitas
Lewis
Mason
Okanogan
Pacific
Pierce
San Juan Islands
Skagit
Skamania
Snohomish
Thurston
Wahkiakum
Whatcom
Yakima

                                 Wyoming

Fremont
Lincoln
Park
Sublette
Teton
Uinta
Yellowstone National
Park
[46 FR 57285, Nov. 23, 1981; 47 FR 953, Jan. 8, 1982]

               Appendices VII--VIII to Part 264 [Reserved]

        Appendix IX to Part 264--Ground-Water Monitoring List \1\

                                        Ground-Water Monitoring List \1\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                          PQL
             Common name \2\               CAS RN \3\     Chemical abstracts service     Suggested    (<greek-m>
                                                                index name \4\          methods \5\    g/L) \6\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acenaphthene............................      83-32-9  Acenaphthylene, 1,2-dihydro-...        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Acenaphthylene..........................     208-96-8  Acenaphthylene.................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Acetone.................................      67-64-1  2-Propanone....................        8240       100
Acetophenone............................      98-86-2  Ethanone, 1-phenyl-............        8270        10
Acetonitrile; Methyl cyanide............      75-05-8  Acetonitrile...................        8015       100
2-Acetylaminofluorene; 2-AAF............      53-96-3  Acetamide, N-9H-fluoren-2-yl-..        8270        10
Acrolein................................     107-02-8  2-Propenal.....................        8030         5
                                                                                              8240         5
Acrylonitrile...........................     107-13-1  2-Propenenitrile...............        8030         5
                                                                                              8240         5
Aldrin..................................     309-00-2  1,4:5,8-Dimethanonaphthalene,          8080         0.05
                                                        1,2,3,4,10,10-hexachloro-             8270        10
                                                        1,4,4a,5,8,8a-hexahydro-
                                                        (1<greek-a>,4<greek-a>,
                                                        4a<greek-b>, 5<greek-
                                                        a>,8<greek-a>,8a<greek-b>)-
Allyl chloride..........................     107-05-1  1-Propene, 3-chloro-...........        8010         5
                                                                                              8240       100
4-Aminobiphenyl.........................      92-67-1  [1,1-Biphenyl]- 4-amine........        8270        10
Aniline.................................      62-53-3  Benzenamine....................        8270        10
Anthracene..............................     120-12-7  Anthracene.....................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Antimony................................      (Total)  Antimony.......................        6010       300
                                                                                              7040     2,000
                                                                                              7041        30
Aramite.................................     140-57-8  Sulfurous acid, 2-chloroethyl 2-       8270        10
                                                        [4-(1,1-dimethylethyl)phenoxy]-
                                                        1-methylethyl ester.
Arsenic.................................      (Total)  Arsenic........................        6010       500
                                                                                              7060        10
                                                                                              7061        20
Barium..................................      (Total)  Barium.........................        6010        20
                                                                                              7080     1,000
Benzene.................................      71-43-2  Benzene........................        8020         2
                                                                                              8240         5
Benzo[a]anthracene; Benzanthracene......      56-55-3  Benz[a]anthracene..............        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Benzo[b]fluoranthene....................     205-99-2  Benz[e]acephenanthrylene.......        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Benzo[k]fluoranthene....................     207-08-9  Benzo[k]fluoranthene...........        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Benzo[ghi]perylene......................     191-24-2  Benzo[ghi]perylene.............        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Benzo[a]pyrene..........................      50-32-8  Benzo[a]pyrene.................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Benzyl alcohol..........................     100-51-6  Benzenemethanol................        8270        20
Beryllium...............................      (Total)  Beryllium......................        6010         3
                                                                                              7090        50
                                                                                              7091         2
alpha-BHC...............................     319-84-6  Cyclohexane, 1,2,3,4,5,6-              8080         0.05
                                                        hexachloro-,(1<greek-a>,
                                                        2<greek-a>,3<greek-b>, 4<greek-
                                                        a>,5<greek-b>,6<greek-b>)-
                                                                                              8250        10

[[Page 372]]

beta-BHC................................     319-85-7  Cyclohexane, 1,2,3,4,5,6-              8080         0.05
                                                        hexachloro-,(1<greek-
                                                        a>,2<greek-b>, 3<greek-
                                                        a>,4<greek-b>, 5<greek-
                                                        a>,6<greek-b>)-
                                                                                              8250        40
delta-BHC...............................     319-86-8  Cyclohexane, 1,2,3,4,5,6-              8080         0.1
                                                        hexachloro-,(1<greek-
                                                        a>,2<greek-a>, 3<greek-a>,
                                                        4<greek-b>,5<greek-a>,6<greek-
                                                        b)-
                                                                                              8250        30
gamma-BHC; Lindane......................      58-89-9  Cyclohexane, 1,2,3,4,5,6-              8080         0.05
                                                        hexachloro-,(1<greek-a>,
                                                        2<greek-a>, 3<greek-b>,
                                                        4<greek-a>,5<greek-a>,6<greek-
                                                        b)-
                                                                                              8250        10
Bis(2-chloroethoxy)methane..............     111-91-1  Ethane, 1,1-[methylenebis              8270        10
                                                        (oxy)]bis [2-chloro-.
Bis(2-chloroethyl)ether.................     111-44-4  Ethane, 1,1-oxybis[2-chloro-...        8270        10
Bis(2-chloro-1-methylethyl) ether; 2,2-      108-60-1  Propane, 2,2-oxybis[1-chloro-..        8010       100
 Di- chlorodiisopropyl ether.                                                                 8270        10
Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate.............     117-81-7  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,          8060        20
                                                        bis(2-ethylhexyl)ester.               8270        10
Bromodichloromethane....................      75-27-4  Methane, bromodichloro-........        8010         1
                                                                                              8240         5
Bromoform; Tribromomethane..............      75-25-2  Methane, tribromo-.............        8010         2
                                                                                              8240         5
4-Bromophenyl phenyl ether..............     101-55-3  Benzene, 1-bromo-4-phenoxy-....        8270        10
Butyl benzyl phthalate; Benzyl butyl          85-68-7  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,          8060         5
 phthalate                                              butyl phenylmethyl ester.             8270        10
Cadmium.................................      (Total)  Cadmium........................        6010        40
                                                                                              7130        50
                                                                                              7131         1
Carbon disulfide........................      75-15-0  Carbon disulfide...............        8240         5
Carbon tetrachloride....................      56-23-5  Methane, tetrachloro-..........        8010         1
                                                                                              8240         5
Chlordane...............................      57-74-9  4,7-Methano-1H-indene,                 8080         0.1
                                                        1,2,4,5,6,7,8,8-octachloro-           8250        10
                                                        2,3,3a,4,7,7a- hexahydro-.
p-Chloroaniline.........................     106-47-8  Benzenamine, 4-chloro-.........        8270        20
Chlorobenzene...........................     108-90-7  Benzene, chloro-...............        8010         2
                                                                                              8020         2
                                                                                              8240         5
Chlorobenzilate.........................     510-15-6  Benzeneacetic acid, 4-chloro-          8270        10
                                                        <greek-a>-(4-chlorophenyl)-
                                                        <greek-a>-hydroxy-, ethyl
                                                        ester.
p-Chloro-m-cresol.......................      59-50-7  Phenol, 4-chloro-3-methyl-.....        8040         5
                                                                                              8270        20
Chloroethane; Ethyl chloride............      75-00-3  Ethane, chloro-................        8010         5
                                                                                              8240        10
Chloroform..............................      67-66-3  Methane, trichloro-............        8010         0.5
                                                                                              8240         5
2-Chloronaphthalene.....................      91-58-7  Naphthalene, 2-chloro-.........        8120        10
                                                                                              8270        10
2-Chlorophenol..........................      95-57-8  Phenol, 2-chloro-..............        8040         5
                                                                                              8270        10
4-Chlorophenyl phenyl ether.............    7005-72-3  Benzene, 1-chloro-4-phenoxy-...        8270        10
Chloroprene.............................     126-99-8  1,3-Butadiene, 2-chloro-.......        8010        50
                                                                                              8240         5
Chromium................................      (Total)  Chromium.......................        6010        70
                                                                                              7190       500
                                                                                              7191        10
Chrysene................................     218-01-9  Chrysene.......................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Cobalt..................................      (Total)  Cobalt.........................        6010        70
                                                                                              7200       500
                                                                                              7201        10
Copper..................................      (Total)  Copper.........................        6010        60
                                                                                              7210       200
m-Cresol................................     108-39-4  Phenol, 3-methyl-..............        8270        10
o-Cresol................................      95-48-7  Phenol, 2-methyl-..............        8270        10
p-Cresol................................     106-44-5  Phenol, 4-methyl-..............        8270        10
Cyanide.................................      57-12-5  Cyanide........................        9010        40
2,4-D; 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid...      94-75-7  Acetic acid, (2,4-                     8150        10
                                                        dichlorophenoxy)-.
4,4-DDD.................................      72-54-8  Benzene 1,1-(2,2-                      8080         0.1
                                                        dichloroethylidene) bis[4-            8270        10
                                                        chloro-.
4,4-DDE.................................      72-55-9  Benzene, 1,1-                          8080         0.05
                                                        (dichloroethenylidene) bis[4-         8270        10
                                                        chloro-.

[[Page 373]]

4,4-DDT.................................      50-29-3  Benzene, 1,1-(2,2,2-                   8080         0.1
                                                        trichloroethylidene) bis[4-           8270        10
                                                        chloro-.
Diallate................................    2303-16-4  Carbamothioic acid, bis(1-             8270        10
                                                        methylethyl)- , S- (2,3-
                                                        dichloro-2-propenyl) ester.
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene...................      53-70-3  Dibenz[a,h]anthracene..........        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Dibenzofuran............................     132-64-9  Dibenzofuran...................        8270        10
Dibromochloromethane;                        124-48-1  Methane, dibromochloro-........        8010         1
 Chlorodibromomethane                                                                         8240         5
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane; DBCP.......      96-12-8  Propane, 1,2-dibromo-3-chloro-.        8010       100
                                                                                              8240         5
                                                                                              8270        10
1,2-Dibromoethane; Ethylene dibromide...     106-93-4  Ethane, 1,2-dibromo-...........        8010        10
                                                                                              8240         5
Di-n-butyl phthalate....................      84-74-2  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,          8060         5
                                                        dibutyl ester.                        8270        10
o-Dichlorobenzene.......................      95-50-1  Benzene, 1,2-dichloro-.........        8010         2
                                                                                              8020         5
                                                                                              8120        10
                                                                                              8270        10
m-Dichlorobenzene.......................     541-73-1  Benzene, 1,3-dichloro-.........        8010         5
                                                                                              8020         5
                                                                                              8120        10
                                                                                              8270        10
p-Dichlorobenzene.......................     106-46-7  Benzene, 1,4-dichloro-.........        8010         2
                                                                                              8020         5
                                                                                              8120        15
                                                                                              8270        10
3,3-Dichlorobenzidine...................      91-94-1  [1,1-Biphenyl]- 4,4- diamine,          8270        20
                                                        3,3-dichloro-.
trans-1,4-Dichloro-2-butene.............     110-57-6  2-Butene, 1,4-dichloro-, (E)-..        8240         5
Dichlorodifluoromethane.................      75-71-8  Methane, dichlorodifluoro-.....        8010        10
                                                                                              8240         5
1,1-Dichloroethane......................      75-34-3  Ethane, 1,1-dichloro-..........        8010         1
                                                                                              8240         5
1,2-Dichloroethane; Ethylene dichloride.     107-06-2  Ethane, 1,2-dichloro-..........        8010         0.5
                                                                                              8240         5
1,1-Dichloroethylene; Vinylidene              75-35-4  Ethene, 1,1-dichloro-..........        8010         1
 chloride.                                                                                    8240         5
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene..............     156-60-5  Ethene, 1,2-dichloro-, (E)-....        8010         1
                                                                                              8240         5
2,4-Dichlorophenol......................     120-83-2  Phenol, 2,4-dichloro-..........        8040         5
                                                                                              8270        10
2,6-Dichlorophenol......................      87-65-0  Phenol, 2,6-dichloro-..........        8270        10
1,2-Dichloropropane.....................      78-87-5  Propane, 1,2-dichloro-.........        8010         0.5
                                                                                              8240         5
cis-1,3-Dichloropropene.................   10061-01-5  1-Propene, 1,3-dichloro-, (Z)-.        8010        20
                                                                                              8240         5
trans-1,3-Dichloropropene...............   10061-02-6  1-Propene, 1,3-dichloro-, (E)-.        8010         5
                                                                                              8240         5
Dieldrin................................      60-57-1  2,7:3,6-Dimethanonaphth [2,3-          8080         0.05
                                                        b]oxirene, 3,4,5,6,9,9-               8270        10
                                                        hexachloro-
                                                        1a,2,2a,3,6,6a,7,7a- octahydro-
                                                        , (1a<greek-a>,2<greek-b>,
                                                        2a<greek-a>, 3<greek-
                                                        b>,6<greek-b>,6a<greek-a>,7<gr
                                                        e,7a<greek-a>)-
Diethyl phthalate.......................      84-66-2  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,          8060         5
                                                        diethyl ester.                        8270        10
O,O-Diethyl O-2-pyrazinyl                    297-97-2  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-             8270        10
 phosphorothioate; Thionazin                            diethyl O-pyrazinyl ester.
Dimethoate..............................      60-51-5  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-           8270        10
                                                        dimethyl S-[2-(methylamino)-2-
                                                        oxoethyl] ester.
p-(Dimethylamino)azobenzene.............      60-11-7  Benzenamine, N,N-dimethyl-4-           8270        10
                                                        (phenylazo)-.
7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene..........      57-97-6  Benz[a]anthracene, 7,12-               8270        10
                                                        dimethyl-.
3,3-Dimethylbenzidine...................     119-93-7  [1,1-Biphenyl]-4,4-diamine, 3,3-       8270        10
                                                        dimethyl-.
alpha, alpha-Dimethylphenethylamine.....     122-09-8  Benzeneethanamine, <greek-             8270        10
                                                        a>,<greek-a>-dimethyl-.
2,4-Dimethylphenol......................     105-67-9  Phenol, 2,4-dimethyl-..........        8040         5
                                                                                              8270        10
Dimethyl phthalate......................     131-11-3  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,          8060         5
                                                        dimethyl ester.                       8270        10
m-Dinitrobenzene........................      99-65-0  Benzene, 1,3-dinitro-..........        8270        10
4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol....................     534-52-1  Phenol, 2-methyl-4,6-dinitro-..        8040       150
                                                                                              8270        50

[[Page 374]]

2,4-Dinitrophenol.......................      51-28-5  Phenol, 2,4-dinitro-...........        8040       150
                                                                                              8270        50
2,4-Dinitrotoluene......................     121-14-2  Benzene, 1-methyl-2,4-dinitro-.        8090         0.2
                                                                                              8270        10
2,6-Dinitrotoluene......................     606-20-2  Benzene, 2-methyl-1,3-dinitro-.        8090         0.1
                                                                                              8270        10
Dinoseb; DNBP; 2-sec-Butyl- 4,6-              88-85-7  Phenol, 2-(1-methylpropyl)-4,6-        8150         1
 dinitrophenol                                          dinitro-.                             8270        10
Di-n-octyl phthalate....................     117-84-0  1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid,          8060        30
                                                        dioctyl ester.                        8270        10
1,4-Dioxane.............................     123-91-1  1,4-Dioxane....................        8015       150
Diphenylamine...........................     122-39-4  Benzenamine, N-phenyl-.........        8270        10
Disulfoton..............................     298-04-4  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-           8140         2
                                                        diethyl S-[2-                         8270        10
                                                        (ethylthio)ethyl]ester
Endosulfan I............................     959-98-8  6,9-Methano-2,4,3-                     8080         0.1
                                                        benzodioxathiepin,                    8250        10
                                                        6,7,8,9,10,10-hexachloro-
                                                        1,5,5a,6,9,9a-hexahydro-, 3-
                                                        oxide, (3<greek-a>,5a<greek-
                                                        b>,6<greek-a>,9<greek-a>,9a<gr
                                                        e)-.
Endosulfan II...........................   33213-65-9  6,9-Methano-2,4,3-                     8080         0.05
                                                        benzodioxathiepin,
                                                        6,7,8,9,10,10-hexachloro-
                                                        1,5,5a,6,9,9a-hexahydro-, 3-
                                                        oxide, (3<greek-a>,5a<greek-
                                                        a>, 6<greek-b>,9<greek-b>,
                                                        9a<greek-a>)-
Endosulfan sulfate......................    1031-07-8  6,9-Methano-2,4,3-                     8080         0.5
                                                        benzodioxathiepin,                    8270        10
                                                        6,7,8,9,10,10-hexachloro-
                                                        1,5,5a,6,9,9a-hexahydro-, 3,3-
                                                        dioxide.
Endrin..................................      72-20-8  2,7:3,6-Dimethanonaphth[2,3-           8080         0.1
                                                        b]oxirene, 3,4,5,6,9,9-               8250        10
                                                        hexachloro-
                                                        1a,2,2a,3,6,6a,7,7a- octahydro-
                                                        , (1a<greek-a>, 2<greek-
                                                        b>,2a<greek-b>, 3<greek-
                                                        a>,6<greek-a>, 6a<greek-
                                                        b>,7<greek-b>, 7a<greek-a>)-
Endrin aldehyde.........................    7421-93-4  1,2,4-                                 8080         0.2
                                                        Methenocyclopenta[cd]pentalene-       8270        10
                                                         5-carboxaldehyde,
                                                        2,2a,3,3,4,7-
                                                        hexachlorodecahydro-, (1<greek-
                                                        a>,2<greek-b>, 2a<greek-
                                                        b>,4<greek-b>, 4a<greek-
                                                        b>,5<greek-b>,6a<greek-b>,6b<g
                                                        r,7R*)-
Ethylbenzene............................     100-41-4  Benzene, ethyl-................        8020         2
                                                                                              8240         5
Ethyl methacrylate......................      97-63-2  2-Propenoic acid, 2-methyl-,           8015        10
                                                        ethyl ester.                          8240         5
                                                                                              8270        10
Ethyl methanesulfonate..................      62-50-0  Methanesulfonic acid, ethyl            8270        10
                                                        ester.
Famphur.................................      52-85-7  Phosphorothioic acid, O-[4-            8270        10
                                                        [(dimethylamino)sulfonyl]pheny
                                                        l]-O,O-dimethyl ester.
Fluoranthene............................     206-44-0  Fluoranthene...................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Fluorene................................      86-73-7  9H-Fluorene....................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Heptachlor..............................      76-44-8  4,7-Methano-1H-indene,                 8080         0.05
                                                        1,4,5,6,7,8,8-heptachloro-            8270        10
                                                         3a,4,7,7a-tetrahydro-........
Heptachlor epoxide......................    1024-57-3  2,5-Methano-2H-indeno[1,2-             8080         1
                                                        b]oxirene, 2,3,4,5,6,7,7-             8270        10
                                                        heptachloro-1a,1b,5,5a,6,6a,-
                                                        hexahydro-, (1a<greek-
                                                        a>,1b<greek-b>,2<greek-a>,5<gr
                                                        e,5a<greek-b>,6<greek-b>,6a<gr
                                                        e)
Hexachlorobenzene.......................     118-74-1  Benzene, hexachloro-...........        8120         0.5
                                                                                              8270        10
Hexachlorobutadiene.....................      87-68-3  1,3-Butadiene, 1,1,2,3,4,4-            8120         5
                                                        hexachloro-.                          8270        10
Hexachlorocyclopentadiene...............      77-47-4  1,3-Cyclopentadiene,                   8120         5
                                                        1,2,3,4,5,5-hexachloro-.              8270        10
Hexachloroethane........................      67-72-1  Ethane, hexachloro-............        8120         0.5
                                                                                              8270        10
Hexachlorophene.........................      70-30-4  Phenol, 2,2-methylenebis[3,4,6-        8270        10
                                                        trichloro-.
Hexachloropropene.......................    1888-71-7  1-Propene, 1,1,2,3,3,3-                8270        10
                                                        hexachloro-.
2-Hexanone..............................     591-78-6  2-Hexanone.....................        8240        50
Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene..................     193-39-5  Indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene.........        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Isobutyl alcohol........................      78-83-1  1-Propanol, 2-methyl-..........        8015        50
Isodrin.................................     465-73-6  1,4,5,8-                               8270        10
                                                        Dimethanonaphthalene,1,2,3,4,1
                                                        0,10- hexachloro-
                                                        1,4,4a,5,8,8a hexahydro-
                                                        (1<greek-a>, 4<greek-a>,
                                                        4a<greek-b>, 5<greek-b>,
                                                        8<greek-b>,8a<greek-b>)-.
Isophorone..............................      78-59-1  2-Cyclohexen-1-one, 3,5,5-             8090        60
                                                        trimethyl-.                           8270        10
Isosafrole..............................     120-58-1  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-(1-                8270        10
                                                        propenyl)-.
Kepone..................................     143-50-0  1,3,4-Metheno-2H-cyclobuta-            8270        10
                                                        [cd]pentalen-2-one,
                                                        1,1a,3,3a,4,5,5,5a,5b,6-
                                                        decachlorooctahydro-
Lead....................................      (Total)  Lead...........................        6010        40

[[Page 375]]

                                                                                              7420     1,000
                                                                                              7421        10
Mercury.................................      (Total)  Mercury........................        7470         2
Methacrylonitrile.......................     126-98-7  2-Propenenitrile, 2-methyl-....        8015         5
                                                                                              8240         5
Methapyrilene...........................      91-80-5  1,2,Ethanediamine, N,N-dimethyl-       8270        10
                                                        N-2- pyridinyl- N-(2-
                                                        thienylmethyl)-.
Methoxychlor............................      72-43-5  Benzene, 1,1-                          8080         2
                                                        (2,2,2,trichloroethylidene)bis        8270        10
                                                        [4-methoxy-.
Methyl bromide; Bromomethane............      74-83-9  Methane, bromo-................        8010        20
                                                                                              8240        10
Methyl chloride; Chloromethane..........      74-87-3  Methane, chloro-...............        8010         1
                                                                                              8240        10
3-Methylcholanthrene....................      56-49-5  Benz[j]aceanthrylene, 1,2-             8270        10
                                                        dihydro-3-methyl-.
Methylene bromide; Dibromomethane.......      74-95-3  Methane, dibromo-..............        8010        15
                                                                                              8240         5
Methylene chloride; Dichloromethane.....      75-09-2  Methane, dichloro-.............        8010         5
                                                                                              8240         5
Methyl ethyl ketone; MEK................      78-93-3  2-Butanone.....................        8015        10
                                                                                              8240       100
Methyl iodide; Iodomethane..............      74-88-4  Methane, iodo-.................        8010        40
                                                                                              8240         5
Methyl methacrylate.....................      80-62-6  2-Propenoic acid, 2-methyl-,           8015         2
                                                        methyl ester.                         8240         5
Methyl methanesulfonate.................      66-27-3  Methanesulfonic acid, methyl           8270        10
                                                        ester.
2-Methylnaphthalene.....................      91-57-6  Naphthalene, 2-methyl-.........        8270        10
Methyl parathion; Parathion methyl......     298-00-0  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-             8140         0.5
                                                        dimethyl O-(4-nitrophenyl)            8270        10
                                                        ester.
4-Methyl-2-pentanone; Methyl isobutyl        108-10-1  2-Pentanone, 4-methyl-.........        8015         5
 ketone.                                                                                      8240        50
Naphthalene.............................      91-20-3  Naphthalene....................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
1,4-Naphthoquinone......................     130-15-4  1,4-Naphthalenedione...........        8270        10
1-Naphthylamine.........................     134-32-7  1-Naphthalenamine..............        8270        10
2-Naphthylamine.........................      91-59-8  2-Naphthalenamine..............        8270        10
Nickel..................................      (Total)  Nickel.........................        6010        50
                                                                                              7520       400
o-Nitroaniline..........................      88-74-4  Benzenamine, 2-nitro-..........        8270        50
m-Nitroaniline..........................      99-09-2  Benzenamine, 3-nitro-..........        8270        50
p-Nitroaniline..........................     100-01-6  Benzenamine, 4-nitro-..........        8270        50
Nitrobenzene............................      98-95-3  Benzene, nitro-................        8090        40
                                                                                              8270        10
o-Nitrophenol...........................      88-75-5  Phenol, 2-nitro-...............        8040         5
                                                                                              8270        10
p-Nitrophenol...........................     100-02-7  Phenol, 4-nitro-...............        8040        10
                                                                                              8270        50
4-Nitroquinoline 1-oxide................      56-57-5  Quinoline, 4-nitro-, 1-oxide...        8270        10
N-Nitrosodi-n-butylamine................     924-16-3  1-Butanamine, N-butyl-N-nitroso-       8270        10
                                                        .
N-Nitrosodiethylamine...................      55-18-5  Ethanamine, N-ethyl-N-nitroso-.        8270        10
N-Nitrosodimethylamine..................      62-75-9  Methanamine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-       8270        10
                                                        .
N-Nitrosodiphenylamine..................      86-30-6  Benzenamine, N-nitroso-N-phenyl-       8270        10
                                                        .
N-Nitrosodipropylamine; Di-n-                621-64-7  1-Propanamine, N-nitroso-N-            8270        10
 propylnitrosamine.                                     propyl-.
N-Nitrosomethylethylamine...............   10595-95-6  Ethanamine, N-methyl-N-nitroso-        8270        10
N-Nitrosomorpholine.....................      59-89-2  Morpholine, 4-nitroso-.........        8270        10
N-Nitrosopiperidine.....................     100-75-4  Piperidine, 1-nitroso-.........        8270        10
N-Nitrosopyrrolidine....................     930-55-2  Pyrrolidine, 1-nitroso-........        8270        10
5-Nitro-o-toluidine.....................      99-55-8  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-5-nitro-.        8270        10
Parathion...............................      56-38-2  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O-             8270        10
                                                        diethyl-O-(4-nitrophenyl)
                                                        ester
Polychlorinated biphenyls; PCBs.........   See Note 7  1,1-Biphenyl, chloro                   8080        50
                                                        derivatives.                          8250       100
Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins; PCDDs   See Note 8  Dibenzo[b,e][1,4]dioxin, chloro        8280         0.01
                                                        derivatives.
Polychlorinated dibenzofurans; PCDFs....   See Note 9  Dibenzofuran, chloro                   8280         0.01
                                                        derivatives.
Pentachlorobenzene......................     608-93-5  Benzene, pentachloro-..........        8270        10
Pentachloroethane.......................      76-01-7  Ethane, pentachloro-...........        8240         5
                                                                                              8270        10
Pentachloronitrobenzene.................      82-68-8  Benzene, pentachloronitro-.....        8270        10

[[Page 376]]

Pentachlorophenol.......................      87-86-5  Phenol, pentachloro-...........        8040         5
                                                                                              8270        50
Phenacetin..............................      62-44-2  Acetamide, N-(4-ethoxyphenyl)..        8270        10
Phenanthrene............................      85-01-8  Phenanthrene...................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Phenol..................................     108-95-2  Phenol.........................        8040         1
                                                                                              8270        10
p-Phenylenediamine......................     106-50-3  1,4-Benzenediamine.............        8270        10
Phorate.................................     298-02-2  Phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-           8140         2
                                                        diethyl S- [(ethylthio)methyl]        8270        10
                                                        ester
2-Picoline..............................     109-06-8  Pyridine, 2-methyl-............        8240         5
                                                                                              8270        10
Pronamide...............................   23950-58-5  Benzamide, 3,5-dichloro-N-(1,1-        8270        10
                                                        dimethyl-2-propynyl)-.
Propionitrile; Ethyl cyanide............     107-12-0  Propanenitrile.................        8015        60
                                                                                              8240         5
Pyrene..................................     129-00-0  Pyrene.........................        8100       200
                                                                                              8270        10
Pyridine................................     110-86-1  Pyridine.......................        8240         5
                                                                                              8270        10
Safrole.................................      94-59-7  1,3-Benzodioxole, 5-(2-                8270        10
                                                        propenyl)-.
Selenium................................      (Total)  Selenium.......................        6010       750
                                                                                              7740        20
                                                                                              7741        20
Silver..................................      (Total)  Silver.........................        6010        70
                                                                                              7760       100
Silvex; 2,4,5-TP........................      93-72-1  Propanoic acid, 2-(2,4,5-              8150         2
                                                        trichlorophenoxy)-.
Styrene.................................     100-42-5  Benzene, ethenyl-..............        8020         1
                                                                                              8240         5
Sulfide.................................   18496-25-8  Sulfide........................        9030    10,000
2,4,5-T; 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic         93-76-5  Acetic acid, (2,4,5-                   8150         2
 acid.                                                  trichlorophenoxy)-.
2,3,7,8-TCDD; 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-   1746-01-6  Dibenzo[b,e][1,4]dioxin,               8280         0.005
 p- dioxin                                              2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-.
1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene..............      95-94-3  Benzene, 1,2,4,5-tetrachloro-..        8270        10
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane...............     630-20-6  Ethane, 1,1,1,2-tetrachloro-...        8010         5
                                                                                              8240         5
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane...............      79-34-5  Ethane, 1,1,2,2-tetrachloro-...        8010         0.5
                                                                                              8240         5
Tetrachloroethylene; Perchloroethylene;      127-18-4  Ethene, tetrachloro-...........        8010         0.5
    Tetrachloroethene.                                                                        8240         5
2,3,4,6-Tetrachlorophenol...............      58-90-2  Phenol, 2,3,4,6-tetrachloro-...        8270        10
Tetraethyl dithiopyrophosphate;             3689-24-5  Thiodiphosphoric acid ([(HO)<INF>2          8270        10
 Sulfotepp.                                             P(S)]<INF>2 O), tetraethyl ester
Thallium................................      (Total)  Thallium.......................        6010       400
                                                                                              7840     1,000
                                                                                              7841        10
Tin.....................................      (Total)  Tin............................        7870     8,000
Toluene.................................     108-88-3  Benzene, methyl-...............        8020         2
                                                                                              8240         5
o-Toluidine.............................      95-53-4  Benzenamine, 2-methyl-.........        8270        10
Toxaphene...............................    8001-35-2  Toxaphene......................        8080         2
                                                                                              8250        10
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene..................     120-82-1  Benzene, 1,2,4-trichloro-......        8270        10
1,1,1-Trichloroethane; Methylchloroform.      71-55-6  Ethane, 1,1,1-trichloro-.......        8240         5
1,1,2-Trichloroethane...................      79-00-5  Ethane, 1,1,2-trichloro-.......        8010         0.2
                                                                                              8240         5
Trichloroethylene; Trichloroethene......      79-01-6  Ethene, trichloro-.............        8010         1
                                                                                              8240         5
Trichlorofluoromethane..................      75-69-4  Methane, trichlorofluoro-......        8010        10
                                                                                              8240         5
2,4,5-Trichlorophenol...................      95-95-4  Phenol, 2,4,5-trichloro-.......        8270        10
2,4,6-Trichlorophenol...................      88-06-2  Phenol, 2,4,6-trichloro-.......        8040         5
                                                                                              8270        10
1,2,3-Trichloropropane..................      96-18-4  Propane, 1,2,3-trichloro-......        8010        10
                                                                                              8240         5
O,O,O-Triethyl phosphorothioate.........     126-68-1  Phosphorothioic acid, O,O,O-           8270        10
                                                        triethyl ester.
sym-Trinitrobenzene.....................      99-35-4  Benzene, 1,3,5-trinitro-.......        8270        10

[[Page 377]]

Vanadium................................      (Total)  Vanadium.......................        6010        80
                                                                                              7910     2,000
                                                                                              7911        40
Vinyl acetate...........................     108-05-4  Acetic acid, ethenyl ester.....        8240         5
Vinyl chloride..........................      75-01-4  Ethene, chloro-................        8010         2
                                                                                              8240        10
Xylene (total)..........................    1330-20-7  Benzene, dimethyl-.............        8020         5
                                                                                              8240         5
Zinc....................................      (Total)  Zinc...........................        6010        20
                                                                                              7950        50
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The regulatory requirements pertain only to the list of substances; the right hand columns (Methods and PQL)
  are given for informational purposes only. See also footnotes 5 and 6.
\2\ Common names are those widely used in government regulations, scientific publications, and commerce;
  synonyms exist for many chemicals.
\3\ Chemical Abstracts Service registry number. Where ``Total'' is entered, all species in the ground water that
  contain this element are included.
\4\ CAS index names are those used in the 9th Cumulative Index.
\5\ Suggested methods refer to analytical procedure numbers used in the EPA publication, SW-846, ``Test Methods
  for Evaluating Solid Waste'', Third Edition. Analytical details can be found in SW-846 and in documentation on
  file at the Agency. The packed column gas chromatography methods 8010, 8020, 8030, 8040, 8060, 8080, 8090,
  8110, 8120, 8140, 8150, 8240, and 8250 were promulgated methods through Update IIB of SW-846 and, as of Update
  III, the Agency has replaced these methods with ``capillary column GC methods'', as the suggested methods.
\6\ Practical Quantitation Limits (PQLs) are the lowest concentrations of analytes in ground waters that can be
  reliably determined within specified limits of precision and accuracy by the indicated methods under routine
  laboratory operating conditions. The PQLs listed are generally stated to one significant figure. CAUTION: The
  PQL values in many cases are based only on a general estimate for the method and not on a determination for
  individual compounds; PQLs are not a part of the regulation.
\7\ Polychlorinated biphenyls (CAS RN 1336-36-3); this category contains congener chemicals, including
  constituents of Aroclor-1016 (CAS RN 12674-11-2), Aroclor-1221 (CAS RN 11104-28-2), Aroclor-1232 (CAS RN 11141-
  16-5), Aroclor-1242 (CAS RN 53469-21-9), Aroclor-1248 (CAS RN 12672-29-6), Aroclor-1254 (CAS RN 11097-69-1),
  and Aroclor-1260 (CAS RN 11096-82-5). The PQL shown is an average value for PCB congeners.
\8\ This category contains congener chemicals, including tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins (see also 2,3,7,8-TCDD),
  pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins, and hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxins. The PQL shown is an average value for PCDD
  congeners.
\9\ This category contains congener chemicals, including tetrachlorodibenzofurans, pentachlorodibenzofurans, and
  hexachlorodibenzofurans. The PQL shown is an average value for PCDF congeners.

[52 FR 25947, July 9, 1987, as amended at 62 FR 32462, June 13, 1997]


<R03>
PART 265--INTERIM STATUS STANDARDS FOR OWNERS AND OPERATORS OF HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT, STORAGE, AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
265.1  Purpose, scope, and applicability.
265.2--265.3  [Reserved]
265.4  Imminent hazard action.

                  Subpart B--General Facility Standards

265.10  Applicability.
265.11  Identification number.
265.12  Required notices.
265.13  General waste analysis.
265.14  Security.
265.15  General inspection requirements.
265.16  Personnel training.
265.17  General requirements for ignitable, reactive, or incompatible 
          wastes.
265.18  Location standards.
265.19  Construction quality assurance program.

                 Subpart C--Preparedness and Prevention

265.30  Applicability.
265.31  Maintenance and operation of facility.

[[Page 378]]

265.32  Required equipment.
265.33  Testing and maintenance of equipment.
265.34  Access to communications or alarm system.
265.35  Required aisle space.
265.36  [Reserved]
265.37  Arrangements with local authorities.

          Subpart D--Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures

265.50  Applicability.
265.51  Purpose and implementation of contingency plan.
265.52  Content of contingency plan.
265.53  Copies of contingency plan.
265.54  Amendment of contingency plan.
265.55  Emergency coordinator.
265.56  Emergency procedures.

        Subpart E--Manifest System, Recordkeeping, and Reporting

265.70  Applicability.
265.71  Use of manifest system.
265.72  Manifest discrepancies.
265.73  Operating record.
265.74  Availability, retention, and disposition of records.
265.75  Biennial report.
265.76  Unmanifested waste report.
265.77  Additional reports.

                   Subpart F--Ground-Water Monitoring

265.90  Applicability.
265.91  Ground-water monitoring system.
265.92  Sampling and analysis.
265.93  Preparation, evaluation, and response.
265.94  Recordkeeping and reporting.

                   Subpart G--Closure and Post-Closure

265.110  Applicability.
265.111  Closure performance standard.
265.112  Closure plan; amendment of plan.
265.113  Closure; time allowed for closure.
265.114  Disposal or decontamination of equipment, structures and soils.
265.115  Certification of closure.
265.116  Survey plat.
265.117  Post-closure care and use of property.
265.118  Post-closure plan; amendment of plan.
265.119  Post-closure notices.
265.120  Certification of completion of post-closure care.

                    Subpart H--Financial Requirements

265.140  Applicability.
265.141  Definitions of terms as used in this subpart.
265.142  Cost estimate for closure.
265.143  Financial assurance for closure.
265.144  Cost estimate for post-closure care.
265.145  Financial assurance for post-closure care.
265.146  Use of a mechanism for financial assurance of both closure and 
          post-closure care.
265.147  Liability requirements.
265.148  Incapacity of owners or operators, guarantors, or financial 
          institutions.
265.149  Use of State-required mechanisms.
265.150  State assumption of responsibility.

               Subpart I--Use and Management of Containers

265.170  Applicability.
265.171  Condition of containers.
265.172  Compatibility of waste with container.
265.173  Management of containers.
265.174  Inspections.
265.175  [Reserved]
265.176  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
265.177  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
265.178  Air emission standards.

                         Subpart J--Tank Systems

265.190  Applicability.
265.191  Assessment of existing tank system's integrity.
265.192  Design and installation of new tank systems or components.
265.193  Containment and detection of releases.
265.194  General operating requirements.
265.195  Inspections.
265.196  Response to leaks or spills and disposition of leaking or 
          unfit-for-use tank systems.
265.197  Closure and post-closure care.
265.198  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive wastes.
265.199  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
265.200  Waste analysis and trial tests.
265.201  Special requirements for generators of between 100 and 1,000 
          kg/mo that accumulate hazardous waste in tanks.
265.202  Air emission standards.

                     Subpart K--Surface Impoundments

265.220  Applicability.
265.221  Design and operating requirements.
265.222  Action leakage rate.
265.223  Containment system.
265.223  Response actions.
265.224  [Reserved]
265.225  Waste analysis and trial tests.
265.226  Monitoring and inspection.
265.227  [Reserved]
265.228  Closure and post-closure care.
265.229  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

[[Page 379]]

265.230  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
265.231  Air emission standards.

                         Subpart L--Waste Piles

265.250  Applicability.
265.251  Protection from wind.
265.252  Waste analysis.
265.253  Containment.
265.254  Design and operating requirements.
265.255  Action leakage rates.
265.256  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
265.257  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
265.258  Closure and post-closure care.
265.259  Response actions.
265.260  Monitoring and inspection.

                        Subpart M--Land Treatment

265.270  Applicability.
265.271  [Reserved]
265.272  General operating requirements.
265.273  Waste analysis.
265.274--265.275  [Reserved]
265.276  Food chain crops.
265.277  [Reserved]
265.278  Unsaturated zone (zone of aeration) monitoring.
265.279  Recordkeeping.
265.280  Closure and post-closure.
265.281  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
265.282  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

                          Subpart N--Landfills

265.300  Applicability.
265.301  Design and operating requirements.
265.302  Action leakage rate.
265.303  Response actions.
265.304  Monitoring and inspection.
265.305--265.308  [Reserved]
265.309  Surveying and recordkeeping.
265.310  Closure and post-closure care.
265.311  [Reserved]
265.312  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
265.313  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.
265.314  Special requirements for bulk and containerized liquids.
265.315  Special requirements for containers.
265.316  Disposal of small containers of hazardous waste in overpacked 
          drums (lab packs).

                         Subpart O--Incinerators

265.340  Applicability.
265.341  Waste analysis.
265.342--265.344  [Reserved]
265.345  General operating requirements.
265.346  [Reserved]
265.347  Monitoring and inspections.
265.348--265.350  [Reserved]
265.351  Closure.
265.352  Interim status incinerators burning particular hazardous 
          wastes.
265.353--265.369  [Reserved]

                      Subpart P--Thermal Treatment

265.370  Other thermal treatment.
265.371--265.372  [Reserved]
265.373  General operating requirements.
265.374  [Reserved]
265.375  Waste analysis.
265.376  [Reserved]
265.377  Monitoring and inspections.
265.378--265.380  [Reserved]
265.381  Closure.
265.382  Open burning; waste explosives.
265.383  Interim status thermal treatment devices burning particular 
          hazardous waste.

         Subpart Q--Chemical, Physical, and Biological Treatment

265.400  Applicability.
265.401  General operating requirements.
265.402  Waste analysis and trial tests.
265.403  Inspections.
265.404  Closure.
265.405  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.
265.406  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

                    Subpart R--Underground Injection

265.430  Applicability.

                        Subparts S--V  [Reserved]

                          Subpart W--Drip Pads

265.440  Applicability.
265.441  Assessment of existing drip pad integrity.
265.442  Design and installation of new drip pads.
265.443  Design and operating requirements.
265.444  Inspections.
265.445  Closure.

                        Subparts X--Z  [Reserved]

          Subpart AA--Air Emission Standards for Process Vents

265.1030  Applicability.
265.1031  Definitions.
265.1032  Standards: Process vents.
265.1033  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.
265.1034  Test methods and procedures.
265.1035  Recordkeeping requirements.
265.1036--265.1049  [Reserved]

[[Page 380]]

         Subpart BB--Air Emission Standards for Equipment Leaks

265.1050  Applicability.
265.1051  Definitions.
265.1052  Standards: Pumps in light liquid service.
265.1053  Standards: Compressors.
265.1054  Standards: Pressure relief devices in gas/vapor service.
265.1055  Standards: Sampling connection systems.
265.1056  Standards: Open-ended valves or lines.
265.1057  Standards: Valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid 
          service.
265.1058  Standards: Pumps and valves in heavy liquid service, pressure 
          relief devices in light liquid or heavy liquid service, and 
          flanges and other connectors.
265.1059  Standards: Delay of repair.
265.1060  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.
265.1061  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in 
          light liquid service: percentage of valves allowed to leak.
265.1062  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in 
          light liquid service: skip period leak detection and repair.
265.1063  Test methods and procedures.
265.1064  Recordkeeping requirements.
265.1065--265.1079  [Reserved]

Subpart CC--Air Emission Standards for Tanks, Surface Impoundments, and 
                               Containers

265.1080  Applicability.
265.1081  Definitions.
265.1082  Schedule for implementation of air emission standards.
265.1083  Standards: General.
265.1084  Waste determination procedures.
265.1085  Standards: Tanks.
265.1086  Standards: Surface impoundments.
265.1087  Standards: Containers.
265.1088  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.
265.1089  Inspection and monitoring requirements.
265.1090  Recordkeeping requirements.
265.1091  [Reserved]

                    Subpart DD--Containment Buildings

265.1100  Applicability.
265.1101  Design and operating standards.
265.1102  Closure and post-closure care.
265.1103--265.1110  [Reserved]

      Subpart EE--Hazardous Waste Munitions and Explosives Storage

265.1200  Applicability.
265.1201  Design and operating standards.
265.1202  Closure and post-closure care.

                         Appendices to Part 265

Appendix I--Recordkeeping Instructions
Appendix II [Reserved]
Appendix III--EPA Interim Primary Drinking Water Standards
Appendix IV--Tests for Significance
Appendix V--Examples of Potentially Incompatible Waste
Appendix VI--Compounds With Henry's Law Constant Less Than 0.1 Y/X

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 6905, 6906, 6912, 6922, 6923, 6924, 6925, 6935, 
6936, and 6937, unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 265.1  Purpose, scope, and applicability.

    (a) The purpose of this part is to establish minimum national 
standards that define the acceptable management of hazardous waste 
during the period of interim status and until certification of final 
closure or, if the facility is subject to post-closure requirements, 
until post-closure responsibilities are fulfilled.
    (b) Except as provided in Sec. 265.1080(b), the standards of this 
part, and of 40 CFR 264.552 and 40 CFR 264.553, apply to owners and 
operators of facilities that treat, store or dispose of hazardous waste 
who have fully complied with the requirements for interim status under 
section 3005(e) of RCRA and Sec. 270.10 of this chapter until either a 
permit is issued under section 3005 of RCRA or until applicable part 265 
closure and post-closure responsibilities are fulfilled, and to those 
owners and operators of facilities in existence on November 19, 1980 who 
have failed to provide timely notification as required by section 
3010(a) of RCRA and/or failed to file Part A of the permit application 
as required by 40 CFR 270.10 (e) and (g). These standards apply to all 
treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous waste at these facilities 
after the effective date of these regulations, except as specifically 
provided otherwise in this part or part 261 of this chapter.

[Comment: As stated in section 3005(a) of RCRA, after the effective date 
of regulations under that section (i.e., parts 270 and 124 of this 
chapter), the treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous waste is 
prohibited except

[[Page 381]]

in accordance with a permit. Section 3005(e) of RCRA provides for the 
continued operation of an existing facility that meets certain 
conditions, until final administrative disposition of the owner's and 
operator's permit application is made.]

    (c) The requirements of this part do not apply to:
    (1) A person disposing of hazardous waste by means of ocean disposal 
subject to a permit issued under the Marine Protection, Research, and 
Sanctuaries Act;

[Comment: These part 265 regulations do apply to the treatment or 
storage of hazardous waste before it is loaded onto an ocean vessel for 
incineration or disposal at sea, as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section.]

    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) The owner or operator of a POTW which treats, stores, or 
disposes of hazardous waste;

[Comment: The owner or operator of a facility under paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (3) of this section is subject to the requirements of part 264 
of this chapter to the extent they are included in a permit by rule 
granted to such a person under part 122 of this chapter, or are required 
by Sec. 144.14 of this chapter.]

    (4) A person who treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste in a 
State with a RCRA hazardous waste program authorized under subpart A or 
B of part 271 of this chapter, except that the requirements of this part 
will continue to apply:
    (i) As stated in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, if the authorized 
State RCRA program does not cover disposal of hazardous waste by means 
of underground injection; or
    (ii) To a person who treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste 
in a State authorized under subpart A or B of part 271 of this chapter 
if the State has not been authorized to carry out the requirements and 
prohibitions applicable to the treatment, storage, or disposal of 
hazardous waste at his facility which are imposed pursuant to the 
Hazardous and Solid Waste Act Amendments of 1984. The requirements and 
prohibitions that are applicable until a State receives authorization to 
carry them out include all Federal program requirements identified in 
Sec. 271.1(j);
    (5) The owner or operator of a facility permitted, licensed, or 
registered by a State to manage municipal or industrial solid waste, if 
the only hazardous waste the facility treats, stores, or disposes of is 
excluded from regulation under this part by Sec. 261.5 of this chapter;
    (6) The owner or operator of a facility managing recyclable 
materials described in Sec. 261.6 (a)(2), (3), and (4) of this chapter 
(except to the extent they are referred to in part 279 or subparts C, D, 
F, or G of part 266 of this chapter).
    (7) A generator accumulating waste on-site in compliance with 
Sec. 262.34 of this chapter, except to the extent the requirements are 
included in Sec. 262.34 of this chapter;
    (8) A farmer disposing of waste pesticides from his own use in 
compliance with Sec. 262.70 of this chapter; or
    (9) The owner or operator of a totally enclosed treatment facility, 
as defined in Sec. 260.10.
    (10) The owner or operator of an elementary neutralization unit or a 
wastewater treatment unit as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter, 
provided that if the owner or operator is diluting hazardous ignitable 
(D001) wastes (other than the D001 High TOC Subcategory defined in 
Sec. 268.40 of this chapter, Table Treatment Standards for Hazardous 
Wastes), or reactive (D003) waste, to remove the characteristic before 
land disposal, the owner/operator must comply with the requirements set 
out in Sec. 265.17(b).
    (11)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(11)(ii) of this section, 
a person engaged in treatment or containment activities during immediate 
response to any of the following situations:
    (A) A discharge of a hazardous waste;
    (B) An imminent and substantial threat of a discharge of a hazardous 
waste;
    (C) A discharge of a material which, when discharged, becomes a 
hazardous waste.
    (D) An immediate threat to human health, public safety, property, or 
the environment, from the known or suspected presence of military 
munitions, other explosive material, or an explosive device, as 
determined by an explosive or munitions emergency response specialist as 
defined in 40 CFR 260.10.

[[Page 382]]

    (ii) An owner or operator of a facility otherwise regulated by this 
part must comply with all applicable requirements of subparts C and D.
    (iii) Any person who is covered by paragraph (c)(11)(i) of this 
section and who continues or initiates hazardous waste treatment or 
containment activities after the immediate response is over is subject 
to all applicable requirements of this part and parts 122 through 124 of 
this chapter for those activities.
    (iv) In the case of an explosives or munitions emergency response, 
if a Federal, State, Tribal or local official acting within the scope of 
his or her official responsibilities, or an explosives or munitions 
emergency response specialist, determines that immediate removal of the 
material or waste is necessary to protect human health or the 
environment, that official or specialist may authorize the removal of 
the material or waste by transporters who do not have EPA identification 
numbers and without the preparation of a manifest. In the case of 
emergencies involving military munitions, the responding military 
emergency response specialist's organizational unit must retain records 
for three years identifying the dates of the response, the responsible 
persons responding, the type and description of material addressed, and 
its disposition.
    (12) A transporter storing manifested shipments of hazardous waste 
in containers meeting the requirements of 40 CFR 262.30 at a transfer 
facility for a period of ten days or less.
    (13) The addition of absorbent material to waste in a container (as 
defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter) or the addition of waste to the 
absorbent material in a container provided that these actions occur at 
the time waste is first placed in the containers; and Secs. 265.17(b), 
265.171, and 265.172 are complied with.
    (14) Universal waste handlers and universal waste transporters (as 
defined in 40 CFR 260.10) handling the wastes listed below. These 
handlers are subject to regulation under 40 CFR part 273, when handling 
the below listed universal wastes.
    (i) Batteries as described in 40 CFR 273.2;
    (ii) Pesticides as described in 40 CFR 273.3; and
    (iii) Thermostats as described in 40 CFR 273.4.
    (d) The following hazardous wastes must not be managed at facilities 
subject to regulation under this part.
    (1) EPA Hazardous Waste Nos. FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, or FO27 
unless:
    (i) The wastewater treatment sludge is generated in a surface 
impoundment as part of the plant's wastewater treatment system;
    (ii) The waste is stored in tanks or containers;
    (iii) The waste is stored or treated in waste piles that meet the 
requirements of Sec. 264.250(c) as well as all other applicable 
requirements of subpart L of this part;
    (iv) The waste is burned in incinerators that are certified pursuant 
to the standards and procedures in Sec. 265.352; or
    (v) The waste is burned in facilities that thermally treat the waste 
in a device other than an incinerator and that are certified pursuant to 
the standards and procedures in Sec. 265.383.
    (e) The requirements of this part apply to owners or operators of 
all facilities which treat, store or dispose of hazardous waste referred 
to in 40 CFR part 268, and the 40 CFR part 268 standards are considered 
material conditions or requirements of the part 265 interim status 
standards.
    (f) Section 266.205 of this chapter identifies when the requirements 
of this part apply to the storage of military munitions classified as 
solid waste under Sec. 266.202 of this chapter. The treatment and 
disposal of hazardous waste military munitions are subject to the 
applicable permitting, procedural, and technical standards in 40 CFR 
parts 260 through 270.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 265.1, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Secs. 265.2--265.3  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.4  Imminent hazard action.

    Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, 
enforcement actions may be brought pursuant to section 7003 of RCRA.

[[Page 383]]


<R04>
                  Subpart B--General Facility Standards


<R05>
Sec. 265.10  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of all 
hazardous waste facilities, except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 265.11  Identification number.

    Every facility owner or operator must apply to EPA for an EPA 
identification number in accordance with the EPA notification procedures 
(45 FR 12746).


<R05>
Sec. 265.12  Required notices.

    (a)(1) The owner or operator of a facility that has arranged to 
receive hazardous waste from a foreign source must notify the Regional 
Administrator in writing at least four weeks in advance of the date of 
the waste is expected to arrive at the facility. Notice of subsequent 
shipments of the same waste from the same foreign source is not 
required.
    (2) The owner or operator of a recovery facility that has arranged 
to receive hazardous waste subject to 40 CFR part 262, subpart H must 
provide a copy of the tracking document bearing all required signatures 
to the notifier, to the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, 
Office of Compliance, Enforcement Planning, Targeting and Data Division 
(2222A), Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 
20460 and to the competent authorities of all other concerned countries 
within three working days of receipt of the shipment. The original of 
the signed tracking document must be maintained at the facility for at 
least three years.
    (b) Before transferring ownership or operation of a facility during 
its operating life, or of a disposal facility during the post-closure 
care period, the owner or operator must notify the new owner or operator 
in writing of the requirements of this part and part 270 of this 
chapter. (Also see Sec. 270.72 of this chapter.)

[Comment: An owner's or operator's failure to notify the new owner or 
operator of the requirements of this part in no way relieves the new 
owner or operator of his obligation to comply with all applicable 
requirements.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 14295, Apr. 1, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 61 FR 16315, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 265.13  General waste analysis.

    (a)(1) Before an owner or operator treats, stores, or disposes of 
any hazardous wastes, or nonhazardous wastes if applicable under 
Sec. 265.113(d), he must obtain a detailed chemical and physical 
analysis of a representative sample of the wastes. At a minimum, the 
analysis must contain all the information which must be known to treat, 
store, or dispose of the waste in accordance with this part and part 268 
of this chapter.
    (2) The analysis may include data developed under part 261 of this 
chapter, and existing published or documented data on the hazardous 
waste or on waste generated from similar processes.

Comment: For example, the facility's records of analyses performed on 
the waste before the effective date of these regulations, or studies 
conducted on hazardous waste generated from processes similar to that 
which generated the waste to be managed at the facility, may be included 
in the data base required to comply with paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section. The owner or operator of an off-site facility may arrange for 
the generator of the hazardous waste to supply part of the information 
required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section, except as otherwise 
specified in 40 CFR 268.7 (b) and (c). If the generator does not supply 
the information, and the owner or operator chooses to accept a hazardous 
waste, the owner or operator is responsible for obtaining the 
information required to comply with this section.]

    (3) The analysis must be repeated as necessary to ensure that it is 
accurate and up to date. At a minimum, the analysis must be repeated:
    (i) When the owner or operator is notified, or has reason to 
believe, that the process or operation generating the hazardous wastes 
or non-hazardous wastes, if applicable, under Sec. 265.113(d) has 
changed; and
    (ii) For off-site facilities, when the results of the inspection 
required in paragraph (a)(4) of this section indicate that the hazardous 
waste received at the facility does not match the waste

[[Page 384]]

designated on the accompanying manifest or shipping paper.
    (4) The owner or operator of an off-site facility must inspect and, 
if necessary, analyze each hazardous waste movement received at the 
facility to determine whether it matches the identity of the waste 
specified on the accompanying manifest or shipping paper.
    (b) The owner or operator must develop and follow a written waste 
analysis plan which describes the procedures which he will carry out to 
comply with paragraph (a) of this section. He must keep this plan at the 
facility. At a minimum, the plan must specify:
    (1) The parameters for which each hazardous waste, or non-hazardous 
waste if applicable under Sec. 265.113(d), will be analyzed and the 
rationale for the selection of these parameters (i.e., how analysis for 
these parameters will provide sufficient information on the waste's 
properties to comply with paragraph (a) of this section);
    (2) The test methods which will be used to test for these 
parameters;
    (3) The sampling method which will be used to obtain a 
representative sample of the waste to be analyzed. A representative 
sample may be obtained using either:
    (i) One of the sampling methods described in appendix I of part 261 
of this chapter; or
    (ii) An equivalent sampling method.

[Comment: See Sec. 260.20(c) of this chapter for related discussion.]

    (4) The frequency with which the initial analysis of the waste will 
be reviewed or repeated to ensure that the analysis is accurate and up 
to date;
    (5) For off-site facilities, the waste analyses that hazardous waste 
generators have agreed to supply; and
    (6) Where applicable, the methods that will be used to meet the 
additional waste analysis requirements for specific waste management 
methods as specified in Secs. 265.200, 265.225, 265.252, 265.273, 
265.314, 265.341, 265.375, 265.402, 265.1034(d), 265.1063(d), 265.1084, 
and 268.7 of this chapter.
    (7) For surface impoundments exempted from land disposal 
restrictions under Sec. 268.4(a) of this chapter, the procedures and 
schedule for:
    (i) The sampling of impoundment contents;
    (ii) The analysis of test data; and,
    (iii) The annual removal of residues which are not delisted under 
Sec. 260.22 of this chapter or which exhibit a characteristic of 
hazardous waste and either:
    (A) Do not meet applicable treatment standards of part 268, subpart 
D; or
    (B) Where no treatment standards have been established;
    (1) Such residues are prohibited from land disposal under 
Sec. 268.32 or RCRA section 3004(d); or
    (2) Such residues are prohibited from land disposal under 
Sec. 268.33(f).
    (8) For owners and operators seeking an exemption to the air 
emission standards of Subpart CC of this part in accordance with 
Sec. 265.1083--
    (i) If direct measurement is used for the waste determination, the 
procedures and schedules for waste sampling and analysis, and the 
results of the analysis of test data to verify the exemption.
    (ii) If knowledge of the waste is used for the waste determination, 
any information prepared by the facility owner or operator or by the 
generator of the hazardous waste, if the waste is received from off-
site, that is used as the basis for knowledge of the waste.
    (c) For off-site facilities, the waste analysis plan required in 
paragraph (b) of this section must also specify the procedures which 
will be used to inspect and, if necessary, analyze each movement of 
hazardous waste received at the facility to ensure that it matches the 
identity of the waste designated on the accompanying manifest or 
shipping paper. At a minimum, the plan must describe:
    (1) The procedures which will be used to determine the identity of 
each movement of waste managed at the facility; and
    (2) The sampling method which will be used to obtain a 
representative sample of the waste to be identified, if the 
identification method includes sampling.
    (3) The procedures that the owner or operator of an off-site 
landfill receiving containerized hazardous waste will use to determine 
whether a hazardous waste generator or treater has added a

[[Page 385]]

biodegradable sorbent to the waste in the container.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 50 
FR 18374, Apr. 30, 1985; 51 FR 40638, Nov. 7, 1986; 52 FR 25788, July 8, 
1987; 54 FR 33396, Aug. 14, 1989; 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990; 55 FR 
25506, June 21, 1990; 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 57 FR 8088, Mar. 6, 
1992; 57 FR 54461, Nov. 18, 1992; 59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994; 61 FR 4913, 
Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 265.14  Security.

    (a) The owner or operator must prevent the unknowing entry, and 
minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons or 
livestock onto the active portion of his facility, unless:
    (1) Physical contact with the waste, structures, or equipment with 
the active portion of the facility will not injure unknowing or 
unauthorized persons or livestock which may enter the active portion of 
a facility, and
    (2) Disturbance of the waste or equipment, by the unknowing or 
unauthorized entry of persons or livestock onto the active portion of a 
facility, will not cause a violation of the requirements of this part.
    (b) Unless exempt under paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section, a 
facility must have:
    (1) A 24-hour surveillance system (e.g., television monitoring or 
surveillance by guards of facility personnel) which continuously 
monitors and controls entry onto the active portion of the facility; or
    (2)(i) An artificial or natural barrier (e.g., a fence in good 
repair or a fence combined with a cliff), which completely surrounds the 
active portion of the facility; and
    (ii) A means to control entry, at all times, through the gates or 
other entrances to the active portion of the facility (e.g., an 
attendant, television monitors, locked entrance, or controlled roadway 
access to the facility).

[Comment: The requirements of paragraph (b) of this section are 
satisfied if the facility or plant within which the active portion is 
located itself has a surveillance system, or a barrier and a means to 
control entry, which complies with the requirements of paragraph (b)(1) 
or (2) of this section.]

    (c) Unless exempt under paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this 
section, a sign with the legend, ``Danger--Unauthorized Personnel Keep 
Out,'' must be posted at each entrance to the active portion of a 
facility, and at other locations, in sufficient numbers to be seen from 
any approach to this active portion. The legend must be written in 
English and in any other language predominant in the area surrounding 
the facility (e.g., facilities in counties bordering the Canadian 
province of Quebec must post signs in French; facilities in counties 
bordering Mexico must post signs in Spanish), and must be legible from a 
distance of at least 25 feet. Existing signs with a legend other than 
``Danger--Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out'' may be used if the legend on 
the sign indicates that only authorized personnel are allowed to enter 
the active portion, and that entry onto the active portion can be 
dangerous.

[Comment: See Sec. 265.117(b) for discussion of security requirements at 
disposal facilities during the post-closure care period.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.15  General inspection requirements.

    (a) The owner or operator must inspect his facility for malfunctions 
and deterioration, operator errors, and discharges which may be 
causing--or may lead to: (1) Release of hazardous waste constituents to 
the environment or (2) a threat to human health. The owner or operator 
must conduct these inspections often enough to identify problems in time 
to correct them before they harm human health or the environment.
    (b)(1) The owner or operator must develop and follow a written 
schedule for inspecting all monitoring equipment, safety and emergency 
equipment, security devices, and operating and structural equipment 
(such as dikes and sump pumps) that are important to preventing, 
detecting, or responding to environmental or human health hazards.
    (2) He must keep this schedule at the facility.
    (3) The schedule must identify the types of problems (e.g., 
malfunctions or deterioration) which are to be looked for during the 
inspection (e.g., inoperative sump pump, leaking fitting, eroding dike, 
etc.).

[[Page 386]]

    (4) The frequency of inspection may vary for the items on the 
schedule. However, the frequency should be based on the rate of 
deterioration of the equipment and the probability of an environmental 
or human health incident if the deterioration, malfunction, or any 
operator error goes undetected between inspections. Areas subject to 
spills, such as loading and unloading areas, must be inspected daily 
when in use. At a minimum, the inspection schedule must include the 
items and frequencies called for in Secs. 265.174, 265.193, 265.195, 
265.226, 265.260, 265.278, 265.304, 265.347, 265.377, 265.403, 265.1033, 
265.1052, 265.1053, 265.1058, and 265.1084 through 265.1090 of this 
part, where applicable.
    (c) The owner or operator must remedy any deterioration or 
malfunction of equipment or structures which the inspection reveals on a 
schedule which ensures that the problem does not lead to an 
environmental or human health hazard. Where a hazard is imminent or has 
already occurred, remedial action must be taken immediately.
    (d) The owner or operator must record inspections in an inspection 
log or summary. He must keep these records for at least three years from 
the date of inspection. At a minimum, these records must include the 
date and time of the inspection, the name of the inspector, a notation 
of the observations made, and the date and nature of any repairs or 
other remedial actions.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 57 
FR 3491, Jan. 29, 1992; 59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994; 62 FR 64661, Dec. 8, 
1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.16  Personnel training.

    (a)(1) Facility personnel must successfully complete a program of 
classroom instruction or on-the-job training that teaches them to 
perform their duties in a way that ensures the facility's compliance 
with the requirements of this part. The owner or operator must ensure 
that this program includes all the elements described in the document 
required under paragraph (d)(3) of this section.
    (2) This program must be directed by a person trained in hazardous 
waste management procedures, and must include instruction which teaches 
facility personnel hazardous waste management procedures (including 
contingency plan implementation) relevant to the positions in which they 
are employed.
    (3) At a minimum, the training program must be designed to ensure 
that facility personnel are able to respond effectively to emergencies 
by familiarizing them with emergency procedures, emergency equipment, 
and emergency systems, including where applicable:
    (i) Procedures for using, inspecting, repairing, and replacing 
facility emergency and monitoring equipment;
    (ii) Key parameters for automatic waste feed cut-off systems;
    (iii) Communications or alarm systems;
    (iv) Response to fires or explosions;
    (v) Response to ground-water contamination incidents; and
    (vi) Shutdown of operations.
    (b) Facility personnel must successfuly complete the program 
required in paragraph (a) of this section within six months after the 
effective date of these regulations or six months after the date of 
their employment or assignment to a facility, or to a new position at a 
facility, whichever is later. Employees hired after the effective date 
of these regulations must not work in unsupervised positions until they 
have completed the training requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (c) Facility personnel must take part in an annual review of the 
initial training required in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (d) The owner or operator must maintain the following documents and 
records at the facility:
    (1) The job title for each position at the facility related to 
hazardous waste management, and the name of the employee filling each 
job;
    (2) A written job description for each position listed under 
paragraph (d)(1) of this Section. This description may be consistent in 
its degree of specificity with descriptions for other similar positions 
in the same company location or bargaining unit, but must include the 
requisite skill, education, or other qualifications, and duties of 
facility personnel assigned to each position;

[[Page 387]]

    (3) A written description of the type and amount of both 
introductory and continuing training that will be given to each person 
filling a position listed under paragraph (d)(1) of this section;
    (4) Records that document that the training or job experience 
required under paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section has been 
given to, and completed by, facility personnel.
    (e) Training records on current personnel must be kept until closure 
of the facility. Training records on former employees must be kept for 
at least three years from the date the employee last worked at the 
facility. Personnel training records may accompany personnel transferred 
within the same company.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.17  General requirements for ignitable, reactive, or incompatible wastes.

    (a) The owner or operator must take precautions to prevent 
accidental ignition or reaction of ignitable or reactive waste. This 
waste must be separated and protected from sources of ignition or 
reaction including but not limited to: Open flames, smoking, cutting and 
welding, hot surfaces, frictional heat, sparks (static, electrical, or 
mechanical), spontaneous ignition (e.g., from heat-producing chemical 
reactions), and radiant heat. While ignitable or reactive waste is being 
handled, the owner or operator must confine smoking and open flame to 
specially designated locations. ``No Smoking'' signs must be 
conspicuously placed wherever there is a hazard from ignitable or 
reactive waste.
    (b) Where specifically required by other sections of this part, the 
treatment, storage, or disposal of ignitable or reactive waste, and the 
mixture or commingling of incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes 
and materials, must be conducted so that it does not:
    (1) Generate extreme heat or pressure, fire or explosion, or violent 
reaction;
    (2) Produce uncontrolled toxic mists, fumes, dusts, or gases in 
sufficient quantities to threaten human health;
    (3) Produce uncontrolled flammable fumes or gases in sufficient 
quantities to pose a risk of fire or explosions;
    (4) Damage the structural integrity of the device or facility 
containing the waste; or
    (5) Through other like means threaten human health or the 
environment.


<R05>
Sec. 265.18  Location standards.

    The placement of any hazardous waste in a salt dome, salt bed 
formation, underground mine or cave is prohibited, except for the 
Department of Energy Waste Isolation Pilot Project in New Mexico.
[50 FR 28749, July 15, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.19  Construction quality assurance program.

    (a) CQA program. (1) A construction quality assurance (CQA) program 
is required for all surface impoundment, waste pile, and landfill units 
that are required to comply with Secs. 265.221(a), 265.254, and 
265.301(a). The program must ensure that the constructed unit meets or 
exceeds all design criteria and specifications in the permit. The 
program must be developed and implemented under the direction of a CQA 
officer who is a registered professional engineer.
    (2) The CQA program must address the following physical components, 
where applicable:
    (i) Foundations;
    (ii) Dikes;
    (iii) Low-permeability soil liners;
    (iv) Geomembranes (flexible membrane liners);
    (v) Leachate collection and removal systems and leak detection 
systems; and
    (vi) Final cover systems.
    (b) Written CQA plan. Before construction begins on a unit subject 
to the CQA program under paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or 
operator must develop a written CQA plan. The plan must identify steps 
that will be used to monitor and document the quality of materials and 
the condition and manner of their installation. The CQA plan must 
include:
    (1) Identification of applicable units, and a description of how 
they will be constructed.

[[Page 388]]

    (2) Identification of key personnel in the development and 
implementation of the CQA plan, and CQA officer qualifications.
    (3) A description of inspection and sampling activities for all unit 
components identified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, including 
observations and tests that will be used before, during, and after 
construction to ensure that the construction materials and the installed 
unit components meet the design specifications. The description must 
cover: Sampling size and locations; frequency of testing; data 
evaluation procedures; acceptance and rejection criteria for 
construction materials; plans for implementing corrective measures; and 
data or other information to be recorded and retained in the operating 
record under Sec. 265.73.
    (c) Contents of program. (1) The CQA program must include 
observations, inspections, tests, and measurements sufficient to ensure:
    (i) Structural stability and integrity of all components of the unit 
identified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section;
    (ii) Proper construction of all components of the liners, leachate 
collection and removal system, leak detection system, and final cover 
system, according to permit specifications and good engineering 
practices, and proper installation of all components (e.g., pipes) 
according to design specifications;
    (iii) Conformity of all materials used with design and other 
material specifications under Secs. 264.221, 264.251, and 264.301 of 
this chapter.
    (2) The CQA program shall include test fills for compacted soil 
liners, using the same compaction methods as in the full-scale unit, to 
ensure that the liners are constructed to meet the hydraulic 
conductivity requirements of Secs. 264.221(c)(1), 264.251(c)(1), and 
264.301(c)(1) of this chapter in the field. Compliance with the 
hydraulic conductivity requirements must be verified by using in-situ 
testing on the constructed test fill. The test fill requirement is 
waived where data are sufficient to show that a constructed soil liner 
meets the hydraulic conductivity requirements of Secs. 264.221(c)(1), 
264.254(c)(1), and 264.301(c)(1) of this chapter in the field.
    (d) Certification. The owner or operator of units subject to 
Sec. 265.19 must submit to the Regional Administrator by certified mail 
or hand delivery, at least 30 days prior to receiving waste, a 
certification signed by the CQA officer that the CQA plan has been 
successfully carried out and that the unit meets the requirements of 
Secs. 265.221(a), 265.254, or 265.301(a). The owner or operator may 
receive waste in the unit after 30 days from the Regional 
Administrator's receipt of the CQA certification unless the Regional 
Administrator determines in writing that the construction is not 
acceptable, or extends the review period for a maximum of 30 more days, 
or seeks additional information from the owner or operator during this 
period. Documentation supporting the CQA officer's certification must be 
furnished to the Regional Administrator upon request.
[57 FR 3491, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R04>
                 Subpart C--Preparedness and Prevention


<R05>
Sec. 265.30  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of all 
hazardous waste facilities, except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 265.31  Maintenance and operation of facility.

    Facilities must be maintained and operated to minimize the 
possibility of a fire, explosion, or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden 
release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents to air, soil, 
or surface water which could threaten human health or the environment.


<R05>
Sec. 265.32  Required equipment.

    All facilities must be equipped with the following, unless none of 
the hazards posed by waste handled at the facility could require a 
particular kind of equipment specified below:
    (a) An internal communications or alarm system capable of providing 
immediate emergency instruction (voice or signal) to facility personnel;
    (b) A device, such as a telephone (immediately available at the 
scene of operations) or a hand-held two-way radio,

[[Page 389]]

capable of summoning emergency assistance from local police departments, 
fire departments, or State or local emergency response teams;
    (c) Portable fire extinguishers, fire control equipment (including 
special extinguishing equipment, such as that using foam, inert gas, or 
dry chemicals), spill control equipment, and decontamination equipment; 
and
    (d) Water at adequate volume and pressure to supply water hose 
streams, or foam producing equipment, or automatic sprinklers, or water 
spray systems.


<R05>
Sec. 265.33  Testing and maintenance of equipment.

    All facility communications or alarm systems, fire protection 
equipment, spill control equipment, and decontamination equipment, where 
required, must be tested and maintained as necessary to assure its 
proper operation in time of emergency.


<R05>
Sec. 265.34  Access to communications or alarm system.

    (a) Whenever hazardous waste is being poured, mixed, spread, or 
otherwise handled, all personnel involved in the operation must have 
immediate access to an internal alarm or emergency communication device, 
either directly or through visual or voice contact with another 
employee, unless such a device is not required under Sec. 265.32.
    (b) If there is ever just one employee on the premises while the 
facility is operating, he must have immediate access to a device, such 
as a telephone (immediately available at the scene of operation) or a 
hand-held two-way radio, capable of summoning external emergency 
assistance, unless such a device is not required under Sec. 265.32.


<R05>
Sec. 265.35  Required aisle space.

    The owner or operator must maintain aisle space to allow the 
unobstructed movement of personnel, fire protection equipment, spill 
control equipment, and decontamination equipment to any area of facility 
operation in an emergency, unless aisle space is not needed for any of 
these purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 265.36  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.37  Arrangements with local authorities.

    (a) The owner or operator must attempt to make the following 
arrangements, as appropriate for the type of waste handled at his 
facility and the potential need for the services of these organizations:
    (1) Arrangements to familiarize police, fire departments, and 
emergency response teams with the layout of the facility, properties of 
hazardous waste handled at the facility and associated hazards, places 
where facility personnel would normally be working, entrances to roads 
inside the facility, and possible evacuation routes;
    (2) Where more than one police and fire department might respond to 
an emergency, agreements designating primary emergency authority to a 
specific police and a specific fire department, and agreements with any 
others to provide support to the primary emergency authority;
    (3) Agreements with State emergency response teams, emergency 
response contractors, and equipment suppliers; and
    (4) Arrangements to familiarize local hospitals with the properties 
of hazardous waste handled at the facility and the types of injuries or 
illnesses which could result from fires, explosions, or releases at the 
facility.
    (b) Where State or local authorities decline to enter into such 
arrangements, the owner or operator must document the refusal in the 
operating record.


<R04>
          Subpart D--Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 265.50  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of all 
hazardous waste facilities, except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 265.51  Purpose and implementation of contingency plan.

    (a) Each owner or operator must have a contingency plan for his 
facility. The contingency plan must be designed to minimize hazards to 
human health or the environment from fires, explosions,

[[Page 390]]

or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden release of hazardous waste or 
hazardous waste constituents to air, soil, or surface water.
    (b) The provisions of the plan must be carried out immediately 
whenever there is a fire, explosion, or release of hazardous waste or 
hazardous waste constituents which could threaten human health or the 
environment.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.52  Content of contingency plan.

    (a) The contingency plan must describe the actions facility 
personnel must take to comply with Secs. 265.51 and 265.56 in response 
to fires, explosions, or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden release of 
hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents to air, soil, or surface 
water at the facility.
    (b) If the owner or operator has already prepared a Spill 
Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures (SPCC) Plan in accordance with 
part 112 of this chapter, or part 1510 of chapter V, or some other 
emergency or contingency plan, he need only amend that plan to 
incorporate hazardous waste management provisions that are sufficient to 
comply with the requirements of this part.
    (c) The plan must describe arrangements agreed to by local police 
departments, fire departments, hospitals, contractors, and State and 
local emergency response teams to coordinate emergency services, 
pursuant to Sec. 265.37.
    (d) The plan must list names, addresses, and phone numbers (office 
and home) of all persons qualified to act as emergency coordinator (see 
Sec. 265.55), and this list must be kept up to date. Where more than one 
person is listed, one must be named as primary emergency coordinator and 
others must be listed in the order in which they will assume 
responsibility as alternates.
    (e) The plan must include a list of all emergency equipment at the 
facility (such as fire extinguishing systems, spill control equipment, 
communications and alarm systems (internal and external), and 
decontamination equipment), where this equipment is required. This list 
must be kept up to date. In addition, the plan must include the location 
and a physical description of each item on the list, and a brief outline 
of its capabilities.
    (f) The plan must include an evacuation plan for facility personnel 
where there is a possibility that evacuation could be necessary. This 
plan must describe signal(s) to be used to begin evacuation, evacuation 
routes, and alternate evacuation routes (in cases where the primary 
routes could be blocked by releases of hazardous waste or fires).
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 27480, May 20, 1981; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.53  Copies of contingency plan.

    A copy of the contingency plan and all revisions to the plan must 
be:
    (a) Maintained at the facility; and
    (b) Submitted to all local police departments, fire departments, 
hospitals, and State and local emergency response teams that may be 
called upon to provide emergency services.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.54  Amendment of contingency plan.

    The contingency plan must be reviewed, and immediately amended, if 
necessary, whenever:
    (a) Applicable regulations are revised;
    (b) The plan fails in an emergency;
    (c) The facility changes--in its design, construction, operation, 
maintenance, or other circumstances--in a way that materially increases 
the potential for fires, explosions, or releases of hazardous waste or 
hazardous waste constituents, or changes the response necessary in an 
emergency;
    (d) The list of emergency coordinators changes; or
    (e) The list of emergency equipment changes.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.55  Emergency coordinator.

    At all times, there must be at least one employee either on the 
facility premises or on call (i.e., available to respond to an emergency 
by reaching the facility within a short period of

[[Page 391]]

time) with the responsibility for coordinating all emergency response 
measures. This emergency coordinator must be thoroughly familiar with 
all aspects of the facility's contingency plan, all operations and 
activities at the facility, the location and characteristics of waste 
handled, the location of all records within the facility, and the 
facility layout. In addition, this person must have the authority to 
commit the resources needed to carry out the contingency plan.

[Comment: The emergency coordinator's responsibilities are more fully 
spelled out in Sec. 265.56. Applicable responsibilities for the 
emergency coordinator vary, depending on factors such as type and 
variety of waste(s) handled by the facility, and type and complexity of 
the facility.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.56  Emergency procedures.

    (a) Whenever there is an imminent or actual emergency situation, the 
emergency coordinator (or his designee when the emergency coordinator is 
on call) must immediately:
    (1) Activate internal facility alarms or communication systems, 
where applicable, to notify all facility personnel; and
    (2) Notify appropriate State or local agencies with designated 
response roles if their help is needed.
    (b) Whenever there is a release, fire, or explosion, the emergency 
coordinator must immediately identify the character, exact source, 
amount, and a real extent of any released materials. He may do this by 
observation or review of facility records or manifests and, if 
necessary, by chemical analysis.
    (c) Concurrently, the emergency coordinator must assess possible 
hazards to human health or the environment that may result from the 
release, fire, or explosion. This assessment must consider both direct 
and indirect effects of the release, fire, or explosion (e.g., the 
effects of any toxic, irritating, or asphyxiating gases that are 
generated, or the effects of any hazardous surface water run-offs from 
water or chemical agents used to control fire and heat-induced 
explosions).
    (d) If the emergency coordinator determines that the facility has 
had a release, fire, or explosion which could threaten human health, or 
the environment, outside the facility, he must report his findings as 
follows:
    (1) If his assessment indicates that evacuation of local areas may 
be advisable, he must immediately notify appropriate local authorities. 
He must be available to help appropriate officials decide whether local 
areas should be evacuated; and
    (2) He must immediately notify either the government official 
designated as the on-scene coordinator for that geographical area (in 
the applicable regional contingency plan under part 1510 of this title), 
or the National Response Center (using their 24-hour toll free number 
800/424-8802). The report must include:
    (i) Name and telephone number of reporter;
    (ii) Name and address of facility;
    (iii) Time and type of incident (e.g., release, fire);
    (iv) Name and quantity of material(s) involved, to the extent known;
    (v) The extent of injuries, if any; and
    (vi) The possible hazards to human health, or the environment, 
outside the facility.
    (e) During an emergency, the emergency coordinator must take all 
reasonable measures necessary to ensure that fires, explosions, and 
releases do not occur, recur, or spread to other hazardous waste at the 
facility. These measures must include, where applicable, stopping 
processes and operations, collecting and containing released waste, and 
removing or isolating containers.
    (f) If the facility stops operations in response to a fire, 
explosion or release, the emergency coordinator must monitor for leaks, 
pressure buildup, gas generation, or ruptures in valves, pipes, or other 
equipment, wherever this is appropriate.
    (g) Immediately after an emergency, the emergency coordinator must 
provide for treating, storing, or disposing of recovered waste, 
contaminated soil or surface water, or any other material that results 
from a release, fire, or explosion at the facility.

[Comment: Unless the owner or operator can demonstrate, in accordance 
with Sec. 261.3(c) or (d) of this chapter, that the recovered material 
is not a hazardous waste, the owner or operator becomes a generator of 
hazardous

[[Page 392]]

waste and must manage it in accordance with all applicable requirements 
of parts 262, 263, and 265 of this chapter.]

    (h) The emergency coordinator must ensure that, in the affected 
area(s) of the facility:
    (1) No waste that may be incompatible with the released material is 
treated, stored, or disposed of until cleanup procedures are completed; 
and
    (2) All emergency equipment listed in the contingency plan is 
cleaned and fit for its intended use before operations are resumed.
    (i) The owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator, 
and appropriate State and local authorities, that the facility is in 
compliance with paragraph (h) of this section before operations are 
resumed in the affected area(s) of the facility.
    (j) The owner or operator must note in the operating record the 
time, date, and details of any incident that requires implementing the 
contingency plan. Within 15 days after the incident, he must submit a 
written report on the incident to the Regional Administrator. The report 
must include:
    (1) Name, address, and telephone number of the owner or operator;
    (2) Name, address, and telephone number of the facility;
    (3) Date, time, and type of incident (e.g., fire, explosion);
    (4) Name and quantity of material(s) involved;
    (5) The extent of injuries, if any;
    (6) An assessment of actual or potential hazards to human health or 
the environment, where this is applicable; and
    (7) Estimated quantity and disposition of recovered material that 
resulted from the incident.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R04>
        Subpart E--Manifest System, Recordkeeping, and Reporting


<R05>
Sec. 265.70  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
both on-site and off-site facilities, except as Sec. 265.1 provides 
otherwise. Sections 265.71, 265.72, and 265.76 do not apply to owners 
and operators of on-site facilities that do not receive any hazardous 
waste from off-site sources, and to owners and operators of off-site 
facilities with respect to waste military munitions exempted from 
manifest requirements under Sec. 266.203(a) of this chapter.
[62 FR 6653, Feb. 12, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.71  Use of manifest system.

    (a) If a facility receives hazardous waste accompanied by a 
manifest, the owner or operator, or his agent, must:
    (1) Sign and date each copy of the manifest to certify that the 
hazardous waste covered by the manifest was received;
    (2) Note any significant discrepancies in the manifest (as defined 
in Sec. 265.72(a)) on each copy of the manifest;

[Comment: The Agency does not intend that the owner or operator of a 
facility whose procedures under Sec. 265.13(c) include waste analysis 
must perform that analysis before signing the manifest and giving it to 
the transporter. Section 265.72(b), however, requires reporting an 
unreconciled discrepancy discovered during later analysis.]

    (3) Immediately give the transporter at least one copy of the signed 
manifest;
    (4) Within 30 days after the delivery, send a copy of the manifest 
to the generator; and
    (5) Retain at the facility a copy of each manifest for at least 
three years from the date of delivery.
    (b) If a facility receives, from a rail or water (bulk shipment) 
transporter, hazardous waste which is accompanied by a shipping paper 
containing all the information required on the manifest (excluding the 
EPA identification numbers, generator's certification, and signatures), 
the owner or operator, or his agent, must:
    (1) Sign and date each copy of the manifest or shipping paper (if 
the manifest has not been received) to certify that the hazardous waste 
covered by the manifest or shipping paper was received;
    (2) Note any significant discrepancies (as defined in 
Sec. 265.72(a)) in the manifest or shipping paper (if the manifest has 
not been received) on each copy of the manifest or shipping paper;


[[Page 393]]


[Comment: The Agency does not intend that the owner or operator of a 
facility whose procedures under Sec. 265.13(c) include waste analysis 
must perform that analysis before signing the shipping paper and giving 
it to the transporter. Section 265.72(b), however, requires reporting an 
unreconciled discrepancy discovered during later analysis.]

    (3) Immediately give the rail or water (bulk shipment) transporter 
at least one copy of the manifest or shipping paper (if the manifest has 
not been received);
    (4) Within 30 days after the delivery, send a copy of the signed and 
dated manifest to the generator; however, if the manifest has not been 
received within 30 days after delivery, the owner or operator, or his 
agent, must send a copy of the shipping paper signed and dated to the 
generator; and

[Comment: Section 262.23(c) of this chapter requires the generator to 
send three copies of the manifest to the facility when hazardous waste 
is sent by rail or water (bulk shipment).]

    (5) Retain at the facility a copy of the manifest and shipping paper 
(if signed in lieu of the manifest at the time of delivery) for at least 
three years from the date of delivery.
    (c) Whenever a shipment of hazardous waste is initiated from a 
facility, the owner or operator of that facility must comply with the 
requirements of part 262 of this chapter.

[Comment: The provisions of Sec. 262.34 are applicable to the on-site 
accumulation of hazardous wastes by generators. Therefore, the 
provisions of Sec. 262.34 only apply to owners or operators who are 
shipping hazardous waste which they generated at that facility.]

    (d) Within three working days of the receipt of a shipment subject 
to 40 CFR part 262, subpart H, the owner or operator of facility must 
provide a copy of the tracking document bearing all required signatures 
to the notifier, to the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, 
Office of Compliance, Enforcement Planning, Targeting and Data Division 
(2222A), Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M St., SW., Washington, DC 
20460, and to competent authorities of all other concerned countries. 
The original copy of the tracking document must be maintained at the 
facility for at least three years from the date of signature.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 86970, 86974, Dec. 31, 
1980; 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 61 FR 16315, Apr. 12, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 265.72  Manifest discrepancies.

    (a) Manifest discrepancies are differences between the quantity or 
type of hazardous waste designated on the manifest or shipping paper, 
and the quantity or type of hazardous waste a facility actually 
receives. Significant discrepancies in quantity are: (1) For bulk waste, 
variations greater than 10 percent in weight, and (2) for batch waste, 
any variation in piece count, such as a discrepancy of one drum in a 
truckload. Significant discrepancies in type are obvious differences 
which can be discovered by inspection or waste analysis, such as waste 
solvent substituted for waste acid, or toxic constituents not reported 
on the manifest or shipping paper.
    (b) Upon discovering a significant discrepancy, the owner or 
operator must attempt to reconcile the discrepancy with the waste 
generator or transporter (e.g., with telephone conversations). If the 
discrepancy is not resolved within 15 days after receiving the waste, 
the owner or operator must immediately submit to the Regional 
Administrator a letter describing the discrepancy and attempts to 
reconcile it, and a copy of the manifest or shipping paper at issue.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.73  Operating record.

    (a) The owner or operator must keep a written operating record at 
his facility.
    (b) The following information must be recorded, as it becomes 
available, and maintained in the operating record until closure of the 
facility:
    (1) A description and the quantity of each hazardous waste received, 
and the method(s) and date(s) of its treatment, storage, or disposal at 
the facility as required by appendix I;
    (2) The location of each hazardous waste within the facility and the 
quantity at each location. For disposal facilities, the location and 
quantity of

[[Page 394]]

each hazardous waste must be recorded on a map or diagram of each cell 
or disposal area. For all facilities, this information must include 
cross-references to specific manifest document numbers, if the waste was 
accompanied by a manifest;

[Comment: See Secs. 265.119, 265.279, and 265.309 for related 
requirements.]

    (3) Records and results of waste analysis, waste determinations, and 
trial tests performed as specified in Secs. 265.13, 265.200, 265.225, 
265.252, 265.273, 265.314, 265.341, 265.375, 265.402, 265.1034, 
265.1063, 265.1084, 268.4(a), and 268.7 of this chapter.
    (4) Summary reports and details of all incidents that require 
implementing the contingency plan as specified in Sec. 265.56(j);
    (5) Records and results of inspections as required by Sec. 265.15(d) 
(except these data need be kept only three years);
    (6) Monitoring, testing or analytical data, and corrective action 
where required by subpart F of this part and by Secs. 265.19, 265.90, 
265.94, 265.191, 265.193, 265.195, 265.222, 265.223, 265.226, 265.255, 
265.259, 265.260, 265.276, 265.278, 265.280(d)(1), 265.302 through 
265.304, 265.347, 265.377, 265.1034(c) through 265.1034(f), 265.1035, 
265.1063(d) through 265.1063(i), 265.1064, and 265.1083 through 265.1090 
of this part.

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.94, monitoring data at disposal 
facilities must be kept throughout the post-closure period.]

    (7) All closure cost estimates under Sec. 265.142 and, for disposal 
facilities, all post-closure cost estimates under Sec. 265.144.
    (8) Records of the quantities (and date of placement) for each 
shipment of hazardous waste placed in land disposal units under an 
extension to the effective date of any land disposal restriction granted 
pursuant to Sec. 268.5, monitoring data required pursuant to a petition 
under Sec. 268.6, or a certification under Sec. 268.8, and the 
applicable notice required by a generator under Sec. 268.7(a).
    (9) For an off-site treatment facility, a copy of the notice, and 
the certification and demonstration if applicable, required by the 
generator or the owner or operator under Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8;
    (10) For an on-site treatment facility, the information contained in 
the notice (except the manifest number), and the certification and 
demonstration if applicable, required by the generator or the owner or 
operator under Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8;
    (11) For an off-site land disposal facility, a copy of the notice, 
and the certification and demonstration if applicable, required by the 
generator or the owner or operator of a treatment facility under 
Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8;
    (12) For an on-site land disposal facility, the information 
contained in the notice (except the manifest number), and the 
certification and demonstration if applicable, required by the generator 
or the owner or operator of a treatment facility under Sec. 268.7 or 
Sec. 268.8.
    (13) For an off-site storage facility, a copy of the notice, and the 
certification and demonstration if applicable, required by the generator 
or the owner or operator under Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8; and
    (14) For an on-site storage facility, the information contained in 
the notice (except the manifest number), and the certification and 
demonstration if applicable, required by the generator or the owner or 
operator of a treatment facility under Sec. 268.7 or Sec. 268.8.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 50 
FR 18374, Apr. 30, 1985; 51 FR 40638, Nov. 7, 1986; 53 FR 31211, Aug. 
17, 1988; 54 FR 26648, June 23, 1989; 55 FR 25507, June 21, 1990; 56 FR 
19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 57 FR 3492, Jan. 29, 1992; 59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 
1994; 62 FR 64661, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.74  Availability, retention, and disposition of records.

    (a) All records, including plans, required under this part must be 
furnished upon request, and made available at all reasonable times for 
inspection, by any officer, employee, or representative of EPA who is 
duly designated by the Administrator.
    (b) The retention period for all records required under this part is 
extended automatically during the course of any unresolved enforcement 
action regarding the facility or as requested by the Administrator.
    (c) A copy of records of waste disposal locations and quantities 
under Sec. 265.73(b)(2) must be submitted to the Regional Administrator 
and local land

[[Page 395]]

authority upon closure of the facility (see Sec. 265.119).
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.75  Biennial report.

    The owner or operator must prepare and submit a single copy of a 
biennial report to the Regional Administrator by March 1 of each even 
numbered year. The biennial report must be submitted on EPA Form 8700-
13B. The report must cover facility activities during the previous 
calendar year and must include the following information:
    (a) The EPA identification number, name, and address of the 
facility;
    (b) The calendar year covered by the report;
    (c) For off-site facilities, the EPA identification number of each 
hazardous waste generator from which the facility received a hazardous 
waste during the year; for imported shipments, the report must give the 
name and address of the foreign generator;
    (d) A description and the quantity of each hazardous waste the 
facility received during the year. For off-site facilities, this 
information must be listed by EPA identification number of each 
generator;
    (e) The method of treatment, storage, or disposal for each hazardous 
waste;
    (f) Monitoring data under Sec. 265.94(a)(2)(ii) and (iii), and 
(b)(2), where required;
    (g) The most recent closure cost estimate under Sec. 265.142, and, 
for disposal facilities, the most recent post-closure cost estimate 
under Sec. 265.144; and
    (h) For generators who treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste 
on-site, a description of the efforts undertaken during the year to 
reduce the volume and toxicity of waste generated.
    (i) For generators who treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste 
on-site, a description of the changes in volume and toxicity of waste 
actually achieved during the year in comparison to previous years to the 
extent such information is available for the years prior to 1984.
    (j) The certification signed by the owner or operator of the 
facility or his authorized representative.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 3982, Jan. 28, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 51 FR 28556, Aug. 8, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 265.76  Unmanifested waste report.

    If a facility accepts for treatment, storage, or disposal any 
hazardous waste from an off-site source without an accompanying 
manifest, or without an accompanying shipping paper as described in 
Sec. 263.20(e)(2) of this chapter, and if the waste is not excluded from 
the manifest requirement by Sec. 261.5 of this chapter, then the owner 
or operator must prepare and submit a single copy of a report to the 
Regional Administrator within fifteen days after receiving the waste. 
The unmanifested waste report must be submitted on EPA form 8700-13B. 
Such report must be designated `Unmanifested Waste Report' and include 
the following information:
    (a) The EPA identification number, name, and address of the 
facility;
    (b) The date the facility received the waste;
    (c) The EPA identification number, name, and address of the 
generator and the transporter, if available;
    (d) A description and the quantity of each unmanifested hazardous 
waste the facility received;
    (e) The method of treatment, storage, or disposal for each hazardous 
waste;
    (f) The certification signed by the owner or operator of the 
facility or his authorized representative; and
    (g) A brief explanation of why the waste was unmanifested, if known.

[Comment: Small quantities of hazardous waste are excluded from 
regulation under this part and do not require a manifest. Where a 
facility receives unmanifested hazardous wastes, the Agency suggests 
that the owner or operator obtain from each generator a certification 
that the waste qualifies for exclusion. Otherwise, the Agency suggests 
that the owner or operator file an unmanifested waste report for the 
hazardous waste movement.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 3982, Jan. 28, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]

[[Page 396]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.77  Additional reports.

    In addition to submitting the biennial report and unmanifested waste 
reports described in Secs. 265.75 and 265.76, the owner or operator must 
also report to the Regional Administrator:
    (a) Releases, fires, and explosions as specified in Sec. 265.56(j);
    (b) Ground-water contamination and monitoring data as specified in 
Secs. 265.93 and 265.94; and
    (c) Facility closure as specified in Sec. 265.115.
    (d) As otherwise required by Subparts AA, BB, and CC of this part.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 3982, Jan. 28, 1983; 55 
FR 25507, June 21, 1990; 59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994]


<R04>
                   Subpart F--Ground-Water Monitoring


<R05>
Sec. 265.90  Applicability.

    (a) Within one year after the effective date of these regulations, 
the owner or operator of a surface impoundment, landfill, or land 
treatment facility which is used to manage hazardous waste must 
implement a ground-water monitoring program capable of determining the 
facility's impact on the quality of ground water in the uppermost 
aquifer underlying the facility, except as Sec. 265.1 and paragraph (c) 
of this section provide otherwise.
    (b) Except as paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section provide 
otherwise, the owner or operator must install, operate, and maintain a 
ground-water monitoring system which meets the requirements of 
Sec. 265.91, and must comply with Secs. 265.92 through 265.94. This 
ground-water monitoring program must be carried out during the active 
life of the facility, and for disposal facilities, during the post-
closure care period as well.
    (c) All or part of the ground-water monitoring requirements of this 
subpart may be waived if the owner or operator can demonstrate that 
there is a low potential for migration of hazardous waste or hazardous 
waste constituents from the facility via the uppermost aquifer to water 
supply wells (domestic, industrial, or agricultural) or to surface 
water. This demonstration must be in writing, and must be kept at the 
facility. This demonstration must be certified by a qualified geologist 
or geotechnical engineer and must establish the following:
    (1) The potential for migration of hazardous waste or hazardous 
waste constituents from the facility to the uppermost aquifer, by an 
evaluation of:
    (i) A water balance of precipitation, evapotranspiration, runoff, 
and infiltration; and
    (ii) Unsaturated zone characteristics (i.e., geologic materials, 
physical properties, and depth to ground water); and
    (2) The potential for hazardous waste or hazardous waste 
constituents which enter the uppermost aquifer to migrate to a water 
supply well or surface water, by an evaluation of:
    (i) Saturated zone characteristics (i.e., geologic materials, 
physical properties, and rate of ground-water flow); and
    (ii) The proximity of the facility to water supply wells or surface 
water.
    (d) If an owner or operator assumes (or knows) that ground-water 
monitoring of indicator parameters in accordance with Secs. 265.91 and 
265.92 would show statistically significant increases (or decreases in 
the case of pH) when evaluated under Sec. 265.93(b), he may, install, 
operate, and maintain an alternate ground-water monitoring system (other 
than the one described in Secs. 265.91 and 265.92). If the owner or 
operator decides to use an alternate ground-water monitoring system he 
must:
    (1) Within one year after the effective date of these regulations, 
submit to the Regional Administrator a specific plan, certified by a 
qualified geologist or geotechnical engineer, which satisfies the 
requirements of Sec. 265.93(d)(3), for an alternate ground-water 
monitoring system;
    (2) Not later than one year after the effective date of these 
regulations, initiate the determinations specified in Sec. 265.93(d)(4);
    (3) Prepare and submit a written report in accordance with 
Sec. 265.93(d)(5);
    (4) Continue to make the determinations specified in 
Sec. 265.93(d)(4) on a quarterly basis until final closure of the 
facility; and

[[Page 397]]

    (5) Comply with the recordkeeping and reporting requirements in 
Sec. 265.94(b).
    (e) The ground-water monitoring requirements of this subpart may be 
waived with respect to any surface impoundment that (1) Is used to 
neutralize wastes which are hazardous solely because they exhibit the 
corrosivity characteristic under Sec. 261.22 of this chapter or are 
listed as hazardous wastes in subpart D of part 261 of this chapter only 
for this reason, and (2) contains no other hazardous wastes, if the 
owner or operator can demonstrate that there is no potential for 
migration of hazardous wastes from the impoundment. The demonstration 
must establish, based upon consideration of the characteristics of the 
wastes and the impoundment, that the corrosive wastes will be 
neutralized to the extent that they no longer meet the corrosivity 
characteristic before they can migrate out of the impoundment. The 
demonstration must be in writing and must be certified by a qualified 
professional.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 1255, Jan. 11, 1982; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.91  Ground-water monitoring system.

    (a) A ground-water monitoring system must be capable of yielding 
ground-water samples for analysis and must consist of:
    (1) Monitoring wells (at least one) installed hydraulically 
upgradient (i.e., in the direction of increasing static head) from the 
limit of the waste management area. Their number, locations, and depths 
must be sufficient to yield ground-water samples that are:
    (i) Representative of background ground-water quality in the 
uppermost aquifer near the facility; and
    (ii) Not affected by the facility; and
    (2) Monitoring wells (at least three) installed hydraulically 
downgradient (i.e., in the direction of decreasing static head) at the 
limit of the waste management area. Their number, locations, and depths 
must ensure that they immediately detect any statistically significant 
amounts of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents that migrate 
from the waste management area to the uppermost aquifer.
    (3) The facility owner or operator may demonstrate that an alternate 
hydraulically downgradient monitoring well location will meet the 
criteria outlined below. The demonstration must be in writing and kept 
at the facility. The demonstration must be certified by a qualified 
ground-water scientist and establish that:
    (i) An existing physical obstacle prevents monitoring well 
installation at the hydraulically downgradient limit of the waste 
management area; and
    (ii) The selected alternate downgradient location is as close to the 
limit of the waste management area as practical; and
    (iii) The location ensures detection that, given the alternate 
location, is as early as possible of any statistically significant 
amounts of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents that migrate 
from the waste management area to the uppermost aquifer.
    (iv) Lateral expansion, new, or replacement units are not eligible 
for an alternate downgradient location under this paragraph.
    (b) Separate monitoring systems for each waste management component 
of a facility are not required provided that provisions for sampling 
upgradient and downgradient water quality will detect any discharge from 
the waste management area.
    (1) In the case of a facility consisting of only one surface 
impoundment, landfill, or land treatment area, the waste management area 
is described by the waste boundary (perimeter).
    (2) In the case of a facility consisting of more than one surface 
impoundment, landfill, or land treatment area, the waste management area 
is described by an imaginary boundary line which circumscribes the 
several waste management components.
    (c) All monitoring wells must be cased in a manner that maintains 
the integrity of the monitoring well bore hole. This casing must be 
screened or perforated, and packed with gravel or sand where necessary, 
to enable sample collection at depths where appropriate aquifer flow 
zones exist. The annular space (i.e., the space between the bore

[[Page 398]]

hole and well casing) above the sampling depth must be sealed with a 
suitable material (e.g., cement grout or bentonite slurry) to prevent 
contamination of samples and the ground water.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 56 
FR 66369, Dec. 23, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 265.92  Sampling and analysis.

    (a) The owner or operator must obtain and analyze samples from the 
installed ground-water monitoring system. The owner or operator must 
develop and follow a ground-water sampling and analysis plan. He must 
keep this plan at the facility. The plan must include procedures and 
techniques for:
    (1) Sample collection;
    (2) Sample preservation and shipment;
    (3) Analytical procedures; and
    (4) Chain of custody control.

[Comment: See ``Procedures Manual For Ground-water Monitoring At Solid 
Waste Disposal Facilities,'' EPA-530/SW-611, August 1977 and ``Methods 
for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,'' EPA-600/4-79-020, March 
1979 for discussions of sampling and analysis procedures.]

    (b) The owner or operator must determine the concentration or value 
of the following parameters in ground-water samples in accordance with 
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section:
    (1) Parameters characterizing the suitability of the ground water as 
a drinking water supply, as specified in appendix III.
    (2) Parameters establishing ground-water quality:
    (i) Chloride
    (ii) Iron
    (iii) Manganese
    (iv) Phenols
    (v) Sodium
    (vi) Sulfate

[Comment: These parameters are to be used as a basis for comparison in 
the event a ground-water quality assessment is required under 
Sec. 265.93(d).]

    (3) Parameters used as indicators of ground-water contamination:
    (i) pH
    (ii) Specific Conductance
    (iii) Total Organic Carbon
    (iv) Total Organic Halogen
    (c)(1) For all monitoring wells, the owner or operator must 
establish initial background concentrations or values of all parameters 
specified in paragraph (b) of this section. He must do this quarterly 
for one year.
    (2) For each of the indicator parameters specified in paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section, at least four replicate measurements must be 
obtained for each sample and the initial background arithmetic mean and 
variance must be determined by pooling the replicate measurements for 
the respective parameter concentrations or values in samples obtained 
from upgradient wells during the first year.
    (d) After the first year, all monitoring wells must be sampled and 
the samples analyzed with the following frequencies:
    (1) Samples collected to establish ground-water quality must be 
obtained and analyzed for the parameters specified in paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section at least annually.
    (2) Samples collected to indicate ground-water contamination must be 
obtained and analyzed for the parameters specified in paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section at least semi-annually.
    (e) Elevation of the ground-water surface at each monitoring well 
must be determined each time a sample is obtained.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.93  Preparation, evaluation, and response.

    (a) Within one year after the effective date of these regulations, 
the owner or operator must prepare an outline of a ground-water quality 
assessment program. The outline must describe a more comprehensive 
ground-water monitoring program (than that described in Secs. 265.91 and 
265.92) capable of determining:
    (1) Whether hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents have 
entered the ground water;
    (2) The rate and extent of migration of hazardous waste or hazardous 
waste constituents in the ground water; and
    (3) The concentrations of hazardous waste or hazardous waste 
constituents in the ground water.

[[Page 399]]

    (b) For each indicator parameter specified in Sec. 265.92(b)(3), the 
owner or operator must calculate the arithmetic mean and variance, based 
on at least four replicate measurements on each sample, for each well 
monitored in accordance with Sec. 265.92(d)(2), and compare these 
results with its initial background arithmetic mean. The comparison must 
consider individually each of the wells in the monitoring system, and 
must use the Student's t-test at the 0.01 level of significance (see 
appendix IV) to determine statistically significant increases (and 
decreases, in the case of pH) over initial background.
    (c)(1) If the comparisons for the upgradient wells made under 
paragraph (b) of this section show a significant increase (or pH 
decrease), the owner or operator must submit this information in 
accordance with Sec. 265.94(a)(2)(ii).
    (2) If the comparisons for downgradient wells made under paragraph 
(b) of this section show a significant increase (or pH decrease), the 
owner or operator must then immediately obtain additional ground-water 
samples from those downgradient wells where a significant difference was 
detected, split the samples in two, and obtain analyses of all 
additional samples to determine whether the significant difference was a 
result of laboratory error.
    (d)(1) If the analyses performed under paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section confirm the significant increase (or pH decrease), the owner or 
operator must provide written notice to the Regional Administrator--
within seven days of the date of such confirmation--that the facility 
may be affecting ground-water quality.
    (2) Within 15 days after the notification under paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section, the owner or operator must develop and submit to the 
Regional Administrator a specific plan, based on the outline required 
under paragraph (a) of this section and certified by a qualified 
geologist or geotechnical engineer, for a ground-water quality 
assessment program at the facility.
    (3) The plan to be submitted under Sec. 265.90(d)(1) or paragraph 
(d)(2) of this section must specify:
    (i) The number, location, and depth of wells;
    (ii) Sampling and analytical methods for those hazardous wastes or 
hazardous waste constituents in the facility;
    (iii) Evaluation procedures, including any use of previously-
gathered ground-water quality information; and
    (iv) A schedule of implementation.
    (4) The owner or operator must implement the ground-water quality 
assessment plan which satisfies the requirements of paragraph (d)(3) of 
this section, and, at a minimum, determine:
    (i) The rate and extent of migration of the hazardous waste or 
hazardous waste constituents in the ground water; and
    (ii) The concentrations of the hazardous waste or hazardous waste 
constituents in the ground water.
    (5) The owner or operator must make his first determination under 
paragraph (d)(4) of this section as soon as technically feasible, and, 
within 15 days after that determination, submit to the Regional 
Administrator a written report containing an assessment of the ground-
water quality.
    (6) If the owner or operator determines, based on the results of the 
first determination under paragraph (d)(4) of this section, that no 
hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents from the facility have 
entered the ground water, then he may reinstate the indicator evaluation 
program described in Sec. 265.92 and paragraph (b) of this section. If 
the owner or operator reinstates the indicator evaluation program, he 
must so notify the Regional Administrator in the report submitted under 
paragraph (d)(5) of this section.
    (7) If the owner or operator determines, based on the first 
determination under paragraph (d)(4) of this section, that hazardous 
waste or hazardous waste constituents from the facility have entered the 
ground water, then he:
    (i) Must continue to make the determinations required under 
paragraph (d)(4) of this section on a quarterly basis until final 
closure of the facility, if the ground-water quality assessment plan was 
implemented prior to final closure of the facility; or
    (ii) May cease to make the determinations required under paragraph 
(d)(4) of this section, if the ground-

[[Page 400]]

water quality assessment plan was implemented during the post-closure 
care period.
    (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subpart, any ground-
water quality assessment to satisfy the requirements of 
Sec. 265.93(d)(4) which is initiated prior to final closure of the 
facility must be completed and reported in accordance with 
Sec. 265.93(d)(5).
    (f) Unless the ground water is monitored to satisfy the requirements 
of Sec. 265.93(d)(4), at least annually the owner or operator must 
evaluate the data on ground-water surface elevations obtained under 
Sec. 265.92(e) to determine whether the requirements under 
Sec. 265.91(a) for locating the monitoring wells continues to be 
satisfied. If the evaluation shows that Sec. 265.91(a) is no longer 
satisfied, the owner or operator must immediately modify the number, 
location, or depth of the monitoring wells to bring the ground-water 
monitoring system into compliance with this requirement.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.94  Recordkeeping and reporting.

    (a) Unless the ground water is monitored to satisfy the requirements 
of Sec. 265.93(d)(4), the owner or operator must:
    (1) Keep records of the analyses required in Sec. 265.92(c) and (d), 
the associated ground-water surface elevations required in 
Sec. 265.92(e), and the evaluations required in Sec. 265.93(b) 
throughout the active life of the facility, and, for disposal 
facilities, throughout the post-closure care period as well; and
    (2) Report the following ground-water monitoring information to the 
Regional Administrator:
    (i) During the first year when initial background concentrations are 
being established for the facility: concentrations or values of the 
parameters listed in Sec. 265.92(b)(1) for each ground-water monitoring 
well within 15 days after completing each quarterly analysis. The owner 
or operator must separately identify for each monitoring well any 
parameters whose concentration or value has been found to exceed the 
maximum contaminant levels listed in appendix III.
    (ii) Annually: Concentrations or values of the parameters listed in 
Sec. 265.92(b)(3) for each ground-water monitoring well, along with the 
required evaluations for these parameters under Sec. 265.93(b). The 
owner or operator must separately identify any significant differences 
from initial background found in the upgradient wells, in accordance 
with Sec. 265.93(c)(1). During the active life of the facility, this 
information must be submitted no later than March 1 following each 
calendar year.
    (iii) No later than March 1 following each calendar year: Results of 
the evaluations of ground-water surface elevations under Sec. 265.93(f), 
and a description of the response to that evaluation, where applicable.
    (b) If the ground water is monitored to satisfy the requirements of 
Sec. 265.93(d)(4), the owner or operator must:
    (1) Keep records of the analyses and evaluations specified in the 
plan, which satisfies the requirements of Sec. 265.93(d)(3), throughout 
the active life of the facility, and, for disposal facilities, 
throughout the post-closure care period as well; and
    (2) Annually, until final closure of the facility, submit to the 
Regional Administrator a report containing the results of his or her 
ground-water quality assessment program which includes, but is not 
limited to, the calculated (or measured) rate of migration of hazardous 
waste or hazardous waste constituents in the ground water during the 
reporting period. This information must be submitted no later than March 
1 following each calendar year.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 3982, Jan. 28, 1983; 50 
FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985]


<R04>
                   Subpart G--Closure and Post-Closure

    Source: 51 FR 16451, May 2, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.110  Applicability.

    Except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise:
    (a) Sections 265.111 through 265.115 (which concern closure) apply 
to the

[[Page 401]]

owners and operators of all hazardous waste management facilities; and
    (b) Sections 265.116 through 265.120 (which concern post-closure 
care) apply to the owners and operators of:
    (1) All hazardous waste disposal facilities;
    (2) Waste piles and surface impoundments for which the owner or 
operator intends to remove the wastes at closure to the extent that 
these sections are made applicable to such facilities in Sec. 265.228 or 
Sec. 265.258;
    (3) Tank systems that are required under Sec. 265.197 to meet 
requirements for landfills; and
    (4) Containment building that are required under Sec. 265.1102 to 
meet the requirement for landfills.
[51 FR 16451, May 2, 1986, as amended at 51 FR 25479, July 14, 1986; 53 
FR 34086, Sept. 2, 1988; 57 FR 37267, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.111  Closure performance standard.

    The owner or operator must close the facility in a manner that:
    (a) Minimizes the need for further maintenance, and
    (b) Controls, minimizes or eliminates, to the extent necessary to 
protect human health and the environment, post-closure escape of 
hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, leachate, contaminated run-off, 
or hazardous waste decomposition products to the ground or surface 
waters or to the atmosphere, and
    (c) Complies with the closure requirements of this subpart, 
including, but not limited to, the requirements of Secs. 265.197, 
265.228, 265.258, 265.280, 265.310, 265.351, 265.381, 265.404, and 
264.1102.
[51 FR 16451, May 2, 1986, as amended at 57 FR 37267, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.112  Closure plan; amendment of plan.

    (a) Written plan. By May 19, 1981, or by six months after the 
effective date of the rule that first subjects a facility to provisions 
of this section, the owner or operator of a hazardous waste management 
facility must have a written closure plan. Until final closure is 
completed and certified in accordance with Sec. 265.115, a copy of the 
most current plan must be furnished to the Regional Administrator upon 
request, including request by mail. In addition, for facilities without 
approved plans, it must also be provided during site inspections, on the 
day of inspection, to any officer, employee, or representative of the 
Agency who is duly designated by the Administrator.
    (b) Content of plan. The plan must identify steps necessary to 
perform partial and/or final closure of the facility at any point during 
its active life. The closure plan must include, at least:
    (1) A description of how each hazardous waste management unit at the 
facility will be closed in accordance with Sec. 265.111; and
    (2) A description of how final closure of the facility will be 
conducted in accordance with Sec. 265.111. The description must identify 
the maximum extent of the operation which will be unclosed during the 
active life of the facility; and
    (3) An estimate of the maximum inventory of hazardous wastes ever 
on-site over the active life of the facility and a detailed description 
of the methods to be used during partial and final closure, including, 
but not limited to methods for removing, transporting, treating, storing 
or disposing of all hazardous waste, identification of and the type(s) 
of off-site hazardous waste management unit(s) to be used, if 
applicable; and
    (4) A detailed description of the steps needed to remove or 
decontaminate all hazardous waste residues and contaminated containment 
system components, equipment, structures, and soils during partial and 
final closure including, but not limited to, procedures for cleaning 
equipment and removing contaminated soils, methods for sampling and 
testing surrounding soils, and criteria for determining the extent of 
decontamination necessary to satisfy the closure performance standard; 
and
    (5) A detailed description of other activities necessary during the 
partial and final closure period to ensure that all partial closures and 
final closure satisfy the closure performance standards, including, but 
not limited to, ground-water monitoring, leachate collection, and run-on 
and run-off control; and
    (6) A schedule for closure of each hazardous waste management unit 
and for

[[Page 402]]

final closure of the facility. The schedule must include, at a minimum, 
the total time required to close each hazardous waste management unit 
and the time required for intervening closure activities which will 
allow tracking of the progress of partial and final closure. (For 
example, in the case of a landfill unit, estimates of the time required 
to treat or dispose of all hazardous waste inventory and of the time 
required to place a final cover must be included.); and
    (7) An estimate of the expected year of final closure for facilities 
that use trust funds to demonstrate financial assurance under 
Sec. 265.143 or Sec. 265.145 and whose remaining operating life is less 
than twenty years, and for facilities without approved closure plans.
    (c) Amendment of plan. The owner or operator may amend the closure 
plan at any time prior to the notification of partial or final closure 
of the facility. An owner or operator with an approved closure plan must 
submit a written request to the Regional Administrator to authorize a 
change to the approved closure plan. The written request must include a 
copy of the amended closure plan for approval by the Regional 
Administrator.
    (1) The owner or operator must amend the closure plan whenever:
    (i) Changes in operating plans or facility design affect the closure 
plan, or
    (ii) There is a change in the expected year of closure, if 
applicable, or
    (iii) In conducting partial or final closure activities, unexpected 
events require a modification of the closure plan.
    (2) The owner or operator must amend the closure plan at least 60 
days prior to the proposed change in facility design or operation, or no 
later than 60 days after an unexpected event has occurred which has 
affected the closure plan. If an unexpected event occurs during the 
partial or final closure period, the owner or operator must amend the 
closure plan no later than 30 days after the unexpected event. These 
provisions also apply to owners or operators of surface impoundments and 
waste piles who intended to remove all hazardous wastes at closure, but 
are required to close as landfills in accordance with Sec. 265.310.
    (3) An owner or operator with an approved closure plan must submit 
the modified plan to the Regional Administrator at least 60 days prior 
to the proposed change in facility design or operation, or no more than 
60 days after an unexpected event has occurred which has affected the 
closure plan. If an unexpected event has occurred during the partial or 
final closure period, the owner or operator must submit the modified 
plan no more than 30 days after the unexpected event. These provisions 
also apply to owners or operators of surface impoundments and waste 
piles who intended to remove all hazardous wastes at closure but are 
required to close as landfills in accordance with Sec. 265.310. If the 
amendment to the plan is a Class 2 or 3 modification according to the 
criteria in Sec. 270.42, the modification to the plan will be approved 
according to the procedures in Sec. 265.112(d)(4).
    (4) The Regional Administrator may request modifications to the plan 
under the conditions described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section. An 
owner or operator with an approved closure plan must submit the modified 
plan within 60 days of the request from the Regional Administrator, or 
within 30 days if the unexpected event occurs during partial or final 
closure. If the amendment is considered a Class 2 or 3 modification 
according to the criteria in Sec. 270.42, the modification to the plan 
will be approved in accordance with the procedures in 
Sec. 265.112(d)(4).
    (d) Notification of partial closure and final closure. (1) The owner 
or operator must submit the closure plan to the Regional Administrator 
at least 180 days prior to the date on which he expects to begin closure 
of the first surface impoundment, waste pile, land treatment, or 
landfill unit, or final closure if it involves such a unit, whichever is 
earlier. The owner or operator must submit the closure plan to the 
Regional Administrator at least 45 days prior to the date on which he 
expects to begin partial or final closure of a boiler or industrial 
furnace. The owner or operator must submit the closure plan to the 
Regional Administrator at least 45 days prior to the date

[[Page 403]]

on which he expects to begin final closure of a facility with only 
tanks, container storage, or incinerator units. Owners or operators with 
approved closure plans must notify the Regional Administrator in writing 
at least 60 days prior to the date on which he expects to begin closure 
of a surface impoundment, waste pile, landfill, or land treatment unit, 
or final closure of a facility involving such a unit. Owners or 
operators with approved closure plans must notify the Regional 
Administrator in writing at least 45 days prior to the date on which he 
expects to begin partial or final closure of a boiler or industrial 
furnace. Owners or operators with approved closure plans must notify the 
Regional Administrator in writing at least 45 days prior to the date on 
which he expects to begin final closure of a facility with only tanks, 
container storage, or incinerator units.
    (2) The date when he ``expects to begin closure'' must be either:
    (i) Within 30 days after the date on which any hazardous waste 
management unit receives the known final volume of hazardous wastes, or, 
if there is a reasonable possibility that the hazardous waste management 
unit will receive additional hazardous wastes, no later than one year 
after the date on which the unit received the most recent volume of 
hazardous waste. If the owner or operator of a hazardous waste 
management unit can demonstrate to the Regional Administrator that the 
hazardous waste management unit or facility has the capacity to receive 
additional hazardous wastes and he has taken, and will continue to take, 
all steps to prevent threats to human health and the environment, 
including compliance with all interim status requirements, the Regional 
Administrator may approve an extension to this one-year limit; or
    (ii) For units meeting the requirements of Sec. 265.113(d), no later 
than 30 days after the date on which the hazardous waste management unit 
receives the known final volume of nonhazardous wastes, or if there is a 
reasonable possibility that the hazardous waste management unit will 
receive additional nonhazardous wastes, no later than one year after the 
date on which the unit received the most recent volume of nonhazardous 
wastes. If the owner or operator can demonstrate to the Regional 
Administrator that the hazardous waste management unit has the capacity 
to receive additional nonhazardous wastes and he has taken, and will 
continue to take, all steps to prevent threats to human health and the 
environment, including compliance with all applicable interim status 
requirements, the Regional Administrator may approve an extension to 
this one-year limit.
    (3) The owner or operator must submit his closure plan to the 
Regional Administrator no later than 15 days after:
    (i) Termination of interim status except when a permit is issued 
simultaneously with termination of interim status; or
    (ii) Issuance of a judicial decree or final order under section 3008 
of RCRA to cease receiving hazardous wastes or close.
    (4) The Regional Administrator will provide the owner or operator 
and the public, through a newspaper notice, the opportunity to submit 
written comments on the plan and request modifications to the plan no 
later than 30 days from the date of the notice. He will also, in 
response to a request or at his own discretion, hold a public hearing 
whenever such a hearing might clarify one or more issues concerning a 
closure plan. The Regional Administrator will give public notice of the 
hearing at least 30 days before it occurs. (Public notice of the hearing 
may be given at the same time as notice of the opportunity for the 
public to submit written comments, and the two notices may be combined.) 
The Regional Administrator will approve, modify, or disapprove the plan 
within 90 days of its receipt. If the Regional Administrator does not 
approve the plan he shall provide the owner or operator with a detailed 
written statement of reasons for the refusal and the owner or operator 
must modify the plan or submit a new plan for approval within 30 days 
after receiving such written statement. The Regional Administrator will 
approve or modify this plan in writing within 60 days. If the Regional 
Administrator modifies the plan, this modified plan becomes the

[[Page 404]]

approved closure plan. The Regional Administrator must assure that the 
approved plan is consistent with Secs.  with 265.111 through 265.115 and 
the applicable requirements of subpart F of this part, Secs. 265.197, 
265.228, 265.258, 265.280, 265.310, 265.351, 265.381, 265.404, and 
264.1102. A copy of the modified plan with a detailed statement of 
reasons for the modifications must be mailed to the owner or operator.
    (e) Removal of wastes and decontamination or dismantling of 
equipment. Nothing in this section shall preclude the owner or operator 
from removing hazardous wastes and decontaminating or dismantling 
equipment in accordance with the approved partial or final closure plan 
at any time before or after notification of partial or final closure.
[51 FR 16451, May 2, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 37935, Sept. 28, 1988; 56 
FR 7207, Feb. 21, 1991; 56 FR 42512, Aug. 27, 1991; 57 FR 37267, Aug. 
18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.113  Closure; time allowed for closure.

    (a) Within 90 days after receiving the final volume of hazardous 
wastes, or the final volume of nonhazardous wastes if the owner or 
operator complies with all applicable requirements in paragraphs (d) and 
(e) of this section, at a hazardous waste management unit or facility, 
or within 90 days after approval of the closure plan, whichever is 
later, the owner or operator must treat, remove from the unit or 
facility, or dispose of on-site, all hazardous wastes in accordance with 
the approved closure plan. The Regional Administrator may approve a 
longer period if the owner or operator demonstrates that:
    (1)(i) The activities required to comply with this paragraph will, 
of necessity, take longer than 90 days to complete; or
    (ii)(A) The hazardous waste management unit or facility has the 
capacity to receive additional hazardous wastes, or has the capacity to 
receive non-hazardous wastes if the facility owner or operator complies 
with paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section; and
    (B) There is a reasonable likelihood that he or another person will 
recommence operation of the hazardous waste management unit or the 
facility within one year; and
    (C) Closure of the hazardous waste management unit or facility would 
be incompatible with continued operation of the site; and
    (2) He has taken and will continue to take all steps to prevent 
threats to human health and the environment, including compliance with 
all applicable interim status requirements.
    (b) The owner or operator must complete partial and final closure 
activities in accordance with the approved closure plan and within 180 
days after receiving the final volume of hazardous wastes, or the final 
volume of nonhazardous wastes if the owner or operator complies with all 
applicable requirements in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, at 
the hazardous waste management unit or facility, or 180 days after 
approval of the closure plan, if that is later. The Regional 
Administrator may approve an extenstion to the closure period if the 
owner or operator demonstrates that:
    (1)(i) The partial or final closure activities will, of necessity, 
take longer than 180 days to complete; or
    (ii)(A) The hazardous waste management unit or facility has the 
capacity to receive additional hazardous wastes, or has the capacity to 
receive non-hazardous wastes if the facility owner or operator complies 
with paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section; and
    (B) There is reasonable likelihood that he or another person will 
recommence operation of the hazardous waste management unit or the 
facility within one year; and
    (C) Closure of the hazardous waste management unit or facility would 
be incompatible with continued operation of the site; and
    (2) He has taken and will continue to take all steps to prevent 
threats to human health and the environment from the unclosed but not 
operating hazardous waste management unit or facility, including 
compliance with all applicable interim status requirements.
    (c) The demonstrations referred to in paragraphs (a)(1) and (b)(1) 
of this section must be made as follows:
    (1) The demonstrations in paragraph (a)(1) of this section must be 
made at

[[Page 405]]

least 30 days prior to the expiration of the 90-day period in paragraph 
(a) of this section; and
    (2) The demonstration in paragraph (b)(1) of this section must be 
made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the 180-day period in 
paragraph (b) of this section, unless the owner or operator is otherwise 
subject to the deadlines in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) The Regional Administrator may allow an owner or operator to 
receive non-hazardous wastes in a landfill, land treatment, or surface 
impoundment unit after the final receipt of hazardous wastes at that 
unit if:
    (1) The owner or operator submits an amended part B application, or 
a part B application, if not previously required, and demonstrates that:
    (i) The unit has the existing design capacity as indicated on the 
part A application to receive non-hazardous wastes; and
    (ii) There is a reasonable likelihood that the owner or operator or 
another person will receive non-hazardous wastes in the unit within one 
year after the final receipt of hazardous wastes; and
    (iii) The non-hazardous wastes will not be incompatible with any 
remaining wastes in the unit or with the facility design and operating 
requirements of the unit or facility under this part; and
    (iv) Closure of the hazardous waste management unit would be 
incompatible with continued operation of the unit or facility; and
    (v) The owner or operator is operating and will continue to operate 
in compliance with all applicable interim status requirements; and
    (2) The part B application includes an amended waste analysis plan, 
ground-water monitoring and response program, human exposure assessment 
required under RCRA section 3019, and closure and post-closure plans, 
and updated cost estimates and demonstrations of financial assurance for 
closure and post-closure care as necessary and appropriate to reflect 
any changes due to the presence of hazardous constituents in the non-
hazardous wastes, and changes in closure activities, including the 
expected year of closure if applicable under Sec. 265.112(b)(7), as a 
result of the receipt of non-hazardous wastes following the final 
receipt of hazardous wastes; and
    (3) The part B application is amended, as necessary and appropriate, 
to account for the receipt of non-hazardous wastes following receipt of 
the final volume of hazardous wastes; and
    (4) The part B application and the demonstrations referred to in 
paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section are submitted to the 
Regional Administrator no later than 180 days prior to the date on which 
the owner or operator of the facility receives the known final volume of 
hazardous wastes, or no later than 90 days after the effective date of 
this rule in the state in which the unit is located, whichever is later.
    (e) In addition to the requirements in paragraph (d) of this 
section, an owner or operator of a hazardous waste surface impoundment 
that is not in compliance with the liner and leachate collection system 
requirements in 42 U.S.C. 3004(o)(1) and 3005(j)(1) or 42 U.S.C. 
3004(o)(2) or (3) or 3005(j) (2), (3), (4) or (13) must:
    (1) Submit with the part B application:
    (i) A contingent corrective measures plan; and
    (ii) A plan for removing hazardous wastes in compliance with 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section; and
    (2) Remove all hazardous wastes from the unit by removing all 
hazardous liquids and removing all hazardous sludges to the extent 
practicable without impairing the integrity of the liner(s), if any.
    (3) Removal of hazardous wastes must be completed no later than 90 
days after the final receipt of hazardous wastes. The Regional 
Administrator may approve an extension to this deadline if the owner or 
operator demonstrates that the removal of hazardous wastes will, of 
necessity, take longer than the allotted period to complete and that an 
extension will not pose a threat to human health and the environment.
    (4) If a release that is a statistically significant increase (or 
decrease in the case of pH) in hazardous oonstituents over background 
levels is detected in accordance with the requirements in

[[Page 406]]

subpart F of this part, the owner or operator of the unit:
    (i) Must implement corrective measures in accordance with the 
approved contingent corrective measures plan required by paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section no later than one year after detection of the 
release, or approval of the contingent corrective measures plan, 
whichever is later;
    (ii) May receive wastes at the unit following detection of the 
release only if the approved corrective measures plan includes a 
demonstration that continued receipt of wastes will not impede 
corrective action; and
    (iii) May be required by the Regional Administrator to implement 
corrective measures in less than one year or to cease receipt of wastes 
until corrective measures have been implemented if necessary to protect 
human health and the environment.
    (5) During the period of corrective action, the owner or operator 
shall provide semi-annual reports to the Regional Administrator that 
describe the progress of the corrective action program, compile all 
ground-water monitoring data, and evaluate the effect of the continued 
receipt of non-hazardous wastes on the effectiveness of the corrective 
action.
    (6) The Regional Administrator may require the owner or operator to 
commence closure of the unit if the owner or operator fails to implement 
corrective action measures in accordance with the approved contingent 
corrective measures plan within one year as required in paragraph (e)(4) 
of this section, or fails to make substantial progress in implementing 
corrective action and achieving the facility's background levels.
    (7) If the owner or operator fails to implement corrective measures 
as required in paragraph (e)(4) of this section, or if the Regional 
Administrator determines that substantial progress has not been made 
pursuant to paragraph (e)(6) of this section he shall:
    (i) Notify the owner or operator in writing that the owner or 
operator must begin closure in accordance with the deadline in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section and provide a detailed statement 
of reasons for this determination, and
    (ii) Provide the owner or operator and the public, through a 
newspaper notice, the opportunity to submit written comments on the 
decision no later than 20 days after the date of the notice.
    (iii) If the Regional Administrator receives no written comments, 
the decision will become final five days after the close of the comment 
period. The Regional Administrator will notify the owner or operator 
that the decision is final, and that a revised closure plan, if 
necessary, must be submitted within 15 days of the final notice and that 
closure must begin in accordance with the deadlines in paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this section.
    (iv) If the Regional Administrator receives written comments on the 
decision, he shall make a final decision within 30 days after the end of 
the comment period, and provide the owner or operator in writing and the 
public through a newspaper notice, a detailed statement of reasons for 
the final decision. If the Regional Administrator determines that 
substantial progress has not been made, closure must be initiated in 
accordance with the deadlines in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
    (v) The final determinations made by the Regional Administrator 
under paragraphs (e)(7) (iii) and (iv) of this section are not subject 
to administrative appeal.
[51 FR 16451, May 2, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 33396, Aug. 14, 1989; 56 
FR 42512, Aug. 27, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 265.114  Disposal or decontamination of equipment, structures and soils.

    During the partial and final closure periods, all contaminated 
equipment, structures and soil must be properly disposed of, or 
decontaminated unless specified otherwise in Secs. 265.197, 265.228, 
265.258, 265.280, or 265.310. By removing all hazardous wastes or 
hazardous constituents during partial and final closure, the owner or 
operator may become a generator of hazardous waste and must handle that 
hazardous waste in accordance with all applicable requirements of part 
262 of this chapter.
[51 FR 16451, May 2, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 34086, Sept. 2, 1988]

[[Page 407]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.115  Certification of closure.

    Within 60 days of completion of closure of each hazardous waste 
surface impoundment, waste pile, land treatment, and landfill unit, and 
within 60 days of completion of final closure, the owner or operator 
must submit to the Regional Administrator, by registered mail, a 
certification that the hazardous waste management unit or facility, as 
applicable, has been closed in accordance with the specifications in the 
approved closure plan. The certification must be signed by the owner or 
operator and by an independent registered professional engineer. 
Documentation supporting the independent registered professional 
engineer's certification must be furnished to the Regional Administrator 
upon request until he releases the owner or operator from the financial 
assurance requirements for closure under Sec. 265.143(h).


<R05>
Sec. 265.116  Survey plat.

    No later than the submission of the certification of closure of each 
hazardous waste disposal unit, an owner or operator must submit to the 
local zoning authority, or the authority with jurisdiction over local 
land use, and to the Regional Administrator, a survey plat indicating 
the location and dimensions of landfill cells or other hazardous waste 
disposal units with respect to permanently surveyed benchmarks. This 
plat must be prepared and certified by a professional land surveyor. The 
plat filed with the local zoning authority, or the authority with 
jurisdiction over local land use must contain a note, prominently 
displayed, which states the owner's or operator's obligation to restrict 
disturbance of the hazardous waste disposal unit in accordance with the 
applicable subpart G regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 265.117  Post-closure care and use of property.

    (a)(1) Post-closure care for each hazardous waste management unit 
subject to the requirements of Secs. 265.117 through 265.120 must begin 
after completion of closure of the unit and continue for 30 years after 
that date. It must consist of at least the following:
    (i) Monitoring and reporting in accordance with the requirements of 
subparts F, K, L, M, and N of this part; and
    (ii) Maintenance and monitoring of waste containment systems in 
accordance with the requirements of subparts F, K, L, M, and N of this 
part.
    (2) Any time preceding closure of a hazardous waste management unit 
subject to post-closure care requirements or final closure, or any time 
during the post-closure period for a particular hazardous waste disposal 
unit, the Regional Administrator may:
    (i) Shorten the post-closure care period applicable to the hazardous 
waste management unit, or facility, if all disposal units have been 
closed, if he finds that the reduced period is sufficient to protect 
human health and the environment (e.g., leachate or ground-water 
monitoring results, characteristics of the hazardous waste, application 
of advanced technology, or alternative disposal, treatment, or re-use 
techniques indicate that the hazardous waste management unit or facility 
is secure); or
    (ii) Extend the post-closure care period applicable to the hazardous 
waste management unit or facility, if he finds that the extended period 
is necessary to protect human health and the environment (e.g., leachate 
or ground-water monitoring results indicate a potential for migration of 
hazardous wastes at levels which may be harmful to human health and the 
environment).
    (b) The Regional Administator may require, at partial and final 
closure, continuation of any of the security requirements of Sec. 265.14 
during part or all of the post-closure period when:
    (1) Hazardous wastes may remain exposed after completion of partial 
or final closure; or
    (2) Access by the public or domestic livestock may pose a hazard to 
human health.
    (c) Post-closure use of property on or in which hazardous wastes 
remain after partial or final closure must never be allowed to disturb 
the integrity of the final cover, liner(s), or any other components of 
the containment system, or the function of the facility's monitoring 
systems, unless the Regional Administrator finds that the disturbance:
    (1) Is necessary to the proposed use of the property, and will not 
increase the

[[Page 408]]

potential hazard to human health or the environment; or
    (2) Is necessary to reduce a threat to human health or the 
environment.
    (d) All post-closure care activities must be in accordance with the 
provisions of the approved post-closure plan as specified in 
Sec. 265.118.


<R05>
Sec. 265.118  Post-closure plan; amendment of plan.

    (a) Written plan. By May 19, 1981, the owner or operator of a 
hazardous waste disposal unit must have a written post-closure plan. An 
owner or operator of a surface impoundment or waste pile that intends to 
remove all hazardous wastes at closure must prepare a post-closure plan 
and submit it to the Regional Administrator within 90 days of the date 
that the owner or operator or Regional Administrator determines that the 
hazardous waste management unit or facility must be closed as a 
landfill, subject to the requirements of Secs. 265.117 through 265.120.
    (b) Until final closure of the facility, a copy of the most current 
post-closure plan must be furnished to the Regional Administrator upon 
request, including request by mail. In addition, for facilities without 
approved post-closure plans, it must also be provided during site 
inspections, on the day of inspection, to any officer, employee or 
representative of the Agency who is duly designated by the 
Administrator. After final closure has been certified, the person or 
office specified in Sec. 265.118(c)(3) must keep the approved post-
closure plan during the post-closure period.
    (c) For each hazardous waste management unit subject to the 
requirements of this section, the post-closure plan must identify the 
activities that will be carried on after closure of each disposal unit 
and the frequency of these activities, and include at least:
    (1) A description of the planned monitoring activities and 
frequencies at which they will be performed to comply with subparts F, 
K, L, M, and N of this part during the post-closure care period; and
    (2) A description of the planned maintenance activities, and 
frequencies at which they will be performed, to ensure:
    (i) The integrity of the cap and final cover or other containment 
systems in accordance with the requirements of subparts K, L, M, and N 
of this part; and
    (ii) The function of the monitoring equipment in accordance with the 
requirements of subparts F, K, L, M, and N of this part; and
    (3) The name, address, and phone number of the person or office to 
contact about the hazardous waste disposal unit or facility during the 
post-closure care period.
    (d) Amendment of plan. The owner or operator may amend the post-
closure plan any time during the active life of the facility or during 
the post-closure care period. An owner or operator with an approved 
post-closure plan must submit a written request to the Regional 
Administrator to authorize a change to the approved plan. The written 
request must include a copy of the amended post-closure plan for 
approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (1) The owner or operator must amend the post-closure plan whenever:
    (i) Changes in operating plans or facility design affect the post-
closure plan, or
    (ii) Events which occur during the active life of the facility, 
including partial and final closures, affect the post-closure plan.
    (2) The owner or operator must amend the post-closure plan at least 
60 days prior to the proposed change in facility design or operation, or 
no later than 60 days after an unexpected event has occurred which has 
affected the post-closure plan.
    (3) An owner or operator with an approved post-closure plan must 
submit the modified plan to the Regional Administrator at least 60 days 
prior to the proposed change in facility design or operation, or no more 
than 60 days after an unexpected event has occurred which has affected 
the post-closure plan. If an owner or operator of a surface impoundment 
or a waste pile who intended to remove all hazardous wastes at closure 
in accordance with Sec. 265.228(b) or Sec. 265.258(a) is required to 
close as a landfill in accordance with Sec. 265.310, the owner or 
operator must submit a post-closure plan within 90 days of the 
determination by the owner

[[Page 409]]

or operator or Regional Administrator that the unit must be closed as a 
landfill. If the amendment to the post-closure plan is a Class 2 or 3 
modification according to the criteria in Sec. 270.42, the modification 
to the plan will be approved according to the procedures in 
Sec. 265.118(f).
    (4) The Regional Administrator may request modifications to the plan 
under the conditions described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. An 
owner or operator with an approved post-closure plan must submit the 
modified plan no later than 60 days of the request from the Regional 
Administrator. If the amendment to the plan is considered a Class 2 or 3 
modification according to the criteria in Sec. 270.42, the modifications 
to the post-closure plan will be approved in accordance with the 
procedures in Sec. 265.118(f). If the Regional Administrator determines 
that an owner or operator of a surface impoundment or waste pile who 
intended to remove all hazardous wastes at closure must close the 
facility as a landfill, the owner or operator must submit a post-closure 
plan for approval to the Regional Administrator within 90 days of the 
determination.
    (e) The owner or operator of a facility with hazardous waste 
management units subject to these requirements must submit his post-
closure plan to the Regional Administrator at least 180 days before the 
date he expects to begin partial or final closure of the first hazardous 
waste disposal unit. The date he ``expects to begin closure'' of the 
first hazardous waste disposal unit must be either within 30 days after 
the date on which the hazardous waste management unit receives the known 
final volume of hazardous waste or, if there is a reasonable possibility 
that the hazardous waste management unit will receive additional 
hazardous wastes, no later than one year after the date on which the 
unit received the most recent volume of hazardous wastes. The owner or 
operator must submit the post-closure plan to the Regional Administrator 
no later than 15 days after:
    (1) Termination of interim status (except when a permit is issued to 
the facility simultaneously with termination of interim status); or
    (2) Issuance of a judicial decree or final orders under section 3008 
of RCRA to cease receiving wastes or close.
    (f) The Regional Administrator will provide the owner or operator 
and the public, through a newspaper notice, the opportunity to submit 
written comments on the post-closure plan and request modifications to 
the plan no later than 30 days from the date of the notice. He will 
also, in response to a request or at his own discretion, hold a public 
hearing whenever such a hearing might clarify one or more issues 
concerning a post-closure plan. The Regional Administrator will give 
public notice of the hearing at least 30 days before it occurs. (Public 
notice of the hearing may be given at the same time as notice of the 
opportunity for the public to submit written comments, and the two 
notices may be combined.) The Regional Administrator will approve, 
modify, or disapprove the plan within 90 days of its receipt. If the 
Regional Administrator does not approve the plan he shall provide the 
owner or operator with a detailed written statement of reasons for the 
refusal and the owner or operator must modify the plan or submit a new 
plan for approval within 30 days after receiving such written statement. 
The Regional Administrator will approve or modify this plan in writing 
within 60 days. If the Regional Administrator modifies the plan, this 
modified plan becomes the approved post-closure plan. The Regional 
Administrator must ensure that the approved post-closure plan is 
consistent with Secs. 265.117 through 265.120. A copy of the modified 
plan with a detailed statement of reasons for the modifications must be 
mailed to the owner or operator.
    (g) The post-closure plan and length of the post-closure care period 
may be modified any time prior to the end of the post-closure care 
period in either of the following two ways:
    (1) The owner or operator or any member of the public may petition 
the Regional Administrator to extend or reduce the post-closure care 
period applicable to a hazardous waste management unit or facility based 
on cause, or alter the requirements of the post-closure care period 
based on cause.

[[Page 410]]

    (i) The petition must include evidence demonstrating that:
    (A) The secure nature of the hazardous waste management unit or 
facility makes the post-closure care requirement(s) unnecessary or 
supports reduction of the post-closure care period specified in the 
current post-closure plan (e.g., leachate or ground-water monitoring 
results, characteristics of the wastes, application of advanced 
technology, or alternative disposal, treatment, or re-use techniques 
indicate that the facility is secure), or
    (B) The requested extension in the post-closure care period or 
alteration of post-closure care requirements is necessary to prevent 
threats to human health and the environment (e.g., leachate or ground-
water monitoring results indicate a potential for migration of hazardous 
wastes at levels which may be harmful to human health and the 
environment).
    (ii) These petitions will be considered by the Regional 
Administrator only when they present new and relevant information not 
previously considered by the Regional Administrator. Whenever the 
Regional Administrator is considering a petition, he will provide the 
owner or operator and the public, through a newspaper notice, the 
opportunity to submit written comments within 30 days of the date of the 
notice. He will also, in response to a request or at his own discretion, 
hold a public hearing whenever a hearing might clarify one or more 
issues concerning the post-closure plan. The Regional Administrator will 
give the public notice of the hearing at least 30 days before it occurs. 
(Public notice of the hearing may be given at the same time as notice of 
the opportunity for written public comments, and the two notices may be 
combined.) After considering the comments, he will issue a final 
determination, based upon the criteria set forth in paragraph (g)(1) of 
this section.
    (iii) If the Regional Administrator denies the petition, he will 
send the petitioner a brief written response giving a reason for the 
denial.
    (2) The Regional Administrator may tentatively decide to modify the 
post-closure plan if he deems it necessary to prevent threats to human 
health and the environment. He may propose to extend or reduce the post-
closure care period applicable to a hazardous waste management unit or 
facility based on cause or alter the requirements of the post-closure 
care period based on cause.
    (i) The Regional Administrator will provide the owner or operator 
and the affected public, through a newspaper notice, the opportunity to 
submit written comments within 30 days of the date of the notice and the 
opportunity for a public hearing as in paragraph (g)(1)(ii) of this 
section. After considering the comments, he will issue a final 
determination.
    (ii) The Regional Administrator will base his final determination 
upon the same criteria as required for petitions under paragraph 
(g)(1)(i) of this section. A modification of the post-closure plan may 
include, where appropriate, the temporary suspension rather than 
permanent deletion of one or more post-closure care requirements. At the 
end of the specified period of suspension, the Regional Administrator 
would then determine whether the requirement(s) should be permanently 
discontinued or reinstated to prevent threats to human health and the 
environment.
[51 FR 16451, May 2, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 37935, Sept. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 265.119  Post-closure notices.

    (a) No later than 60 days after certification of closure of each 
hazardous waste disposal unit, the owner or operator must submit to the 
local zoning authority, or the authority with jurisdiction over local 
land use, and to the Regional Administrator, a record of the type, 
location, and quantity of hazardous wastes disposed of within each cell 
or other disposal unit of the facility. For hazardous wastes disposed of 
before January 12, 1981, the owner or operator must identify the type, 
location and quantity of the hazardous wastes to the best of his 
knowledge and in accordance with any records he has kept.
    (b) Within 60 days of certification of closure of the first 
hazardous waste disposal unit and within 60 days of certification of 
closure of the last hazardous waste disposal unit, the owner or operator 
must:

[[Page 411]]

    (1) Record, in accordance with State law, a notation on the deed to 
the facility property--or on some other instrument which is normally 
examined during title search--that will in perpetuity notify any 
potential purchaser of the property that:
    (i) The land has been used to manage hazardous wastes; and
    (ii) Its use is restricted under 40 CFR subpart G regulations; and
    (iii) The survey plat and record of the type, location, and quantity 
of hazardous wastes disposed of within each cell or other hazardous 
waste disposal unit of the facility required by Secs. 265.116 and 
265.119(a) have been filed with the local zoning authority or the 
authority with jurisdiction over local land use and with the Regional 
Administrator; and
    (2) Submit a certification signed by the owner or operator that he 
has recorded the notation specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
and a copy of the document in which the notation has been placed, to the 
Regional Administrator.
    (c) If the owner or operator or any subsequent owner of the land 
upon which a hazardous waste disposal unit was located wishes to remove 
hazardous wastes and hazardous waste residues, the liner, if any, and 
all contaminated structures, equipment, and soils, he must request a 
modification to the approved post-closure plan in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 265.118(g). The owner or operator must demonstrate 
that the removal of hazardous wastes will satisfy the criteria of 
Sec. 265.117(c). By removing hazardous waste, the owner or operator may 
become a generator of hazardous waste and must manage it in accordance 
with all applicable requirements of this chapter. If the owner or 
operator is granted approval to conduct the removal activities, the 
owner or operator may request that the Regional Administrator approve 
either:
    (1) The removal of the notation on the deed to the facility property 
or other instrument normally examined during title search, or
    (2) The addition of a notation to the deed or instrument indicating 
the removal of the hazardous waste.


<R05>
Sec. 265.120  Certification of completion of post-closure care.

    No later than 60 days after the completion of the established post-
closure care period for each hazardous waste disposal unit, the owner or 
operator must submit to the Regional Administrator, by registered mail, 
a certification that the post-closure care period for the hazardous 
waste disposal unit was performed in accordance with the specifications 
in the approved post-closure plan. The certification must be signed by 
the owner or operator and an independent registered professional 
engineer. Documentation supporting the independent registered 
professional engineer's certification must be furnished to the Regional 
Administrator upon request until he releases the owner or operator from 
the financial assurance requirements for post-closure care under 
Sec. 265.145(h).


<R04>
                    Subpart H--Financial Requirements

    Source: 47 FR 15064, Apr. 7, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.140  Applicability.

    (a) The requirements of Secs. 265.142, 265.143 and 265.147 through 
265.150 apply to owners or operators of all hazardous waste facilities, 
except as provided otherwise in this section or in Sec. 265.1.
    (b) The requirements of Secs. 265.144 and 265.146 apply only to 
owners and operators of:
    (1) Disposal facilities;
    (2) Tank systems that are required under Sec. 264.197 of this 
chapter to meet the requirements for landfills; and
    (3) Containment buildings that are required under Sec. 265.1102 to 
meet the requirements for landfills.
    (c) States and the Federal government are exempt from the 
requirements of this subpart.
[47 FR 15064, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 16455, May 2, 1986; 51 
FR 25479, July 14, 1986; 57 FR 37267, Aug. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.141  Definitions of terms as used in this subpart.

    (a) Closure plan means the plan for closure prepared in accordance 
with the requirements of Sec. 265.112.

[[Page 412]]

    (b) Current closure cost estimate means the most recent of the 
estimates prepared in accordance with Sec. 265.142 (a), (b), and (c).
    (c) Current post-closure cost estimate means the most recent of the 
estimates prepared in accordance with Sec. 265.144 (a), (b), and (c).
    (d) Parent corporation means a corporation which directly owns at 
least 50 percent of the voting stock of the corporation which is the 
facility owner or operator; the latter corporation is deemed a 
``subsidiary'' of the parent corporation.
    (e) Post-closure plan means the plan for post-closure care prepared 
in accordance with the requirements of Secs. 265.117 through 265.120.
    (f) The following terms are used in the specifications for the 
financial tests for closure, post-closure care, and liability coverage. 
The definitions are intended to assist in the understanding of these 
regulations and are not intended to limit the meanings of terms in a way 
that conflicts with generally accepted accounting practices.
    Assets means all existing and all probable future economic benefits 
obtained or controlled by a particular entity.
    Current assets means cash or other assets or resources commonly 
identified as those which are reasonably expected to be realized in cash 
or sold or consumed during the normal operating cycle of the business.
    Current liabilities means obligations whose liquidation is 
reasonably expected to require the use of existing resources properly 
classifiable as current assets or the creation of other current 
liabilities.
    Current plugging and abandonment cost estimate means the most recent 
of the estimates prepared in accordance with Sec. 144.62(a), (b), and 
(c) of this title.
    Independently audited refers to an audit performed by an independent 
certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted 
auditing standards.
    Liabilities means probable future sacrifices of economic benefits 
arising from present obligations to transfer assets or provide services 
to other entities in the future as a result of past transactions or 
events.
    Net working capital means current assets minus current liabilities.
    Net worth means total assets minus total liabilities and is 
equivalent to owner's equity.
    Tangible net worth means the tangible assets that remain after 
deducting liabilities; such assets would not include intangibles such as 
goodwill and rights to patents or royalties.
    (g) In the liability insurance requirements the terms bodily injury 
and property damage shall have the meanings given these terms by 
applicable State law. However, these terms do not include those 
liabilities which, consistent with standard industry practice, are 
excluded from coverage in liability policies for bodily injury and 
property damage. The Agency intends the meanings of other terms used in 
the liability insurance requirements to be consistent with their common 
meanings within the insurance industry. The definitions given below of 
several of the terms are intended to assist in the understanding of 
these regulations and are not intended to limit their meanings in a way 
that conflicts with general insurance industry usage.
    Accidental occurrence means an accident, including continuous or 
repeated exposure to conditions, which results in bodily injury or 
property damage neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of the 
insured.
    Legal defense costs means any expenses that an insurer incurs in 
defending against claims of third parties brought under the terms and 
conditions of an insurance policy.
    Nonsudden accidental occurrence means an occurrence which takes 
place over time and involves continuous or repeated exposure.
    Sudden accidental occurrence means an occurrence which is not 
continuous or repeated in nature.
    (h) Substantial business relationship means the extent of a business 
relationship necessary under applicable State law to make a guarantee 
contract issued incident to that relationship valid and enforceable. A 
``substantial business relationship'' must arise from a pattern of 
recent or ongoing business transactions, in addition to the guarantee 
itself, such that a currently existing business relationship

[[Page 413]]

between the guarantor and the owner or operator is demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the applicable EPA Regional Administrator.
[47 FR 16558, Apr. 16, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 16456, May 2, 1986; 53 
FR 33959, Sept. 1, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 265.142  Cost estimate for closure.

    (a) The owner or operator must have a detailed written estimate, in 
current dollars, of the cost of closing the facility in accordance with 
the requirements in Secs. 265.111 through 265.115 and applicable closure 
requirements in Secs. 265.178, 265.197, 265.228, 265.258, 265.280, 
265.310, 265.351, 265.381, 265.404, and 265.1102.
    (1) The estimate must equal the cost of final closure at the point 
in the facility's active life when the extent and manner of its 
operation would make closure the most expensive, as indicated by its 
closure plan (see Sec. 265.112(b)); and
    (2) The closure cost estimate must be based on the costs to the 
owner or operator of hiring a third party to close the facility. A third 
party is a party who is neither a parent nor a subsidiary of the owner 
or operator. (See definition of parent corporation in Sec. 265.141(d).) 
The owner or operator may use costs for on-site disposal if he can 
demonstrate that on-site disposal capacity will exist at all times over 
the life of the facility.
    (3) The closure cost estimate may not incorporate any salvage value 
that may be realized with the sale of hazardous wastes, or non-hazardous 
wastes if applicable under Sec. 265.113(d), facility structures or 
equipment, land, or other assets associated with the facility at the 
time of partial or final closure.
    (4) The owner or operator may not incorporate a zero cost for 
hazardous wastes, or non-hazardous wastes if applicable under 
Sec. 265.113(d), that might have economic value.
    (b) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must adjust the closure cost estimate for inflation within 60 days prior 
to the anniversary date of the establishment of the financial 
instrument(s) used to comply with Sec. 265.143. For owners and operators 
using the financial test or corporate guarantee, the closure cost 
estimate must be updated for inflation within 30 days after the close of 
the firm's fiscal year and before submission of updated information to 
the Regional Administrator as specified in Sec. 265.143(e)(3). The 
adjustment may be made by recalculating the closure cost estimate in 
current dollars, or by using an inflation factor derived from the most 
recent Implicit Price Deflator for Gross National Product published by 
the U.S. Department of Commerce in its Survey of Current Business, as 
specified in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section. The inflation 
factor is the result of dividing the latest published annual Deflator by 
the Deflator for the previous year.
    (1) The first adjustment is made by multiplying the closure cost 
estimate by the inflation factor. The result is the adjusted closure 
cost estimate.
    (2) Subsequent adjustments are made by multiplying the latest 
adjusted closure cost estimate by the latest inflation factor.
    (c) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must revise the closure cost estimate no later than 30 days after a 
revision has been made to the closure plan which increases the cost of 
closure. If the owner or operator has an approved closure plan, the 
closure cost estimate must be revised no later than 30 days after the 
Regional Administrator has approved the request to modify the closure 
plan, if the change in the closure plan increases the cost of closure. 
The revised closure cost estimate must be adjusted for inflation as 
specified in Sec. 265.142(b).
    (d) The owner or operator must keep the following at the facility 
during the operating life of the facility: The latest closure cost 
estimate prepared in accordance with Secs. 265.142 (a) and (c) and, when 
this estimate has been adjusted in accordance with Sec. 265.142(b), the 
latest adjusted closure cost estimate.
[47 FR 15064, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 51 
FR 16456, May 2, 1986; 54 FR 33397, Aug. 14, 1989; 57 FR 37267, Aug. 18, 
1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.143  Financial assurance for closure.

    By the effective date of these regulations, an owner or operator of 
each facility must establish financial assurance for closure of the 
facility. He

[[Page 414]]

must choose from the options as specified in paragraphs (a) through (e) 
of this section.
    (a) Closure trust fund. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy the 
requirements of this section by establishing a closure trust fund which 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting an 
originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement to the Regional 
Administrator. The trustee must be an entity which has the authority to 
act as a trustee and whose trust operations are regulated and examined 
by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the trust agreement must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(a)(1), and the trust agreement must be 
accompanied by a formal certification of acknowledgment (for example, 
see Sec. 264.151(a)(2)). Schedule A of the trust agreement must be 
updated within 60 days after a change in the amount of the current 
closure cost estimate covered by the agreement.
    (3) Payments into the trust fund must be made annually by the owner 
or operator over the 20 years beginning with the effective date of these 
regulations or over the remaining operating life of the facility as 
estimated in the closure plan, whichever period is shorter; this period 
is hereafter referred to as the ``pay-in period.'' The payments into the 
closure trust fund must be made as follows:
    (i) The first payment must be made by the effective date of these 
regulations, except as provided in paragraph (a)(5) of this section. The 
first payment must be at least equal to the current closure cost 
estimate, except as provided in Sec. 265.143(f), divided by the number 
of years in the pay-in period.
    (ii) Subsequent payments must be made no later than 30 days after 
each anniversary date of the first payment. The amount of each 
subsequent payment must be determined by this formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.050


where CE is the current closure cost estimate, CV is the current value 
of the trust fund, and Y is the number of years remaining in the pay-in 
period.
    (4) The owner or operator may accelerate payments into the trust 
fund or he may deposit the full amount of the current closure cost 
estimate at the time the fund is established. However, he must maintain 
the value of the fund at no less than the value that the fund would have 
if annual payments were made as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section.
    (5) If the owner or operator establishes a closure trust fund after 
having used one or more alternate mechanisms specified in this section, 
his first payment must be in at least the amount that the fund would 
contain if the trust fund were established initially and annual payments 
made as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
    (6) After the pay-in period is completed, whenever the current 
closure cost estimate changes, the owner or operator must compare the 
new estimate with the trustee's most recent annual valuation of the 
trust fund. If the value of the fund is less than the amount of the new 
estimate, the owner or operator, within 60 days after the change in the 
cost estimate, must either deposit an amount into the fund so that its 
value after this deposit at least equals the amount of the current 
closure cost estimate, or obtain other financial assurance as specified 
in this section to cover the difference.
    (7) If the value of the trust fund is greater than the total amount 
of the current closure cost estimate, the owner or operator may submit a 
written request to the Regional Administrator for release of the amount 
in excess of the current closure cost estimate.
    (8) If an owner or operator substitutes other financial assurance as 
specified in this section for all or part of the trust fund, he may 
submit a written request to the Regional Administrator for release of 
the amount in excess of the current closure cost estimate covered by the 
trust fund.
    (9) Within 60 days after receiving a request from the owner or 
operator for release of funds as specified in paragraph (a) (7) or (8) 
of this section, the Regional Administrator will instruct the trustee to 
release to the owner or

[[Page 415]]

operator such funds as the Regional Administrator specifies in writing.
    (10) After beginning partial or final closure, an owner or operator 
or another person authorized to conduct partial or final closure may 
request reimbursements for partial or final closure expenditures by 
submitting itemized bills to the Regional Administrator. The owner or 
operator may request reimbursements for partial closure only if 
sufficient funds are remaining in the trust fund to cover the maximum 
costs of closing the facility over its remaining operating life. No 
later than 60 days after receiving bills for partial or final closure 
activities, the Regional Administrator will instruct the trustee to make 
reimbursements in those amounts as the Regional Administrator specifies 
in writing, if the Regional Administrator determines that the partial or 
final closure expenditures are in accordance with the approved closure 
plan, or otherwise justified. If the Regional Administrator has reason 
to believe that the maximum cost of closure over the remaining life of 
the facility will be significantly greater than the value of the trust 
fund, he may withhold reimbursements of such amounts as he deems prudent 
until he determines, in accordance with Sec. 265.143(h) that the owner 
or operator is no longer required to maintain financial assurance for 
final closure of the facility. If the Regional Administrator does not 
instruct the trustee to make such reimbursements, he will provide to the 
owner or operator a detailed written statement of reasons.
    (11) The Regional Administrator will agree to termination of the 
trust when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.143(h).
    (b) Surety bond guaranteeing payment into a closure trust fund. (1) 
An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
obtaining a surety bond which conforms to the requirements of this 
paragraph and submitting the bond to the Regional Administrator. The 
surety company issuing the bond must, at a minimum, be among those 
listed as acceptable sureties on Federal bonds in Circular 570 of the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury.
    (2) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(b).
    (3) The owner or operator who uses a surety bond to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the bond, all payments made thereunder will be 
deposited by the surety directly into the standby trust fund in 
accordance with instructions from the Regional Administrator. This 
standby trust fund must meet the requirements specified in 
Sec. 265.143(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the surety bond; and
    (ii) Until the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 265.143(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The bond must guarantee that the owner or operator will:
    (i) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
of the bond before the beginning of final closure of the facility; or
    (ii) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
within 15 days after an administrative order to begin final closure 
issued by the Regional Administrator becomes final, or within 15 days 
after an order to begin final closure is issued by a U.S. district court 
or other court of competent jurisdiction; or
    (iii) Provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this 
section, and obtain the Regional Administrator's written approval of the 
assurance provided, within 90 days after receipt by both the owner or 
operator and the Regional Administrator of a notice of

[[Page 416]]

cancellation of the bond from the surety.
    (5) Under the terms of the bond, the surety will become liable on 
the bond obligation when the owner or operator fails to perform as 
guaranteed by the bond.
    (6) The penal sum of the bond must be in an amount at least equal to 
the current closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 265.143(f).
    (7) Whenever the current closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the penal sum, the owner or operator, within 60 days 
after the increase, must either cause the penal sum to be increased to 
an amount at least equal to the current closure cost estimate and submit 
evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or obtain other 
financial assurance as specified in this section to cover the increase. 
Whenever the current closure cost estimate decreases, the penal sum may 
be reduced to the amount of the current closure cost estimate following 
written approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) Under the terms of the bond, the surety may cancel the bond by 
sending notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (9) The owner or operator may cancel the bond if the Regional 
Administrator has given prior written consent based on his receipt of 
evidence of alternate financial assurance as specified in this section.
    (c) Closure letter of credit. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy 
the requirements of this section by obtaining an irrevocable standby 
letter of credit which conforms to the requirements of this paragraph 
and submitting the letter to the Regional Administrator. The issuing 
institution must be an entity which has the authority to issue letters 
of credit and whose letter-of-credit operations are regulated and 
examined by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the letter of credit must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(d).
    (3) An owner or operator who uses a letter of credit to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the letter of credit, all amounts paid pursuant to a 
draft by the Regional Administrator will be deposited by the issuing 
institution directly into the standby trust fund in accordance with 
instructions from the Regional Administrator. This standby trust fund 
must meet the requirements of the trust fund specified in 
Sec. 265.143(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the letter of credit; and
    (ii) Unless the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 265.143(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The letter of credit must be accompanied by a letter from the 
owner or operator referring to the letter of credit by number, issuing 
institution, and date, and providing the following information: The EPA 
Identification Number, name, and address of the facility, and the amount 
of funds assured for closure of the facility by the letter of credit.
    (5) The letter of credit must be irrevocable and issued for a period 
of at least 1 year. The letter of credit must provide that the 
expiration date will be automatically extended for a period of at least 
1 year unless, at least 120 days before the current expiration date, the 
issuing institution notifies both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator by certified mail of a decision not to extend the 
expiration date. Under the terms of the letter of credit, the 120 days 
will begin on the date when both the owner or operator and

[[Page 417]]

the Regional Administrator have received the notice, as evidenced by the 
return receipts.
    (6) The letter of credit must be issued in an amount at least equal 
to the current closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 265.143(f).
    (7) Whenever the current closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the amount of the credit, the owner or operator, 
within 60 days after the increase, must either cause the amount of the 
credit to be increased so that it at least equals the current closure 
cost estimate and submit evidence of such increase to the Regional 
Administrator, or obtain other financial assurance as specified in this 
section to cover the increase. Whenever the current closure cost 
estimate decreases, the amount of the credit may be reduced to the 
amount of the current closure cost estimate following written approval 
by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) Following a final administrative determination pursuant to 
section 3008 of RCRA that the owner or operator has failed to perform 
final closure in accordance with the approved closure plan when required 
to do so, the Regional Administrator may draw on the letter of credit.
    (9) If the owner or operator does not establish alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain written approval of 
such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 days 
after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice from the issuing institution that it has 
decided not to extend the letter of credit beyond the current expiration 
date, the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter of credit. The 
Regional Administrator may delay the drawing if the issuing institution 
grants an extension of the term of the credit. During the last 30 days 
of any such extension the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter 
of credit if the owner or operator has failed to provide alternate 
financial assurance as specified in this section and obtain written 
approval of such assurance from the Regional Administrator.
    (10) The Regional Administrator will return the letter of credit to 
the issuing institution for termination when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.143(h).
    (d) Closure insurance. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy the 
requirements of this section by obtaining closure insurance which 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting a 
certificate of such insurance to the Regional Administrator. By the 
effective date of these regulations the owner or operator must submit to 
the Regional Administrator a letter from an insurer stating that the 
insurer is considering issuance of closure insurance conforming to the 
requirements of this paragraph to the owner or operator. Within 90 days 
after the effective date of these regulations, the owner or operator 
must submit the certificate of insurance to the Regional Administrator 
or establish other financial assurance as specified in this section. At 
a minimum, the insurer must be licensed to transact the business of 
insurance, or eligible to provide insurance as an excess or surplus 
lines insurer, in one or more States.
    (2) The wording of the certificate of insurance must be identical to 
the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(e).
    (3) The closure insurance policy must be issued for a face amount at 
least equal to the current closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 265.143(f). The term ``face amount'' means the total amount the 
insurer is obligated to pay under the policy. Actual payments by the 
insurer will not change the face amount, although the insurer's future 
liability will be lowered by the amount of the payments.
    (4) The closure insurance policy must guarantee that funds will be 
available to close the facility whenever final closure occurs. The 
policy must also guarantee that once final closure begins, the insurer 
will be responsible for paying out funds, up to an amount equal to the 
face amount of the policy, upon the direction of the Regional 
Administrator, to such party or parties as the Regional Administrator 
specifies.

[[Page 418]]

    (5) After beginning partial or final closure, an owner or operator 
or any other person authorized to conduct closure may request 
reimbursements for closure expenditures by submitting itemized bills to 
the Regional Administrator. The owner or operator may request 
reimbursements for partial closure only if the remaining value of the 
policy is sufficient to cover the maximum costs of closing the facility 
over its remaining operating life. Within 60 days after receiving bills 
for closure activities, the Regional Administrator will instruct the 
insurer to make reimbursements in such amounts as the Regional 
Administrator specifies in writing if the Regional Administrator 
determines that the partial or final closure expenditures are in 
accordance with the approved closure plan or otherwise justified. If the 
Regional Administrator has reason to believe that the maximum cost of 
closure over the remaining life of the facility will be significantly 
greater than the face amount of the policy, he may withhold 
reimbursement of such amounts as he deems prudent until he determines, 
in accordance with Sec. 265.143(h), that the owner or operator is no 
longer required to maintain financial assurance for final closure of the 
particular facility. If the Regional Administrator does not instruct the 
insurer to make such reimbursements, he will provide to the owner or 
operator a detailed written statement of reasons.
    (6) The owner or operator must maintain the policy in full force and 
effect until the Regional Administrator consents to termination of the 
policy by the owner or operator as specified in paragraph (d)(10) of 
this section. Failure to pay the premium, without substitution of 
alternate financial assurance as specified in this section, will 
constitute a significant violation of these regulations, warranting such 
remedy as the Regional Administrator deems necessary. Such violation 
will be deemed to begin upon receipt by the Regional Administrator of a 
notice of future cancellation, termination, or failure to renew due to 
nonpayment of the premium, rather than upon the date of expiration.
    (7) Each policy must contain a provision allowing assignment of the 
policy to a successor owner or operator. Such assignment may be 
conditional upon consent of the insurer, provided such consent is not 
unreasonably refused.
    (8) The policy must provide that the insurer may not cancel, 
terminate, or fail to renew the policy except for failure to pay the 
premium. The automatic renewal of the policy must, at a minimum, provide 
the insured with the option of renewal at the face amount of the 
expiring policy. If there is a failure to pay the premium, the insurer 
may elect to cancel, terminate, or fail to renew the policy by sending 
notice by certified mail to the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator. Cancellation, termination, or failure to renew may not 
occur, however, during the 120 days beginning with the date of receipt 
of the notice by both the Regional Administrator and the owner or 
operator, as evidenced by the return receipts. Cancellation, 
termination, or failure to renew may not occur and the policy will 
remain in full force and effect in the event that on or before the date 
of expiration:
    (i) The Regional Administrator deems the facility abandoned; or
    (ii) Interim status is terminated or revoked; or
    (iii) Closure is ordered by the Regional Administrator or a U.S. 
district court or other court of competent jurisdiction; or
    (iv) The owner or operator is named as debtor in a voluntary or 
involuntary proceeding under Title 11 (Bankruptcy), U.S. Code; or
    (v) The premium due is paid.
    (9) Whenever the current closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the face amount of the policy, the owner or 
operator, within 60 days after the increase, must either cause the face 
amount to be increased to an amount at least equal to the current 
closure cost estimate and submit evidence of such increase to the 
Regional Administrator, or obtain other financial assurance as specified 
in this section to cover the increase. Whenever the current closure cost 
estimate decreases, the face amount may be reduced to the amount of the 
current closure cost estimate following written approval by the Regional 
Administrator.

[[Page 419]]

    (10) The Regional Administrator will give written consent to the 
owner or operator that he may terminate the insurance policy when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.143(h).
    (e) Financial test and corporate guarantee for closure. (1) An owner 
or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
demonstrating that he passes a financial test as specified in this 
paragraph. To pass this test the owner or operator must meet the 
criteria of either paragraph (e)(1)(i) or (ii) of this section:
    (i) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) Two of the following three ratios: A ratio of total liabilities 
to net worth less than 2.0; a ratio of the sum of net income plus 
depreciation, depletion, and amortization to total liabilities greater 
than 0.1; and a ratio of current assets to current liabilities greater 
than 1.5; and
    (B) Net working capital and tangible net worth each at least six 
times the sum of the current closure and post-closure cost estimates and 
the current plugging and abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets located in the United States amounting to at least 90 
percent of total assets or at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates.
    (ii) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) A current rating for his most recent bond issuance of AAA, AA, 
A, or BBB as issued by Standard and Poor's or Aaa, Aa, A, or Baa as 
issued by Moody's; and
    (B) Tangible net worth at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets located in the United States amounting to at least 90 
percent of total assets or at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates.
    (2) The phrase ``current closure and post-closure cost estimates'' 
as used in paragraph (e)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates 
required to be shown in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or 
operator's chief financial officer (Sec. 264.151(f)). The phrase 
``current plugging and abandonment cost estimates'' as used in paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates required to be shown 
in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or operator's chief 
financial officer (Sec. 144.70(f) of this title).
    (3) To demonstrate that he meets this test, the owner or operator 
must submit the following items to the Regional Administrator:
    (i) A letter signed by the owner's or operator's chief financial 
officer and worded as specified in Sec. 264.151(f); and
    (ii) A copy of the independent certified public accountant's report 
on examination of the owner's or operator's financial statements for the 
latest completed fiscal year; and
    (iii) A special report from the owner's or operator's independent 
certified public accountant to the owner or operator stating that:
    (A) He has compared the data which the letter from the chief 
financial officer specifies as having been derived from the 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
fiscal year with the amounts in such financial statements; and
    (B) In connection with that procedure, no matters came to his 
attention which caused him to believe that the specified data should be 
adjusted.
    (4) The owner or operator may obtain an extension of the time 
allowed for submission of the documents specified in paragraph (e)(3) of 
this section if the fiscal year of the owner or operator ends during the 
90 days prior to the effective date of these regulations and if the 
year-end financial statements for that fiscal year will be audited by an 
independent certified public accountant. The extension will end no later 
than 90 days after the end of the owner's or operator's fiscal year. To 
obtain

[[Page 420]]

the extension, the owner's or operator's chief financial officer must 
send, by the effective date of these regulations, a letter to the 
Regional Administrator of each Region in which the owner's or operator's 
facilities to be covered by the financial test are located. This letter 
from the chief financial officer must:
    (i) Request the extension;
    (ii) Certify that he has grounds to believe that the owner or 
operator meets the criteria of the financial test;
    (iii) Specify for each facility to be covered by the test the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, and current closure and post-
closure cost estimates to be covered by the test;
    (iv) Specify the date ending the owner's or operator's last complete 
fiscal year before the effective date of these regulations;
    (v) Specify the date, no later than 90 days after the end of such 
fiscal year, when he will submit the documents specified in paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section; and
    (vi) Certify that the year-end financial statements of the owner or 
operator for such fiscal year will be audited by an independent 
certified public accountant.
    (5) After the initial submission of items specified in paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must send updated 
information to the Regional Administrator within 90 days after the close 
of each succeeding fiscal year. This information must consist of all 
three items specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (6) If the owner or operator no longer meets the requirements of 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, he must send notice to the Regional 
Administrator of intent to establish alternate financial assurance as 
specified in this section. The notice must be sent by certified mail 
within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year for which the year-end 
financial data show that the owner or operator no longer meets the 
requirements. The owner or operator must provide the alternate financial 
assurance within 120 days after the end of such fiscal year.
    (7) The Regional Administrator may, based on a reasonable belief 
that the owner or operator may no longer meet the requirements of 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, require reports of financial condition 
at any time from the owner or operator in addition to those specified in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section. If the Regional Administrator finds, 
on the basis of such reports or other information, that the owner or 
operator no longer meets the requirements of paragraph (e)(1) of this 
section, the owner or operator must provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section within 30 days after notification 
of such a finding.
    (8) The Regional Administrator may disallow use of this test on the 
basis of qualifications in the opinion expressed by the independent 
certified public accountant in his report on examination of the owner's 
or operator's financial statements (see paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this 
section). An adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion will be cause 
for disallowance. The Regional Administrator will evaluate other 
qualifications on an individual basis. The owner or operator must 
provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this section 
within 30 days after notification of the disallowance.
    (9) The owner or operator is no longer required to submit the items 
specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.143(h).
    (10) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a written guarantee. The guarantor must be the direct or 
higher-tier parent corporation of the owner or operator, a firm whose 
parent corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or 
operator, or a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with 
the owner or operator. The guarantor must meet the requirements for 
owners or operators in paragraphs (e)(1) through (8) of this section and 
must comply with the terms of the guarantee. The wording of the 
guarantee must be identical to the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(h). 
A certified copy of the guarantee must accompany the

[[Page 421]]

items sent to the Regional Administrator as specified in paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section. One of these items must be the letter from the 
guarantor's chief financial officer. If the guarantor's parent 
corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or operator, the 
letter must describe the value received in consideration of the 
guarantee. If the guarantor is a firm with a ``substantial business 
relationship'' with the owner or operator, this letter must describe 
this ``substantial business relationship'' and the value received in 
consideration of the guarantee. The terms of the guarantee must provide 
that:
    (i) If the owner or operator fails to perform final closure of a 
facility covered by the corporate guarantee in accordance with the 
closure plan and other interim status requirements whenever required to 
do so, the guarantor will do so or establish a trust fund as specified 
in Sec. 265.143(a) in the name of the owner or operator.
    (ii) The corporate guarantee will remain in force unless the 
guarantor sends notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (iii) If the owner or operator fails to provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain the written approval 
of such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 
days after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice of cancellation of the corporate guarantee 
from the guarantor, the guarantor will provide such alternate financial 
assurance in the name of the owner or operator.
    (f) Use of multiple financial mechanisms. An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by establishing more than one 
financial mechanism per facility. These mechanisms are limited to trust 
funds, surety bonds, letters of credit, and insurance. The mechanisms 
must be as specified in paragraphs (a) through (d), respectively, of 
this section, except that it is the combination of mechanisms, rather 
than the single mechanism, which must provide financial assurance for an 
amount at least equal to the current closure cost estimate. If an owner 
or operator uses a trust fund in combination with a surety bond or a 
letter of credit, he may use the trust fund as the standby trust fund 
for the other mechanisms. A single standby trust fund may be established 
for two or more mechanisms. The Regional Administrator may use any or 
all of the mechanisms to provide for closure of the facility.
    (g) Use of a financial mechanism for multiple facilities. An owner 
or operator may use a financial assurance mechanism specified in this 
section to meet the requirements of this section for more than one 
facility. Evidence of financial assurance submitted to the Regional 
Administrator must include a list showing, for each facility, the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, and the amount of funds for 
closure assured by the mechanism. If the facilities covered by the 
mechanism are in more than one Region, identical evidence of financial 
assurance must be submitted to and maintained with the Regional 
Administrators of all such Regions. The amount of funds available 
through the mechanism must be no less than the sum of funds that would 
be available if a separate mechanism had been established and maintained 
for each facility. In directing funds available through the mechanism 
for closure of any of the facilities covered by the mechanism, the 
Regional Administrator may direct only the amount of funds designated 
for that facility, unless the owner or operator agrees to the use of 
additional funds available under the mechanism.
    (h) Release of the owner or operator from the requirements of this 
section. Within 60 days after receiving certifications from the owner or 
operator and an independent registered professional engineer that final 
closure has been completed in accordance with the approved closure plan, 
the Regional Administrator will notify the owner or operator in writing 
that he is no longer required by this section to maintain financial 
assurance for final closure of

[[Page 422]]

the facility, unless the Regional Administrator has reason to believe 
that final closure has not been in accordance with the approved closure 
plan. The Regional Administrator shall provide the owner or operator a 
detailed written statement of any such reason to believe that closure 
has not been in accordance with the approved closure plan.
[47 FR 15064, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 16456, May 2, 1986; 57 
FR 42843, Sept. 16, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.144  Cost estimate for post-closure care.

    (a) The owner or operator of a hazardous waste disposal unit must 
have a detailed written estimate, in current dollars, of the annual cost 
of post-closure monitoring and maintenance of the facility in accordance 
with the applicable post-closure regulations in Secs. 265.117 through 
265.120, 265.228, 265.258, 265.280, and 265.310.
    (1) The post-closure cost estimate must be based on the costs to the 
owner or operator of hiring a third party to conduct post-closure care 
activities. A third party is a party who is neither a parent nor 
subsidiary of the owner or operator. (See definition of parent 
corporation in Sec. 265.141(d).)
    (2) The post-closure cost estimate is calculated by multiplying the 
annual post-closure cost estimate by the number of years of post-closure 
care required under Sec. 265.117.
    (b) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must adjust the post-closure cost estimate for inflation within 60 days 
prior to the anniversary date of the establishment of the financial 
instrument(s) used to comply with Sec. 265.145. For owners or operators 
using the financial test or corporate guarantee, the post-closure care 
cost estimate must be updated for inflation no later than 30 days after 
the close of the firm's fiscal year and before submission of updated 
information to the Regional Administrator as specified in 
Sec. 265.145(d)(5). The adjustment may be made by recalculating the 
post-closure cost estimate in current dollars or by using an inflation 
factor derived from the most recent Implicit Price Deflator for Gross 
National Product published by the U.S. Department of Commerce in its 
Survey of Current Business as specified in Sec. 265.145 (b)(1) and (2). 
The inflation factor is the result of dividing the latest published 
annual Deflator by the Deflator for the previous year.
    (1) The first adjustment is made by multiplying the post-closure 
cost estimate by the inflation factor. The result is the adjusted post-
closure cost estimate.
    (2) Subsequent adjustments are made by multiplying the latest 
adjusted post-closure cost estimate by the latest inflation factor.
    (c) During the active life of the facility, the owner or operator 
must revise the post-closure cost estimate no later than 30 days after a 
revision to the post-closure plan which increases the cost of post-
closure care. If the owner or operator has an approved post-closure 
plan, the post-closure cost estimate must be revised no later than 30 
days after the Regional Administrator has approved the request to modify 
the plan, if the change in the post-closure plan increases the cost of 
post-closure care. The revised post-closure cost estimate must be 
adjusted for inflation as specified in Sec. 265.144(b).
    (d) The owner or operator must keep the following at the facility 
during the operating life of the facility: the latest post-closure cost 
estimate prepared in accordance with Sec. 265.144 (a) and (c) and, when 
this estimate has been adjusted in accordance with Sec. 265.144(b), the 
latest adjusted post-closure cost estimate.
[47 FR 15064, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 4514, Jan. 31, 1985; 51 
FR 16457, May 2, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 265.145  Financial assurance for post-closure care.

    By the effective date of these regulations, an owner or operator of 
a facility with a hazardous waste disposal unit must establish financial 
assurance for post-closure care of the disposal unit(s).
    (a) Post-closure trust fund. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy 
the requirements of this section by establishing a post-closure trust 
fund which conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting 
an originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement

[[Page 423]]

to the Regional Administrator. The trustee must be an entity which has 
the authority to act as a trustee and whose trust operations are 
regulated and examined by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the trust agreement must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(a)(1), and the trust agreement must be 
accompanied by a formal certification of acknowledgment (for example, 
see Sec. 264.151(a)(2)). Schedule A of the trust agreement must be 
updated within 60 days after a change in the amount of the current post-
closure cost estimate covered by the agreement.
    (3) Payments into the trust fund must be made annually by the owner 
or operator over the 20 years beginning with the effective date of these 
regulations or over the remaining operating life of the facility as 
estimated in the closure plan, whichever period is shorter; this period 
is hereafter referred to as the ``pay-in period.'' The payments into the 
post-closure trust fund must be made as follows:
    (i) The first payment must be made by the effective date of these 
regulations, except as provided in paragraph (a)(5) of this section. The 
first payment must be at least equal to the current post-closure cost 
estimate, except as provided in Sec. 265.145(f), divided by the number 
of years in the pay-in period.
    (ii) Subsequent payments must be made no later than 30 days after 
each anniversary date of the first payment. The amount of each 
subsequent payment must be determined by this formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU92.050


where CE is the current post-closure cost estimate, CV is the current 
value of the trust fund, and Y is the number of years remaining in the 
pay-in period.
    (4) The owner or operator may accelerate payments into the trust 
fund or he may deposit the full amount of the current post-closure cost 
estimate at the time the fund is established. However, he must maintain 
the value of the fund at no less than the value that the fund would have 
if annual payments were made as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section.
    (5) If the owner or operator establishes a post-closure trust fund 
after having used one or more alternate mechanisms specified in this 
section, his first payment must be in at least the amount that the fund 
would contain if the trust fund were established initially and annual 
payments made as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
    (6) After the pay-in period is completed, whenever the current post-
closure cost estimate changes during the operating life of the facility, 
the owner or operator must compare the new estimate with the trustee's 
most recent annual valuation of the trust fund. If the value of the fund 
is less than the amount of the new estimate, the owner or operator, 
within 60 days after the change in the cost estimate, must either 
deposit an amount into the fund so that its value after this deposit at 
least equals the amount of the current post-closure cost estimate, or 
obtain other financial assurance as specified in this section to cover 
the difference.
    (7) During the operating life of the facility, if the value of the 
trust fund is greater than the total amount of the current post-closure 
cost estimate, the owner or operator may submit a written request to the 
Regional Administrator for release of the amount in excess of the 
current post-closure cost estimate.
    (8) If an owner or operator substitutes other financial assurance as 
specified in this section for all or part of the trust fund, he may 
submit a written request to the Regional Administrator for release of 
the amount in excess of the current post-closure cost estimate covered 
by the trust fund.
    (9) Within 60 days after receiving a request from the owner or 
operator for release of funds as specified in paragraph (a) (7) or (8) 
of this section, the Regional Administrator will instruct the trustee to 
release to the owner or operator such funds as the Regional 
Administrator specifies in writing.
    (10) During the period of post-closure care, the Regional 
Administrator may approve a release of funds if the owner or operator 
demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that the value of

[[Page 424]]

the trust fund exceeds the remaining cost of post-closure care.
    (11) An owner or operator or any other person authorized to conduct 
post-closure care may request reimbursements for post-closure 
expenditures by submitting itemized bills to the Regional Administrator. 
Within 60 days after receiving bills for post-closure care activities, 
the Regional Administrator will instruct the trustee to make 
reimbursements in those amounts as the Regional Administrator specifies 
in writing, if the Regional Administrator determines that the post-
closure expenditures are in accordance with the approved post-closure 
plan or otherwise justified. If the Regional Administrator does not 
instruct the trustee to make such reimbursements, he will provide the 
owner or operator with a detailed written statement of reasons.
    (12) The Regional Administrator will agree to termination of the 
trust when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.145(h).
    (b) Surety bond guaranteeing payment into a post-closure trust fund. 
(1) An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
obtaining a surety bond which conforms to the requirements of this 
paragraph and submitting the bond to the Regional Administrator. The 
surety company issuing the bond must, at a minimum, be among those 
listed as acceptable sureties on Federal bonds in Circular 570 of the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury.
    (2) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(b).
    (3) The owner or operator who uses a surety bond to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the bond, all payments made thereunder will be 
deposited by the surety directly into the standby trust fund in 
accordance with instructions from the Regional Administrator. This 
standby trust fund must meet the requirements specified in 
Sec. 265.145(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the surety bond; and
    (ii) Until the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 265.145(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current post-closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The bond must guarantee that the owner or operator will:
    (i) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
of the bond before the beginning of final closure of the facility; or
    (ii) Fund the standby trust fund in an amount equal to the penal sum 
within 15 days after an administrative order to begin final closure 
issued by the Regional Administrator becomes final, or within 15 days 
after an order to begin final closure is issued by a U.S. district court 
or other court of competent jurisdiction; or
    (iii) Provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this 
section, and obtain the Regional Administrator's written approval of the 
assurance provided, within 90 days after receipt by both the owner or 
operator and the Regional Administrator of a notice of cancellation of 
the bond from the surety.
    (5) Under the terms of the bond, the surety will become liable on 
the bond obligation when the owner or operator fails to perform as 
guaranteed by the bond.
    (6) The penal sum of the bond must be in an amount at least equal to 
the current post-closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 265.145(f).
    (7) Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the penal sum, the owner or operator, within 60 days 
after the increase, must either cause the penal sum to be increased to 
an amount at

[[Page 425]]

least equal to the current post-closure cost estimate and submit 
evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or obtain other 
financial assurance as specified in this section to cover the increase. 
Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate decreases, the penal sum 
may be reduced to the amount of the current post-closure cost estimate 
following written approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (8) Under the terms of the bond, the surety may cancel the bond by 
sending notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (9) The owner or operator may cancel the bond if the Regional 
Administrator has given prior written consent based on his receipt of 
evidence of alternate financial assurance as specified in this section.
    (c) Post-closure letter of credit. (1) An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by obtaining an irrevocable 
standby letter of credit which conforms to the requirements of this 
paragraph and submitting the letter to the Regional Administrator. The 
issuing institution must be an entity which has the authority to issue 
letters of credit and whose letter-of-credit operations are regulated 
and examined by a Federal or State agency.
    (2) The wording of the letter of credit must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(d).
    (3) An owner or operator who uses a letter of credit to satisfy the 
requirements of this section must also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of the letter of credit, all amounts paid pursuant to a 
draft by the Regional Administrator will be deposited by the issuing 
institution directly into the standby trust fund in accordance with 
instructions from the Regional Administrator. This standby trust fund 
must meet the requirements of the trust fund specified in 
Sec. 265.145(a), except that:
    (i) An originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement must be 
submitted to the Regional Administrator with the letter of credit; and
    (ii) Unless the standby trust fund is funded pursuant to the 
requirements of this section, the following are not required by these 
regulations:
    (A) Payments into the trust fund as specified in Sec. 265.145(a);
    (B) Updating of Schedule A of the trust agreement (see 
Sec. 264.151(a)) to show current post-closure cost estimates;
    (C) Annual valuations as required by the trust agreement; and
    (D) Notices of nonpayment as required by the trust agreement.
    (4) The letter of credit must be accompanied by a letter from the 
owner or operator referring to the letter of credit by number, issuing 
institution, and date, and providing the following information: The EPA 
Identification Number, name, and address of the facility, and the amount 
of funds assured for post-closure care of the facility by the letter of 
credit.
    (5) The letter of credit must be irrevocable and issued for a period 
of at least 1 year. The letter of credit must provide that the 
expiration date will be automatically extended for a period of at least 
1 year unless, at least 120 days before the current expiration date, the 
issuing institution notifies both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator by certified mail of a decision not to extend the 
expiration date. Under the terms of the letter of credit, the 120 days 
will begin on the date when both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator have received the notice, as evidenced by the return 
receipts.
    (6) The letter of credit must be issued in an amount at least equal 
to the current post-closure cost estimate, except as provided in 
Sec. 265.145(f).
    (7) Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the amount of the credit during the operating life 
of the facility, the owner or operator, within 60 days after the 
increase, must either cause the amount of the credit to be increased so 
that it at least equals the current post-closure cost estimate and 
submit evidence of such increase to the

[[Page 426]]

Regional Administrator, or obtain other financial assurance as specified 
in this section to cover the increase. Whenever the current post-closure 
cost estimate decreases during the operating life of the facility, the 
amount of the credit may be reduced to the amount of the current post-
closure cost estimate following written approval by the Regional 
Administrator.
    (8) During the period of post-closure care, the Regional 
Administrator may approve a decrease in the amount of the letter of 
credit if the owner or operator demonstrates to the Regional 
Administrator that the amount exceeds the remaining cost of post-closure 
care.
    (9) Following a final administrative determination pursuant to 
section 3008 of RCRA that the owner or operator has failed to perform 
post-closure care in accordance with the approved post-closure plan and 
other permit requirements, the Regional Administrator may draw on the 
letter of credit.
    (10) If the owner or operator does not establish alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain written approval of 
such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 days 
after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice from the issuing institution that it has 
decided not to extend the letter of credit beyond the current expiration 
date, the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter of credit. The 
Regional Administrator may delay the drawing if the issuing institution 
grants an extension of the term of the credit. During the last 30 days 
of any such extension the Regional Administrator will draw on the letter 
of credit if the owner or operator has failed to provide alternate 
financial assurance as specified in this section and obtain written 
approval of such assurance from the Regional Administrator.
    (11) The Regional Administrator will return the letter of credit to 
the issuing institution for termination when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.145(h).
    (d) Post-closure insurance. (1) An owner or operator may satisfy the 
requirements of this section by obtaining post-closure insurance which 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting a 
certificate of such insurance to the Regional Administrator. By the 
effective date of these regulations the owner or operator must submit to 
the Regional Administrator a letter from an insurer stating that the 
insurer is considering issuance of post- closure insurance conforming to 
the requirements of this paragraph to the owner or operator. Within 90 
days after the effective date of these regulations, the owner or 
operator must submit the certificate of insurance to the Regional 
Administrator or establish other financial assurance as specified in 
this section. At a minimum, the insurer must be licensed to transact the 
business of insurance, or eligible to provide insurance as an excess or 
surplus lines insurer, in one or more States.
    (2) The wording of the certificate of insurance must be identical to 
the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(e).
    (3) The post-closure insurance policy must be issued for a face 
amount at least equal to the current post-closure cost estimate, except 
as provided in Sec. 265.145(f). The term ``face amount'' means the total 
amount the insurer is obligated to pay under the policy. Actual payments 
by the insurer will not change the face amount, although the insurer's 
future liability will be lowered by the amount of the payments.
    (4) The post-closure insurance policy must guarantee that funds will 
be available to provide post-closure care of the facility whenever the 
post-closure period begins. The policy must also guarantee that once 
post-closure care begins the insurer will be responsible for paying out 
funds, up to an amount equal to the face amount of the policy, upon the 
direction of the Regional Administrator, to such party or parties as the 
Regional Administrator specifies.
    (5) An owner or operator or any other person authorized to perform 
post-closure care may request reimbursement for post-closure care 
expenditures by

[[Page 427]]

submitting itemized bills to the Regional Administrator. Within 60 days 
after receiving bills for post-closure care activities, the Regional 
Administrator will instruct the insurer to make reimbursements in those 
amounts as the Regional Administrator specifies in writing, if the 
Regional Administrator determines that the post-closure expenditures are 
in accordance with the approved post-closure plan or otherwise 
justified. If the Regional Administrator does not instruct the insurer 
to make such reimbursements, he will provide a detailed written 
statement of reasons.
    (6) The owner or operator must maintain the policy in full force and 
effect until the Regional Administrator consents to termination of the 
policy by the owner or operator as specified in paragraph (d)(11) of 
this section. Failure to pay the premium, without substitution of 
alternate financial assurance as specified in the section, will 
constitute a significant violation of these regulations, warranting such 
remedy as the Regional Administrator deems necessary. Such violation 
will be deemed to begin upon receipt by the Regional Administrator of a 
notice of future cancellation, termination, or failure to renew due to 
nonpayment of the premium, rather than upon the date of expiration.
    (7) Each policy most contain a provision allowing assignment of the 
policy to a successor owner or operator. Such assignment may be 
conditional upon consent of the insurer, provided such consent is not 
unreasonably refused.
    (8) The policy must provide that the insurer may not cancel, 
terminate, or fail to renew the policy except for failure to pay the 
premium. The automatic renewal of the policy must, at a minimum, provide 
the insured with the option of renewal at the face amount of the 
expiring policy. If there is a failure to pay the premium, the insurer 
may elect to cancel, terminate, or fail to renew the policy by sending 
notice by certified mail to the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator. Cancellation, termination, or failure to renew may not 
occur, however, during the 120 days beginning with the date of receipt 
of the notice by both the Regional Administrator and the owner or 
operator, as evidenced by the return receipts. Cancellation, 
termination, or failure to renew may not occur and the policy will 
remain in full force and effect in the event that on or before the date 
of expiration:
    (i) The Regional Administrator deems the facility abandoned; or
    (ii) Interim status is terminated or revoked; or
    (iii) Closure is ordered by the Regional Administrator or a U.S. 
district court or other court of competent jurisdiction; or
    (iv) The owner or operator is named as debtor in a voluntary or 
involuntary proceeding under Title 11 (Bankruptcy), U.S. Code; or
    (v) The premium due is paid.
    (9) Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate increases to an 
amount greater than the face amount of the policy during the operating 
life of the facility, the owner or operator, within 60 days after the 
increase, must either cause the face amount to be increased to an amount 
at least equal to the current post-closure cost estimate and submit 
evidence of such increase to the Regional Administrator, or obtain other 
financial assurance as specified in this section to cover the increase. 
Whenever the current post-closure cost estimate decreases during the 
operating life of the facility, the face amount may be reduced to the 
amount of the current post-closure cost estimate following written 
approval by the Regional Administrator.
    (10) Commencing on the date that liability to make payments pursuant 
to the policy accrues, the insurer will thereafter annually increase the 
face amount of the policy. Such increase must be equivalent to the face 
amounts of the policy, less any payments made, multiplied by an amount 
equivalent to 85 percent of the most recent investment rate or of the 
equivalent coupon-issue yield announced by the U.S. Treasury for 26-week 
Treasury securities.
    (11) The Regional Administrator will give written consent to the 
owner or operator that he may terminate the insurance policy when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or

[[Page 428]]

    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.145(h).
    (e) Financial test and corporate guarantee for post-closure care. 
(1) An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by 
demonstrating that he passes a financial test as specified in this 
paragraph. To pass this test the owner or operator must meet the 
criteria either of paragraph (e)(1)(i) or (ii) of this section:
    (i) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) Two of the following three ratios: a ratio of total liabilities 
to net worth less than 2.0; a ratio of the sum of net income plus 
depreciation, depletion, and amortization to total liabilities greater 
than 0.1; and a ratio of current assets to current liabilities greater 
than 1.5; and
    (B) Net working capital and tangible net worth each at least six 
times the sum of the current closure and post-closure cost estimates and 
the current plugging and abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets in the United States amounting to at least 90 percent of 
his total assets or at least six times the sum of the current closure 
and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and abandonment 
cost estimates.
    (ii) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) A current rating for his most recent bond issuance of AAA, AA, 
A, or BBB as issued by Standard and Poor's or Aaa, Aa, A, or Baa as 
issued by Moody's; and
    (B) Tangible net worth at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates; and
    (C) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (D) Assets located in the United States amounting to at least 90 
percent of his total assets or at least six times the sum of the current 
closure and post-closure cost estimates and the current plugging and 
abandonment cost estimates.
    (2) The phrase ``current closure and post-closure cost estimates'' 
as used in paragraph (e)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates 
required to be shown in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or 
operator's chief financial officer (Sec. 264.151(f)). The phrase 
``current plugging and abandonment cost estimates'' as used in paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section refers to the cost estimates required to be shown 
in paragraphs 1-4 of the letter from the owner's or operator's chief 
financial officer (Sec. 144.70(f) of this title).
    (3) To demonstrate that he meets this test, the owner or operator 
must submit the following items to the Regional Administrator:
    (i) A letter signed by the owner's or operator's chief financial 
officer and worded as specified in Sec. 264.151(f); and
    (ii) A copy of the independent certified public accountant's report 
on examination of the owner's or operator's financial statements for the 
latest completed fiscal year; and
    (iii) A special report from the owner's or operator's independent 
certified public accountant to the owner or operator stating that:
    (A) He has compared the data which the letter from the chief 
financial officer specifies as having been derived from the 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
fiscal year with the amounts in such financial statements; and
    (B) In connection with that procedure, no matters came to his 
attention which caused him to believe that the specified data should be 
adjusted.
    (4) The owner or operator may obtain an extension of the time 
allowed for submission of the documents specified in paragraph (e)(3) of 
this section if the fiscal year of the owner or operator ends during the 
90 days prior to the effective date of these regulations and if the 
year-end financial statements for that fiscal year will be audited by an 
independent certified public accountant. The extension will end no later 
than 90 days after the end of the owner's or operator's fiscal year. To 
obtain the extension, the owner's or operator's chief financial officer 
must send, by the effective date of these regulations, a letter to the 
Regional Administrator of each Region in which the owner's or operator's 
facilities to be

[[Page 429]]

covered by the financial test are located. This letter from the chief 
financial officer must:
    (i) Request the extension;
    (ii) Certify that he has grounds to believe that the owner or 
operator meets the criteria of the financial test;
    (iii) Specify for each facility to be covered by the test the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, and the current closure and post-
closure cost estimates to be covered by the test;
    (iv) Specify the date ending the owner's or operator's latest 
complete fiscal year before the effective date of these regulations;
    (v) Specify the date, no later than 90 days after the end of such 
fiscal year, when he will submit the documents specified in paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section; and
    (vi) Certify that the year-end financial statements of the owner or 
operator for such fiscal year will be audited by an independent 
certified public accountant.
    (5) After the initial submission of items specified in paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must send updated 
information to the Regional Administrator within 90 days after the close 
of each succeeding fiscal year. This information must consist of all 
three items specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (6) If the owner or operator no longer meets the requirements of 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, he must send notice to the Regional 
Administrator of intent to establish alternate financial assurance as 
specified in this section. The notice must be sent by certified mail 
within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year for which the year-end 
financial data show that the owner or operator no longer meets the 
requirements. The owner or operator must provide the alternate financial 
assurance within 120 days after the end of such fiscal year.
    (7) The Regional Administrator may, based on a reasonable belief 
that the owner or operator may no longer meet the requirements of 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, require reports of financial condition 
at any time from the owner or operator in addition to those specified in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section. If the Regional Administrator finds, 
on the basis of such reports or other information, that the owner or 
operator no longer meets the requirements of paragraph (e)(1) of this 
section, the owner or operator must provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section within 30 days after notification 
of such a finding.
    (8) The Regional Administrator may disallow use of this test on the 
basis of qualifications in the opinion expressed by the independent 
certified public accountant in his report on examination of the owner's 
or operator's financial statements (see paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this 
section). An adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion will be cause 
for disallowance. The Regional Administrator will evaluate other 
qualifications on an individual basis. The owner or operator must 
provide alternate financial assurance as specified in this section 
within 30 days after notification of the disallowance.
    (9) During the period of post-closure care, the Regional 
Administrator may approve a decrease in the current post-closure cost 
estimate for which this test demonstrates financial assurance if the 
owner or operator demonstrates to the Regional Administrator that the 
amount of the cost estimate exceeds the remaining cost of post-closure 
care.
    (10) The owner or operator is no longer required to submit the items 
specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section when:
    (i) An owner or operator substitutes alternate financial assurance 
as specified in this section; or
    (ii) The Regional Administrator releases the owner or operator from 
the requirements of this section in accordance with Sec. 265.145(h).
    (11) An owner or operator may meet the requirements for this section 
by obtaining a written guarantee. The guarantor must be the direct of 
higher-tier parent corporation of the owner or operator, a firm whose 
parent corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or 
operator, or a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with 
the owner or operator. The guarantor must meet the requirements for 
owners or operators in paragraphs (f)(1) through (9) of this section and 
must comply with the terms of the guarantee. The wording of the 
guarantee must

[[Page 430]]

be identical to the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(h). A certified 
copy of the guarantee must accompany the items sent to the Regional 
Administrator as specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section. One of 
these items must be the letter from the guarantor's chief financial 
officer. If the guarantor's parent corporation is also the parent 
corporation of the owner or operator, the letter must describe the value 
received in consideration of the guarantee. If the guarantor is a firm 
with a ``substantial business relationship'' with the owner or operator, 
this letter must describe this ``substantial business relationship'' and 
the value received in consideration of the guarantee. The terms of the 
guarantee must provide that:
    (i) If the owner or operator fails to perform post-closure care of a 
facility covered by the corporate guarantee in accordance with the post-
closure plan and other interim status requirements whenever required to 
do so, the guarantor will do so or establish a trust fund as specified 
in Sec. 265.145(a) in the name of the owner or operator.
    (ii) The corporate guarantee will remain in force unless the 
guarantor sends notice of cancellation by certified mail to the owner or 
operator and to the Regional Administrator. Cancellation may not occur, 
however, during the 120 days beginning on the date of receipt of the 
notice of cancellation by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator, as evidenced by the return receipts.
    (iii) If the owner or operator fails to provide alternate financial 
assurance as specified in this section and obtain the written approval 
of such alternate assurance from the Regional Administrator within 90 
days after receipt by both the owner or operator and the Regional 
Administrator of a notice of cancellation of the corporate guarantee 
from the guarantor, the guarantor will provide such alternate financial 
assurance in the name of the owner or operator.
    (f) Use of multiple financial mechanisms. An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by establishing more than one 
financial mechanism per facility. These mechanisms are limited to trust 
funds, surety bonds, letters of credit, and insurance. The mechanisms 
must be as specified in paragraphs (a) through (d), respectively, of 
this section, except that it is the combination of mechanisms, rather 
than the single mechanism, which must provide financial assurance for an 
amount at least equal to the current post-closure cost estimate. If an 
owner or operator uses a trust fund in combination with a surety bond or 
a letter of credit, he may use the trust fund as the standby trust fund 
for the other mechanisms. A single standby trust fund may be established 
for two or more mechanisms. The Regional Administrator may use any or 
all of the mechanisms to provide for post-closure care of the facility.
    (g) Use of a financial mechanism for multiple facilities. An owner 
or operator may use a financial assurance mechanism specified in this 
section to meet the requirements of this section for more than one 
facility. Evidence of financial assurance submitted to the Regional 
Administrator must include a list showing, for each facility, the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, and the amount of funds for post-
closure care assured by the mechanism. If the facilities covered by the 
mechanism are in more than one Region, identical evidence of financial 
assurance must be submitted to and maintained with the Regional 
Administrators of all such Regions. The amount of funds available 
through the mechanism must be no less than the sum of funds that would 
be available if a separate mechanism had been established and maintained 
for each facility. In directing funds available through the mechanism 
for post-closure care of any of the facilities covered by the mechanism, 
the Regional Administrator may direct only the amount of funds 
designated for that facility, unless the owner or operator agrees to the 
use of additional funds available under the mechanism.
    (h) Release of the owner or operator from the requirements of this 
section. Within 60 days after receiving certifications from the owner or 
operator and an independent registered professional engineer that the 
post-closure care period has been completed in accordance with the 
approved post-closure plan, the Regional Administrator will notify the 
owner or operator in writing that

[[Page 431]]

he is no longer required by this section to maintain financial assurance 
for post-closure care of that unit, unless the Regional Administrator 
has reason to believe that post-closure care has not been in accordance 
with the approved post-closure plan. The Regional Administrator will 
provide the owner or operator a detailed written statement of any such 
reason to believe that post-closure care has not been in accordance with 
the approved post-closure plan.
[47 FR 15064, Apr. 7, 1982, as amended at 51 FR 16457, May 2, 1986; 57 
FR 42843, Sept. 16, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.146  Use of a mechanism for financial assurance of both closure and post-closure care.

    An owner or operator may satisfy the requirements for financial 
assurance for both closure and post-closure care for one or more 
facilities by using a trust fund, surety bond, letter of credit, 
insurance, financial test, or corporate guarantee that meets the 
specifications for the mechanism in both Secs. 265.143 and 265.145. The 
amount of funds available through the mechanism must be no less than the 
sum of funds that would be available if a separate mechanism had been 
established and maintained for financial assurance of closure and of 
post-closure care.


<R05>
Sec. 265.147  Liability requirements.

    (a) Coverage for sudden accidental occurrences. An owner or operator 
of a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility, or a 
group of such facilities, must demonstrate financial responsibility for 
bodily injury and property damage to third parties caused by sudden 
accidental occurrences arising from operations of the facility or group 
of facilities. The owner or operator must have and maintain liability 
coverage for sudden accidental occurrences in the amount of at least $1 
million per occurrence with an annual aggregate of at least $2 million, 
exclusive of legal defense costs. This liability coverage may be 
demonstrated as specified in paragraphs (a) (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or 
(6) of this section:
    (1) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage by having liability insurance as specified in this paragraph.
    (i) Each insurance policy must be amended by attachment of the 
Hazardous Waste Facility Liability Endorsement, or evidenced by a 
Certificate of Liability Insurance. The wording of the endorsement must 
be identical to the wording specified in Sec. 264.151(i). The wording of 
the certificate of insurance must be identical to the wording specified 
in Sec. 264.151(j). The owner or operator must submit a signed duplicate 
original of the endorsement or the certificate of insurance to the 
Regional Administrator, or Regional Administrator if facilities are 
located in more than one Region. If requested by a Regional 
Administrator, the owner or operator must provide a signed duplicate 
original of the insurance policy.
    (ii) Each insurance policy must be issued by an insurer which, at a 
minimum, is licensed to transact the business of insurance, or eligible 
to provide insurance as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in one or 
more States.
    (2) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by passing a financial test or using the guarantee for liability 
coverage as specified in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section.
    (3) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a letter of credit for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (h) of this section.
    (4) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a surety bond for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (5) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a trust fund for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (6) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage through the use of combinations of insurance, financial test, 
guarantee, letter of credit, surety bond, and trust fund, except that 
the owner or operator may not combine a financial test covering part of 
the liability coverage requirement with a guarantee unless the

[[Page 432]]

financial statement of the owner or operator is not consolidated with 
the financial statement of the guarantor. The amounts of coverage 
demonstrated must total at least the minimum amounts required by this 
section. If the owner or operator demonstrates the required coverage 
through the use of a combination of financial assurances under this 
paragraph, the owner or operator shall specify at least one such 
assurance as ``primary'' coverage and shall specify other assurance as 
``excess'' coverage.
    (7) An owner or operator shall notify the Regional Administrator in 
writing within 30 days whenever:
    (i) A claim results in a reduction in the amount of financial 
assurance for liability coverage provided by a financial instrument 
authorized in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section; or
    (ii) A Certification of Valid Claim for bodily injury or property 
damages caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental occurrence arising 
from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal 
facility is entered between the owner or operator and third-party 
claimant for liability coverage under paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) 
of this section; or
    (iii) A final court order establishing a judgment for bodily injury 
or property damage caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental 
occurrence arising from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, 
storage, or disposal facility is issued against the owner or operator or 
an instrument that is providing financial assurance for liability 
coverage under paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section.
    (b) Coverage for nonsudden accidental occurrences. An owner or 
operator of a surface impoundment, landfill, or land treatment facility 
which is used to manage hazardous waste, or a group of such facilities, 
must demonstrate financial responsibility for bodily injury and property 
damage to third parties caused by nonsudden accidental occurrences 
arising from operations of the facility or group of facilities. The 
owner or operator must have and maintain liability coverage for 
nonsudden accidental occurrences in the amount of at least $3 million 
per occurrence with an annual aggregate of at least $6 million, 
exclusive of legal defense costs. An owner or operator who must meet the 
requirements of this section may combine the required per-occurrence 
coverage levels for sudden and nonsudden accidental occurrences into a 
single per-occurrence level, and combine the required annual aggregate 
coverage levels for sudden and nonsudden accidental occurrences into a 
single annual aggregate level. Owners or operators who combine coverage 
levels for sudden and nonsudden accidental occurrences must maintain 
liability coverage in the amount of at least $4 million per occurrence 
and $8 million annual aggregate. This liability coverage may be 
demonstrated as specified in paragraph (b) (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or 
(6) of this section:
    (1) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage by having liability insurance as specified in this paragraph.
    (2) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by passing a financial test or using the guarantee for liability 
coverage as specified in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section.
    (3) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a letter of credit for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (h) of this section.
    (4) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a surety bond for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (5) An owner or operator may meet the requirements of this section 
by obtaining a trust fund for liability coverage as specified in 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (6) An owner or operator may demonstrate the required liability 
coverage through the use of combinations of insurance, financial test, 
guarantee, letter of credit, surety bond, and trust fund, except that 
the owner or operator may not combine a financial test covering part of 
the liability coverage requirement with a guarantee unless the financial 
statement of the owner or operator is not consolidated with the 
financial statement of the guarantor. The amounts of coverage 
demonstrated

[[Page 433]]

must total at least the minimum amounts required by this section. If the 
owner or operator demonstrates the required coverage through the use of 
a combination of financial assurances under this paragraph, the owner or 
operator shall specify at least one such assurance as ``primary'' 
coverage and shall specify other assurance as ``excess'' coverage.
    (7) An owner or operator shall notify the Regional Administrator in 
writing within 30 days whenever:
    (i) A claim results in a reduction in the amount of financial 
assurance for liability coverage provided by a financial instrument 
authorized in paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(6) of this section; or
    (ii) A Certification of Valid Claim for bodily injury or property 
damages caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental occurrence arising 
from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal 
facility is entered between the owner or operator and third-party 
claimant for liability coverage under paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(6) 
of this section; or
    (iii) A final court order establishing a judgment for bodily injury 
or property damage caused by a sudden or non-sudden accidental 
occurrence arising from the operation of a hazardous waste treatment, 
storage, or disposal facility is issued against the owner or operator or 
an instrument that is providing financial assurance for liability 
coverage under paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(6) of this section.
    (c) Request for variance. If an owner or operator can demonstrate to 
the satisfaction of the Regional Administrator that the levels of 
financial responsibility required by paragraph (a) or (b) of this 
section are not consistent with the degree and duration of risk 
associated with treatment, storage, or disposal at the facility or group 
of facilities, the owner or operator may obtain a variance from the 
Regional Administrator. The request for a variance must be submitted in 
writing to the Regional Administrator. If granted, the variance will 
take the form of an adjusted level of required liability coverage, such 
level to be based on the Regional Administrator's assessment of the 
degree and duration of risk associated with the ownership or operation 
of the facility or group of facilities. The Regional Administrator may 
require an owner or operator who requests a variance to provide such 
technical and engineering information as is deemed necessary by the 
Regional Administrator to determine a level of financial responsibility 
other than that required by paragraph (a) or (b) of this section. The 
Regional Administrator will process a variance request as if it were a 
permit modification request under Sec. 270.41(a)(5) of this chapter and 
subject to the procedures of Sec. 124.5 of this chapter. Notwithstanding 
any other provision, the Regional Administrator may hold a public 
hearing at his discretion or whenever he finds, on the basis of requests 
for a public hearing, a significant degree of pubic interest in a 
tentative decision to grant a variance.
    (d) Adjustments by the Regional Administrator. If the Regional 
Administrator determines that the levels of financial responsibility 
required by paragraph (a) or (b) of this section are not consistent with 
the degree and duration of risk associated with treatment, storage, or 
disposal at the facility or group of facilities, the Regional 
Administrator may adjust the level of financial responsibility required 
under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section as may be necessary to 
protect human health and the environment. This adjusted level will be 
based on the Regional Administrator's assessment of the degree and 
duration of risk associated with the ownership or operation of the 
facility or group of facilities. In addition, if the Regional 
Administrator determines that there is a significant risk to human 
health and the environment from nonsudden accidental occurrences 
resulting from the operations of a facility that is not a surface 
impoundment, landfill, or land treatment facility, he may require that 
an owner or operator of the facility comply with paragraph (b) of this 
section. An owner or operator must furnish to the Regional 
Administrator, within a reasonable time, any information which the 
Regional Administrator requests to determine whether cause exists for 
such adjustments of level or type of coverage. The Regional 
Administrator will process an adjustment of the level of

[[Page 434]]

required coverage as if it were a permit modification under 
Sec. 270.41(a)(5) of this chapter and subject to the procedures of 
Sec. 124.5 of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision, the 
Regional Administrator may hold a public hearing at his discretion or 
whenever he finds, on the basis of requests for a public hearing, a 
significant degree of public interest in a tentative decision to adjust 
the level or type of required coverage.
    (e) Period of coverage. Within 60 days after receiving 
certifications from the owner or operator and an independent registered 
professional engineer that final closure has been completed in 
accordance with the approved closure plan, the Regional Administrator 
will notify the owner or operator in writing that he is no longer 
required by this section to maintain liability coverage for that 
facility, unless the Regional Administrator has reason to believe that 
closure has not been in accordance with the approved closure plan.
    (f) Financial test for liability coverage. (1) An owner or operator 
may satisfy the requirements of this section by demonstrating that he 
passes a financial test as specified in this paragraph. To pass this 
test the owner or operator must meet the criteria of paragraph (f)(1) 
(i) or (ii) of this section:
    (i) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) Net working capital and tangible net worth each at least six 
times the amount of liability coverage to be demonstrated by this test; 
and
    (B) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (C) Assets in the United States amounting to either: (1) At least 90 
percent of his total assets; or (2) at least six times the amount of 
liability coverage to be demonstrated by this test.
    (ii) The owner or operator must have:
    (A) A current rating for his most recent bond issuance of AAA, AA, 
A, or BBB as issued by Standard and Poor's, or Aaa, Aa, A, or Baa as 
issued by Moody's; and
    (B) Tangible net worth of at least $10 million; and
    (C) Tangible net worth at least six times the amount of liability 
coverage to be demonstrated by this test; and
    (D) Assets in the United States amounting to either: (1) At least 90 
percent of his total assets; or (2) at least six times the amount of 
liability coverage to be demonstrated by this test.
    (2) The phrase ``amount of liability coverage'' as used in paragraph 
(f)(1) of this section refers to the annual aggregate amounts for which 
coverage is required under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
    (3) To demonstrate that he meets this test, the owner or operator 
must submit the following three items to the Regional Administrator:
    (i) A letter signed by the owner's or operator's chief financial 
officer and worded as specified in Sec. 264.151(g). If an owner or 
operator is using the financial test to demonstrate both assurance for 
closure or post-closure care, as specified by Secs. 264.143(f), 
264.145(f), 265.143(e), and 265.145(e), and liability coverage, he must 
submit the letter specified in Sec. 264.151(g) to cover both forms of 
financial responsibility; a separate letter as specified in 
Sec. 264.151(f) is not required.
    (ii) A copy of the independent certified public accountant's report 
on examination of the owner's or operator's financial statements for the 
latest completed fiscal year.
    (iii) A special report from the owner's or operator's independent 
certified public accountant to the owner or operator stating that:
    (A) He has compared the data which the letter from the chief 
financial officer specifies as having been derived from the 
independently audited, year-end financial statements for the latest 
fiscal year with the amounts in such financial statements; and
    (B) In connection with that procedure, no matters came to his 
attention which caused him to believe that the specified data should be 
adjusted.
    (4) The owner or operator may obtain a one-time extension of the 
time allowed for submission of the documents specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section if the fiscal year of the owner or operator ends 
during the 90 days prior to the effective date of these regulations and 
if the year-end financial statements for that fiscal year will be 
audited by an independent certified public accountant. The extension 
will end no later than 90 days after the end of the owner's or 
operator's fiscal year. To obtain the extension, the owner's or

[[Page 435]]

operator's chief financial officer must send, by the effective date of 
these regulations, a letter to the Regional Administrator of each Region 
in which the owner's or operator's facilities to be covered by the 
financial test are located. This letter from the chief financial officer 
must:
    (i) Request the extension;
    (ii) Certify that he has grounds to believe that the owner or 
operator meets the criteria of the financial test;
    (iii) Specify for each facility to be covered by the test the EPA 
Identification Number, name, address, the amount of liability coverage 
and, when applicable, current closure and post-closure cost estimates to 
be covered by the test;
    (iv) Specify the date ending the owner's or operator's last complete 
fiscal year before the effective date of these regulations;
    (v) Specify the date, no later than 90 days after the end of such 
fiscal year, when he will submit the documents specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section; and
    (vi) Certify that the year-end financial statements of the owner or 
operator for such fiscal year will be audited by an independent 
certified public accountant.
    (5) After the initial submission of items specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must send updated 
information to the Regional Administrator within 90 days after the close 
of each succeeding fiscal year. This information must consist of all 
three items specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section.
    (6) If the owner or operator no longer meets the requirements of 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section, he must obtain insurance, a letter of 
credit, a surety bond, a trust fund, or a guarantee for the entire 
amount of required liability coverage as specified in this section. 
Evidence of liability coverage must be submitted to the Regional 
Administrator within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year for which 
the year-end financial data show that the owner or operator no longer 
meets the test requirements.
    (7) The Regional Administrator may disallow use of this test on the 
basis of qualifications in the opinion expressed by the independent 
certified public accountant in his report on examination of the owner's 
or operator's financial statements (see paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this 
section). An adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion will be cause 
for disallowance. The Regional Administrator will evaluate other 
qualifications on an individual basis. The owner or operator must 
provide evidence of insurance for the entire amount of required 
liability coverage as specified in this section within 30 days after 
notification of disallowance.
    (g) Guarantee for liability coverage. (1) Subject to paragraph 
(g)(2) of this section, an owner or operator may meet the requirements 
of this section by obtaining a written guarantee, hereinafter referred 
to as ``guarantee.'' The guarantor must be the direct or higher-tier 
parent corporation of the owner or operator, a firm whose parent 
corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or operator, or 
a firm with a ``substantial business relationship'' with the owner or 
operator. The guarantor must meet the requirements for owners or 
operators in paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(6) of this section. The 
wording of the guarantee must be identical to the wording specified in 
Sec. 264.151(h)(2) of this chapter. A certified copy of the guarantee 
must accompany the items sent to the Regional Administrator as specified 
in paragraph (f)(3) of this section. One of these items must be the 
letter from the guarantor's chief financial officer. If the guarantor's 
parent corporation is also the parent corporation of the owner or 
operator, this letter must describe the value received in consideration 
of the guarantee. If the guarantor is a firm with a ``substantial 
business relationship'' with the owner or operator, this letter must 
describe this ``substantial business relationship'' and the value 
received in consideration of the guarantee.
    (i) If the owner or operator fails to satisfy a judgment based on a 
determination of liability for bodily injury or property damage to third 
parties caused by sudden or nonsudden accidental occurrences (or both as 
the case may be), arising from the operation of facilities covered by 
this corporate guarantee, or fails to pay an amount

[[Page 436]]

agreed to in settlement of claims arising from or alleged to arise from 
such injury or damage, the guarantor will do so up to the limits of 
coverage.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (2)(i) In the case of corporations incorporated in the United 
States, a guarantee may be used to satisfy the requirements of this 
section only if the Attorneys General or Insurance Commissioners of (A) 
the State in which the guarantor is incorporated, and (B) each State in 
which a facility covered by the guarantee is located have submitted a 
written statement to EPA that a guarantee executed as described in this 
section and Sec. 264.151(h)(2) is a legally valid and enforceable 
obligation in that State.
    (ii) In the case of corporations incorporated outside the United 
States, a guarantee may be used to satisfy the requirements of this 
section only if (A) the non-U.S. corporation has identified a registered 
agent for service of process in each State in which a facility covered 
by the guarantee is located and in the State in which it has its 
principal place of business, and if (B) the Attorney General or 
Insurance Commissioner of each State in which a facility covered by the 
guarantee is located and the State in which the guarantor corporation 
has its principal place of business, has submitted a written statement 
to EPA that a guarantee executed as described in this section and 
Sec. 264.151(h)(2) is a legally valid and enforceable obligation in that 
State.
    (h) Letter of credit for liability coverage. (1) An owner or 
operator may satisfy the requirements of this section by obtaining an 
irrevocable standby letter of credit that conforms to the requirements 
of this paragraph and submitting a copy of the letter of credit to the 
Regional Administrator.
    (2) The financial institution issuing the letter of credit must be 
an entity that has the authority to issue letters of credit and whose 
letter of credit operations are regulated and examined by a Federal or 
State agency.
    (3) The wording of the letter of credit must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(k) of this chapter.
    (4) An owner or operator who uses a letter of credit to satisfy the 
requirements of this section may also establish a standby trust fund. 
Under the terms of such a letter of credit, all amounts paid pursuant to 
a draft by the trustee of the standby trust will be deposited by the 
issuing institution into the standby trust in accordance with 
instructions from the trustee. The trustee of the standby trust fund 
must be an entity which has the authority to act as a trustee and whose 
trust operations are regulated and examined by a Federal or State 
agency.
    (5) The wording of the standby trust fund must be identical to the 
wording specified in Sec. 264.151(n).
    (i) Surety bond for liability coverage. (1) An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by obtaining a surety bond that 
conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting a copy of 
the bond to the Regional Administrator.
    (2) The surety company issuing the bond must be among those listed 
as acceptable sureties on Federal bonds in the most recent Circular 570 
of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
    (3) The wording of the surety bond must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(l) of this chapter.
    (4) A surety bond may be used to satisfy the requirements of this 
section only if the Attorneys General or Insurance Commissioners of (i) 
the State in which the surety is incorporated, and (ii) each State in 
which a facility covered by the surety bond is located have submitted a 
written statement to EPA that a surety bond executed as described in 
this section and Sec. 264.151(l) of this chapter is a legally valid and 
enforceable obligation in that State.
    (j) Trust fund for liability coverage. (1) An owner or operator may 
satisfy the requirements of this section by establishing a trust fund 
that conforms to the requirements of this paragraph and submitting an 
originally signed duplicate of the trust agreement to the Regional 
Administrator.
    (2) The trustee must be an entity which has the authority to act as 
a trustee and whose trust operations are regulated and examined by a 
Federal or State agency.
    (3) The trust fund for liability coverage must be funded for the 
full amount of the liability coverage to be provided by the trust fund 
before it

[[Page 437]]

may be relied upon to satisfy the requirements of this section. If at 
any time after the trust fund is created the amount of funds in the 
trust fund is reduced below the full amount of the liability coverage to 
be provided, the owner or operator, by the anniversary date of the 
establishment of the Fund, must either add sufficient funds to the trust 
fund to cause its value to equal the full amount of liability coverage 
to be provided, or obtain other financial assurance as specified in this 
section to cover the difference. For purposes of this paragraph, ``the 
full amount of the liability coverage to be provided'' means the amount 
of coverage for sudden and/or nonsudden occurrences required to be 
provided by the owner or operator by this section, less the amount of 
financial assurance for liability coverage that is being provided by 
other financial assurance mechanisms being used to demonstrate financial 
assurance by the owner or operator.
    (4) The wording of the trust fund must be identical to the wording 
specified in Sec. 264.151(m) of this part.
    (k) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, an owner or 
operator using liability insurance to satisfy the requirements of this 
section may use, until October 16, 1982, a Hazardous Waste Facility 
Liability Endorsement or Certificate of Liability Insurance that does 
not certify that the insurer is licensed to transact the business of 
insurance, or eligible as an excess or surplus lines insurer, in one or 
more States.
[47 FR 16558, Apr. 16, 1982, as amended at 47 FR 28627, July 1, 1982; 47 
FR 30447, July 13, 1982; 48 FR 30115, June 30, 1983; 51 FR 16458, May 2, 
1986; 51 FR 25355, July 11, 1986; 52 FR 44321, Nov. 18, 1987; 53 FR 
33959, Sept. 1, 1988; 56 FR 30200, July 1, 1991; 56 FR 47912, Sept. 23, 
1991; 57 FR 42843, Sept. 16, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.148  Incapacity of owners or operators, guarantors, or financial institutions.

    (a) An owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator by 
certified mail of the commencement of a voluntary or involuntary 
proceeding under Title 11 (Bankruptcy), U.S. Code, naming the owner or 
operator as debtor, within 10 days after commencement of the proceeding. 
A guarantor of a corporate guarantee as specified in Secs. 265.143(e) 
and 265.145(e) must make such a notification if he is named as debtor, 
as required under the terms of the corporate guarantee 
(Sec. 264.151(h)).
    (b) An owner or operator who fulfills the requirements of 
Sec. 265.143, Sec. 265.145, or Sec. 265.147 by obtaining a trust fund, 
surety bond, letter of credit, or insurance policy will be deemed to be 
without the required financial assurance or liability coverage in the 
event of bankruptcy of the trustee or issuing institution, or a 
suspension or revocation of the authority of the trustee institution to 
act as trustee or of the institution issuing the surety bond, letter of 
credit, or insurance policy to issue such instruments. The owner or 
operator must establish other financial assurance or liability coverage 
within 60 days after such an event.


<R05>
Sec. 265.149  Use of State-required mechanisms.

    (a) For a facility located in a State where EPA is administering the 
requirements of this subpart but where the State has hazardous waste 
regulations that include requirements for financial assurance of closure 
or post-closure care or liability coverage, an owner or operator may use 
State-required financial mechanisms to meet the requirements of 
Sec. 265.143, Sec. 265.145, or Sec. 265.147 if the Regional 
Administrator determines that the State mechanisms are at least 
equivalent to the financial mechanisms specified in this subpart. The 
Regional Administrator will evaluate the equivalency of the mechanisms 
principally in terms of (1) certainty of the availability of funds for 
the required closure or post-closure care activities or liability 
coverage and (2) the amount of funds that will be made available. The 
Regional Administrator may also consider other factors as he deems 
appropriate. The owner or operator must submit to the Regional 
Administrator evidence of the establishment of the mechanism together 
with a letter requesting that the State-required mechanism be considered 
acceptable for meeting the requirements of this subpart. The submission 
must include the following information: The facility's EPA 
Identification Number, name, and address, and the amount of

[[Page 438]]

funds for closure or post-closure care or liability coverage assured by 
the mechanism. The Regional Administrator will notify the owner or 
operator of his determination regarding the mechanism's acceptability in 
lieu of financial mechanisms specified in this subpart. The Regional 
Administrator may require the owner or operator to submit additional 
information as is deemed necessary to make this determination. Pending 
this determination, the owner or operator will be deemed to be in 
compliance with the requirements of Sec. 265.143, Sec. 265.145, or 
Sec. 265.147, as applicable.
    (b) If a State-required mechanism is found acceptable as specified 
in paragraph (a) of this section except for the amount of funds 
available, the owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of this 
subpart by increasing the funds available through the State-required 
mechanism or using additional financial mechanisms as specified in this 
subpart. The amount of funds available through the State and Federal 
mechanisms must at least equal the amount required by this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 265.150  State assumption of responsibility.

    (a) If a State either assumes legal responsibility for an owner's or 
operator's compliance with the closure, post-closure care, or liability 
requirements of this part or assures that funds will be available from 
State sources to cover those requirements, the owner or operator will be 
in compliance with the requirements of Sec. 265.143, Sec. 265.145, or 
Sec. 265.147 if the Regional Administrator determines that the State's 
assumption of responsibility is at least equivalent to the financial 
mechanisms specified in this subpart. The Regional Administrator will 
evaluate the equivalency of State guarantees principally in terms of (1) 
certainty of the availability of funds for the required closure or post-
closure care activities or liability coverage and (2) the amount of 
funds that will be made available. The Regional Administrator may also 
consider other factors as he deems appropriate. The owner or operator 
must submit to the Regional Administrator a letter from the State 
describing the nature of the State's assumption of responsibility 
together with a letter from the owner or operator requesting that the 
State's assumption of responsibility be considered acceptable for 
meeting the requirements of this subpart. The letter from the State must 
include, or have attached to it, the following information: The 
facility's EPA Identification Number, name, and address, and the amount 
of funds for closure or post-closure care or liability coverage that are 
guaranteed by the State. The Regional Administrator will notify the 
owner or operator of his determination regarding the acceptability of 
the State's guarantee in lieu of financial mechanisms specified in this 
subpart. The Regional Administrator may require the owner or operator to 
submit additional information as is deemed necessary to make this 
determination. Pending this determination, the owner or operator will be 
deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Secs. 265.143, 
Sec. 265.145, or Sec. 265.147, as applicable.
    (b) If a State's assumption of responsibility is found acceptable as 
specified in paragraph (a) of this section except for the amount of 
funds available, the owner or operator may satisfy the requirements of 
this subpart by use of both the State's assurance and additional 
financial mechanisms as specified in this subpart. The amount of funds 
available through the State and Federal mechanisms must at least equal 
the amount required by this subpart.


<R04>
               Subpart I--Use and Management of Containers


<R05>
Sec. 265.170  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of all 
hazardous waste facilities that store containers of hazardous waste, 
except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 265.171  Condition of containers.

    If a container holding hazardous waste is not in good condition, or 
if it begins to leak, the owner or operator must transfer the hazardous 
waste from this container to a container that is in good condition, or 
manage the

[[Page 439]]

waste in some other way that complies with the requirements of this 
part.


<R05>
Sec. 265.172  Compatibility of waste with container.

    The owner or operator must use a container made of or lined with 
materials which will not react with, and are otherwise compatible with, 
the hazardous waste to be stored, so that the ability of the container 
to contain the waste is not impaired.


<R05>
Sec. 265.173  Management of containers.

    (a) A container holding hazardous waste must always be closed during 
storage, except when it is necessary to add or remove waste.
    (b) A container holding hazardous waste must not be opened, handled, 
or stored in a manner which may rupture the container or cause it to 
leak.

[Comment: Re-use of containers in transportation is governed by U.S. 
Department of Transportation regulations, including those set forth in 
49 CFR 173.28.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 78529, Nov. 25, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 265.174  Inspections.

    The owner or operator must inspect areas where containers are 
stored, at least weekly, looking for leaks and for deterioration caused 
by corrosion or other factors.

[Comment: See Sec. 265.171 for remedial action required if deterioration 
or leaks are detected.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.175  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.176  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    Containers holding ignitable or reactive waste must be located at 
least 15 meters (50 feet) from the facility's property line.

[Comment: See Sec. 265.17(a) for additional requirements.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.177  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    (a) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V for examples) must not be placed in the same container, 
unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.
    (b) Hazardous waste must not be placed in an unwashed container that 
previously held an incompatible waste or material (see appendix V for 
examples), unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.
    (c) A storage container holding a hazardous waste that is 
incompatible with any waste or other materials stored nearby in other 
containers, piles, open tanks, or surface impoundments must be separated 
from the other materials or protected from them by means of a dike, 
berm, wall, or other device.

[Comment: The purpose of this is to prevent fires, explosions, gaseous 
emissions, leaching, or other discharge of hazardous waste or hazardous 
waste constituents which could result from the mixing of incompatible 
wastes or materials if containers break or leak.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.178  Air emission standards.

    The owner or operator shall manage all hazardous waste placed in a 
container in accordance with the applicable requirements of subparts AA, 
BB, and CC of this part.
[61 FR 59968, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R04>
                         Subpart J--Tank Systems

    Source: 51 FR 25479, July 14, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.190  Applicability.

    The requirements of this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that use tank systems for storing or treating hazardous waste 
except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this 
section or in Sec. 265.1 of this part.
    (a) Tank systems that are used to store or treat hazardous waste 
which contains no free liquids and that are situated inside a building 
with an impermeable floor are exempted from the requirements in 
Sec. 265.193. To demonstrate the absence or presence of free liquids in 
the stored/treated waste, the following test must be used: Method 9095 
(Paint Filter Liquids Test) as described in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-
846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of this chapter.
    (b) Tank systems, including sumps, as defined in Sec. 260.10, that 
serve as part of a secondary containment system to

[[Page 440]]

collect or contain releases of hazardous wastes are exempted from the 
requirements in Sec. 265.193(a).
    (c) Tanks, sumps, and other collection devices used in conjunction 
with drip pads, as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter and regulated 
under 40 CFR part 265 subpart W, must meet the requirements of this 
subpart.
[51 FR 25479, July 14, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 34087, Sept. 2, 1988; 
55 FR 50486, Dec. 6, 1990; 58 FR 46050, Aug. 31, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 265.191  Assessment of existing tank system's integrity.

    (a) For each existing tank system that does not have secondary 
containment meeting the requirements of Sec. 265.193, the owner or 
operator must determine that the tank system is not leaking or is unfit 
for use. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the owner 
or operator must obtain and keep on file at the facility a written 
assessment reviewed and certified by an independent, qualified, 
registered professional engineer in accordance with Sec. 270.11(d), that 
attests to the tank system's integrity by January 12, 1988.
    (b) This assessment must determine that the tank system is 
adequately designed and has sufficient structural strength and 
compatibility with the waste(s) to be stored or treated to ensure that 
it will not collapse, rupture, or fail. At a minimum, this assessment 
must consider the following:
    (1) Design standard(s), if available, according to which the tank 
and ancillary equipment were constructed;
    (2) Hazardous characteristics of the waste(s) that have been or will 
be handled;
    (3) Existing corrosion protection measures;
    (4) Documented age of the tank system, if available, (otherwise, an 
estimate of the age); and
    (5) Results of a leak test, internal inspection, or other tank 
integrity examination such that:
    (i) For non-enterable underground tanks, this assessment must 
consist of a leak test that is capable of taking into account the 
effects of temperature variations, tank end deflection, vapor pockets, 
and high water table effects,
    (ii) For other than non-enterable underground tanks and for 
ancillary equipment, this assessment must be either a leak test, as 
described above, or an internal inspection and/or other tank integrity 
examination certified by an independent, qualified, registered 
professional engineer in accordance with Sec. 270.11(d) that addresses 
cracks, leaks, corrosion, and erosion.

[Note: The practices described in the American Petroleum Institute (API) 
Publication, Guide for Inspection of Refinery Equipment, Chapter XIII, 
``Atmospheric and Low-Pressure Storage Tanks,'' 4th edition, 1981, may 
be used, where applicable, as guidelines in conducting the integrity 
examination of an other than non-enterable underground tank system.]

    (c) Tank systems that store or treat materials that become hazardous 
wastes subsequent to July 14, 1986 must conduct this assessment within 
12 months after the date that the waste becomes a hazardous waste.
    (d) If, as a result of the assessment conducted in accordance with 
paragraph (a) of this section, a tank system is found to be leaking or 
unfit for use, the owner or operator must comply with the requirements 
of Sec. 265.196.


<R05>
Sec. 265.192  Design and installation of new tank systems or components.

    (a) Owners or operators of new tank systems or components must 
ensure that the foundation, structural support, seams, connections, and 
pressure controls (if applicable) are adequately designed and that the 
tank system has sufficient structural strength, compatibility with the 
waste(s) to be stored or treated, and corrosion protection so that it 
will not collapse, rupture, or fail. The owner or operator must obtain a 
written assessment reviewed and certified by an independent, qualified, 
registered professional engineer in accordance with Sec. 270.11(d) 
attesting that the system has sufficient structural integrity and is 
acceptable for the storing and treating of hazardous waste. This 
assessment must include, at a minimum, the following information:
    (1) Design standard(s) according to which the tank(s) and ancillary 
equipment is or will be constructed.
    (2) Hazardous characteristics of the waste(s) to be handled.

[[Page 441]]

    (3) For new tank systems or components in which the external shell 
of a metal tank or any external metal component of the tank system is or 
will be in contact with the soil or with water, a determination by a 
corrosion expert of:
    (i) Factors affecting the potential for corrosion, including but not 
limited to:
    (A) Soil moisture content;
    (B) Soil pH;
    (C) Soil sulfides level;
    (D) Soil resistivity;
    (E) Structure to soil potential;
    (F) Influence of nearby underground metal structures (e.g., piping);
    (G) Stray electric current; and,
    (H) Existing corrosion-protection measures (e.g., coating, cathodic 
protection), and
    (ii) The type and degree of external corrosion protection that are 
needed to ensure the integrity of the tank system during the use of the 
tank system or component, consisting of one or more of the following:
    (A) Corrosion-resistant materials of construction such as special 
alloys or fiberglass-reinforced plastic;
    (B) Corrosion-resistant coating (such as epoxy or fiberglass) with 
cathodic protection (e.g., impressed current or sacrificial anodes); and
    (C) Electrical isolation devices such as insulating joints and 
flanges.

    Note: The practices described in the National Association of 
Corrosion Engineers (NACE) standard, ``Recommended Practice (RP-02-85)--
Control of External Corrosion on Metallic Buried, Partially Buried, or 
Submerged Liquid Storage Systems,'' and the American Petroleum Institute 
(API) Publication 1632, ``Cathodic Protection of Underground Petroleum 
Storage Tanks and Piping Systems,'' may be used, where applicable, as 
guidelines in providing corrosion protection for tank systems.

    (4) For underground tank system components that are likely to be 
affected by vehicular traffic, a determination of design or operational 
measures that will protect the tank system against potential damage; and
    (5) Design considerations to ensure that:
    (i) Tank foundations will maintain the load of a full tank;
    (ii) Tank systems will be anchored to prevent flotation or 
dislodgement where the tank system is placed in a saturated zone, or is 
located within a seismic fault zone; and
    (iii) Tank systems will withstand the effects of frost heave.
    (b) The owner or operator of a new tank system must ensure that 
proper handling procedures are adhered to in order to prevent damage to 
the system during installation. Prior to covering, enclosing, or placing 
a new tank system or component in use, an independent, qualified 
installation inspector or an independent, qualified, registered 
professional engineer, either of whom is trained and experienced in the 
proper installation of tank systems, must inspect the system or 
component for the presence of any of the following items:
    (1) Weld breaks;
    (2) Punctures;
    (3) Scrapes of protective coatings;
    (4) Cracks;
    (5) Corrosion;
    (6) Other structural damage or inadequate construction or 
installation.

All discrepancies must be remedied before the tank system is covered, 
enclosed, or placed in use.
    (c) New tank systems or components and piping that are placed 
underground and that are backfilled must be provided with a backfill 
material that is a noncorrosive, porous, homogeneous substance and that 
is carefully installed so that the backfill is placed completely around 
the tank and compacted to ensure that the tank and piping are fully and 
uniformly supported.
    (d) All new tanks and ancillary equipment must be tested for 
tightness prior to being covered, enclosed or placed in use. If a tank 
system is found not to be tight, all repairs necessary to remedy the 
leak(s) in the system must be performed prior to the tank system being 
covered, enclosed, or placed in use.
    (e) Ancillary equipment must be supported and protected against 
physical damage and excessive stress due to settlement, vibration, 
expansion or contraction.

    Note: The piping system installation procedures described in 
American Petroleum Institute (API) Publication 1615 (November 1979), 
``Installation of Underground Petroleum Storage Systems,'' or ANSI 
Standard B31.3, ``Petroleum Refinery System,'' may be

[[Page 442]]

used, where applicable, as guidelines for proper installation of piping 
systems.

    (f) The owner or operator must provide the type and degree of 
corrosion protection necessary, based on the information provided under 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section, to ensure the integrity of the tank 
system during use of the tank system. The installation of a corrosion 
protection system that is field fabricated must be supervised by an 
independent corrosion expert to ensure proper installation.
    (g) The owner or operator must obtain and keep on file at the 
facility written statements by those persons required to certify the 
design of the tank system and supervise the installation of the tank 
system in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs (b) through (f) 
of this section to attest that the tank system was properly designed and 
installed and that repairs, pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (d) of this 
section were performed. These written statements must also include the 
certification statement as required in Sec. 270.11(d) of this chapter.
[51 FR 25479, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 265.193  Containment and detection of releases.

    (a) In order to prevent the release of hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents to the environment, secondary containment that meets the 
requirements of this section must be provided (except as provided in 
paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section):
    (1) For all new tank systems or components, prior to their being put 
into service;
    (2) For all existing tanks used to store or treat EPA Hazardous 
Waste Nos. F020, F021, F022, F023, F026, and F027, within two years 
after January 12, 1987;
    (3) For those existing tank systems of known and documentable age, 
within two years after January 12, 1987, or when the tank systems have 
reached 15 years of age, whichever comes later;
    (4) For those existing tank system for which the age cannot be 
documented, within eight years of January 12, 1987; but if the age of 
the facility is greater than seven years, secondary containment must be 
provided by the time the facility reaches 15 years of age, or within two 
years of January 12, 1987, whichever comes later; and
    (5) For tank systems that store or treat materials that become 
hazardous wastes subsequent to January 12, 1987, within the time 
intervals required in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section, 
except that the date that a material becomes a hazardous waste must be 
used in place of January 12, 1987.
    (b) Secondary containment systems must be:
    (1) Designed, installed, and operated to prevent any migration of 
wastes or accumulated liquid out of the system to the soil, ground 
water, or surface water at any time during the use of the tank system; 
and
    (2) Capable of detecting and collecting releases and accumulated 
liquids until the collected material is removed.
    (c) To meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section, 
secondary containment systems must be at a minimum:
    (1) Constructed of or lined with materials that are compatible with 
the waste(s) to be placed in the tank system and must have sufficient 
strength and thickness to prevent failure due to pressure gradients 
(including static head and external hydrological forces), physical 
contact with the waste to which they are exposed, climatic conditions, 
the stress of installation, and the stress of daily operation (including 
stresses from nearby vehicular traffic);
    (2) Placed on a foundation or base capable of providing support to 
the secondary containment system and resistance to pressure gradients 
above and below the system and capable of preventing failure due to 
settlement, compression, or uplift;
    (3) Provided with a leak detection system that is designed and 
operated so that it will detect the failure of either the primary and 
secondary containment structure or any release of hazardous waste or 
accumulated liquid in the secondary containment system within 24 hours, 
or at the earliest practicable time if the existing detection technology 
or site conditions will not allow detection of a release within 24 
hours;

[[Page 443]]

    (4) Sloped or otherwise designed or operated to drain and remove 
liquids resulting from leaks, spills, or precipitation. Spilled or 
leaked waste and accumulated precipitation must be removed from the 
secondary containment system within 24 hours, or in as timely a manner 
as is possible to prevent harm to human health or the environment, if 
removal of the released waste or accumulated precipitation cannot be 
accomplished within 24 hours.

    Note: If the collected material is a hazardous waste under part 261 
of this chapter, it is subject to management as a hazardous waste in 
accordance with all applicable requirements of parts 262 through 265 of 
this chapter. If the collected material is discharged through a point 
source to waters of the United States, it is subject to the requirements 
of sections 301, 304, and 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. If 
discharged to Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTWs), it is subject to 
the requirements of section 307 of the Clear Water Act, as amended. If 
the collected material is released to the environment, it may be subject 
to the reporting requirements of 40 CFR part 302.

    (d) Secondary containment for tanks must include one or more of the 
following devices:
    (1) A liner (external to the tank);
    (2) A vault;
    (3) A double-walled tank; or
    (4) An equivalent device as approved by the Regional Administrator.
    (e) In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) 
of this section, secondary containment systems must satisfy the 
following requirements:
    (1) External liner systems must be:
    (i) Designed or operated to contain 100 percent of the capacity of 
the largest tank within its boundary;
    (ii) Designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration of 
precipitation into the secondary containment system unless the 
collection system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on or 
infiltration. Such additional capacity must be sufficient to contain 
precipitation from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event;
    (iii) Free of cracks or gaps; and
    (iv) Designed and installed to completely surround the tank and to 
cover all surrounding earth likely to come into contact with the waste 
if released from the tank(s) (i.e., capable of preventing lateral as 
well as vertical migration of the waste).
    (2) Vault systems must be:
    (i) Designed or operated to contain 100 percent of the capacity of 
the largest tank within its boundary;
    (ii) Designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration of 
precipitation into the secondary containment system unless the 
collection system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on or 
infiltration. Such additional capacity must be sufficient to contain 
precipitation from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event;
    (iii) Constructed with chemical-resistant water stops in place at 
all joints (if any);
    (iv) Provided with an impermeable interior coating or lining that is 
compatible with the stored waste and that will prevent migration of 
waste into the concrete;
    (v) Provided with a means to protect against the formation of and 
ignition of vapors within the vault, if the waste being stored or 
treated:
    (A) Meets the definition of ignitable waste under Sec. 262.21 of 
this chapter, or
    (B) Meets the definition of reactive waste under Sec. 262.21 of this 
chapter and may form an ignitable or explosive vapor; and
    (vi) Provided with an exterior moisture barrier or be otherwise 
designed or operated to prevent migration of moisture into the vault if 
the vault is subject to hydraulic pressure.
    (3) Double-walled tanks must be:
    (i) Designed as an integral structure (i.e., an inner tank within an 
outer shell) so that any release from the inner tank is contained by the 
outer shell;
    (ii) Protected, if constructed of metal, from both corrosion of the 
primary tank interior and the external surface of the outer shell; and
    (iii) Provided with a built-in, continuous leak detection system 
capable of detecting a release within 24 hours or at the earliest 
practicable time, if the owner or operator can demonstrate to the 
Regional Administrator, and the Regional Administrator concurs, that the 
existing leak detection technology or site conditions will not allow 
detection of a release within 24 hours.


[[Page 444]]


    Note: The provisions outlined in the Steel Tank Institute's (STI) 
``Standard for Dual Wall Underground Steel Storage Tank'' may be used as 
guidelines for aspects of the design of underground steel double-walled 
tanks.

    (f) Ancillary equipment must be provided with full secondary 
containment (e.g., trench, jacketing, double-walled piping) that meets 
the requirements of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section except for:
    (1) Aboveground piping (exclusive of flanges, joints, valves, and 
connections) that are visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis;
    (2) Welded flanges, welded joints, and welded connections that are 
visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis;
    (3) Sealless or magnetic coupling pumps and sealless valves, that 
are visually inspected for leaks on a daily basis; and
    (4) Pressurized aboveground piping systems with automatic shut-off 
devices (e.g., excess flow check valves, flow metering shutdown devices, 
loss of pressure actuated shut-off devices) that are visually inspected 
for leaks on a daily basis.
    (g) The owner or operator may obtain a variance from the 
requirements of this Section if the Regional Administrator finds, as a 
result of a demonstration by the owner or operator, either: that 
alternative design and operating practices, together with location 
characteristics, will prevent the migration of hazardous waste or 
hazardous constituents into the ground water or surface water at least 
as effectively as secondary containment during the active life of the 
tank system or that in the event of a release that does migrate to 
ground water or surface water, no substantial present or potential 
hazard will be posed to human health or the environment. New underground 
tank systems may not, per a demonstration in accordance with paragraph 
(g)(2) of this section, be exempted from the secondary containment 
requirements of this section. Application for a variance as allowed in 
paragraph (g) of this section does not waive compliance with the 
requirements of this subpart for new tank systems.
    (1) In deciding whether to grant a variance based on a demonstration 
of equivalent protection of ground water and surface water, the Regional 
Administrator will consider:
    (i) The nature and quantity of the waste;
    (ii) The proposed alternate design and operation;
    (iii) The hydrogeologic setting of the facility, including the 
thickness of soils between the tank system and ground water; and
    (iv) All other factors that would influence the quality and mobility 
of the hazardous constituents and the potential for them to migrate to 
ground water or surface water.
    (2) In deciding whether to grant a variance, based on a 
demonstration of no substantial present or potential hazard, the 
Regional Administrator will consider:
    (i) The potential adverse effects on ground water, surface water, 
and land quality taking into account:
    (A) The physical and chemical characteristics of the waste in the 
tank system, including its potential for migration,
    (B) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and 
surrounding land,
    (C) The potential for health risks caused by human exposure to waste 
constituents,
    (D) The potential for damage to wildlife, crops, vegetation, and 
physical structures caused by exposure to waste constituents, and
    (E) The persistence and permanence of the potential adverse effects;
    (ii) The potential adverse effects of a release on ground-water 
quality, taking into account:
    (A) The quantity and quality of ground water and the direction of 
ground-water flow,
    (B) The proximity and withdrawal rates of water in the area,
    (C) The current and future uses of ground water in the area, and
    (D) The existing quality of ground water, including other sources of 
contamination and their cumulative impact on the ground-water quality;
    (iii) The potential adverse effects of a release on surface water 
quality, taking into account:
    (A) The quantity and quality of ground water and the direction of 
ground-water flow,

[[Page 445]]

    (B) The patterns of rainfall in the region,
    (C) The proximity of the tank system to surface waters,
    (D) The current and future uses of surface waters in the area and 
any water quality standards established for those surface waters, and
    (E) The existing quality of surface water, including other sources 
of contamination and the cumulative impact on surface-water quality; and
    (iv) The potential adverse effects of a release on the land 
surrounding the tank system, taking into account:
    (A) The patterns of rainfall in the region, and
    (B) The current and future uses of the surrounding land.
    (3) The owner or operator of a tank system, for which a variance 
from secondary containment had been granted in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (g)(1) of this section, at which a release of 
hazardous waste has occurred from the primary tank system but has not 
migrated beyond the zone of engineering control (as established in the 
variance), must:
    (i) Comply with the requirements of Sec. 265.196, except paragraph 
(d); and
    (ii) Decontaminate or remove contaminated soil to the extent 
necessary to:
    (A) Enable the tank system, for which the variance was granted, to 
resume operation with the capability for the detection of and response 
to releases at least equivalent to the capability it had prior to the 
release, and
    (B) Prevent the migration of hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents to ground water or surface water; and
    (iii) If contaminated soil cannot be removed or decontaminated in 
accordance with paragraph (g)(3)(ii) of this section, comply with the 
requirements of Sec. 265.197(b);
    (4) The owner or operator of a tank system, for which a variance 
from secondary containment had been granted in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (g)(1) of this section, at which a release of 
hazardous waste has occurred from the primary tank system and has 
migrated beyond the zone of engineering control (as established in the 
variance), must:
    (i) Comply with the requirements of Sec. 265.196(a), (b), (c), and 
(d); and
    (ii) Prevent the migration of hazardous waste or hazardous 
constituents to ground water or surface water, if possible, and 
decontaminate or remove contaminated soil. If contaminated soil cannot 
be decontaminated or removed, or if ground water has been contaminated, 
the owner or operator must comply with the requirements of 
Sec. 265.197(b);
    (iii) If repairing, replacing, or reinstalling the tank system, 
provide secondary containment in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraphs (a) through (f) of this section or reapply for a variance 
from secondary containment and meet the requirements for new tank 
systems in Sec. 265.192 if the tank system is replaced. The owner or 
operator must comply with these requirements even if contaminated soil 
can be decontaminated or removed, and ground water or surface water has 
not been contaminated.
    (h) The following procedures must be followed in order to request a 
variance from secondary containment:
    (1) The Regional Administrator must be notified in writing by the 
owner or operator that he intends to conduct and submit a demonstration 
for a variance from secondary containment as allowed in paragraph (g) of 
this section according to the following schedule:
    (i) For existing tank systems, at least 24 months prior to the date 
that secondary containment must be provided in accordance with paragraph 
(a) of this section; and
    (ii) For new tank systems, at least 30 days prior to entering into a 
contract for installation of the tank system.
    (2) As part of the notification, the owner or operator must also 
submit to the Regional Administrator a description of the steps 
necessary to conduct the demonstration and a timetable for completing 
each of the steps. The demonstration must address each of the factors 
listed in paragraph (g)(1) or paragraph (g)(2) of this section.
    (3) The demonstration for a variance must be completed and submitted 
to the Regional Administrator within 180 days after notifying the 
Regional Administrator of intent to conduct the demonstration.

[[Page 446]]

    (4) The Regional Administrator will inform the public, through a 
newspaper notice, of the availability of the demonstration for a 
variance. The notice shall be placed in a daily or weekly major local 
newspaper of general circulation and shall provide at least 30 days from 
the date of the notice for the public to review and comment on the 
demonstration for a variance. The Regional Administrator also will hold 
a public hearing, in response to a request or at his own discretion, 
whenever such a hearing might clarify one or more issues concerning the 
demonstration for a variance. Public notice of the hearing will be given 
at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing and may be given at 
the same time as notice of the opportunity for the public to review and 
comment on the demonstration. These two notices may be combined.
    (5) The Regional Administrator will approve or disapprove the 
request for a variance within 90 days of receipt of the demonstration 
from the owner or operator and will notify in writing the owner or 
operator and each person who submitted written comments or requested 
notice of the variance decision. If the demonstration for a variance is 
incomplete or does not include sufficient information, the 90-day time 
period will begin when the Regional Administrator receives a complete 
demonstration, including all information necessary to make a final 
determination. If the public comment period in paragraph (h)(4) of this 
section is extended, the 90-day time period will be similarly extended.
    (i) All tank systems, until such time as secondary containment 
meeting the requirements of this section is provided, must comply with 
the following:
    (1) For non-enterable underground tanks, a leak test that meets the 
requirements of Sec. 265.191(b)(5) must be conducted at least annually;
    (2) For other than non-enterable underground tanks and for all 
ancillary equipment, an annual leak test, as described in paragraph 
(i)(1) of this section, or an internal inspection or other tank 
integrity examination by an independent, qualified, registered 
professional engineer that addresses cracks, leaks, corrosion, and 
erosion must be conducted at least annually. The owner or operator must 
remove the stored waste from the tank, if necessary, to allow the 
condition of all internal tank surfaces to be assessed.

    Note: The practices described in the American Petroleum Institute 
(API) Publication Guide for Inspection of Refining Equipment, Chapter 
XIII, ``Atmospheric and Low Pressure Storage Tanks,'' 4th edition, 1981, 
may be used, when applicable, as guidelines for assessing the overall 
condition of the tank system.

    (3) The owner or operator must maintain on file at the facility a 
record of the results of the assessments conducted in accordance with 
paragraphs (i)(1) through (i)(3) of this section.
    (4) If a tank system or component is found to be leaking or unfit-
for-use as a result of the leak test or assessment in paragraphs (i)(1) 
through (i)(3) of this section, the owner or operator must comply with 
the requirements of Sec. 265.196.
[51 FR 25479, July 14, 1986; 51 FR 29430, Aug. 15, 1986, as amended at 
53 FR 34087, Sept. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 265.194  General operating requirements.

    (a) Hazardous wastes or treatment reagents must not be placed in a 
tank system if they could cause the tank, its ancillary equipment, or 
the secondary containment system to rupture, leak, corrode, or otherwise 
fail.
    (b) The owner or operator must use appropriate controls and 
practices to prevent spills and overflows from tank or secondary 
containment systems. These include at a minimum:
    (1) Spill prevention controls (e.g , check valves, dry discount 
couplings);
    (2) Overfill prevention controls (e.g , level sensing devices, high 
level alarms, automatic feed cutoff, or bypass to a standby tank); and
    (3) Maintenance of sufficient freeboard in uncovered tanks to 
prevent overtopping by wave or wind action or by precipitation.
    (c) The owner or operator must comply with the requirements of 
Sec. 265.196 if a leak or spill occurs in the tank system.


[[Page 447]]




<R05>
Sec. 265.195  Inspections.

    (a) The owner or operator must inspect, where present, at least once 
each operating day:
    (1) Overfill/spill control equipment (e.g., waste-feed cutoff 
systems, bypass systems, and drainage systems) to ensure that it is in 
good working order;
    (2) The aboveground portions of the tank system, if any, to detect 
corrosion or releases of waste;
    (3) Data gathered from monitoring equipment and leak-detection 
equipment, (e.g., pressure and temperature gauges, monitoring wells) to 
ensure that the tank system is being operated according to its design; 
and
    (4) The construction materials and the area immediately surrounding 
the externally accessible portion of the tank system including secondary 
containment structures (e.g., dikes) to detect erosion or signs of 
releases of hazardous waste (e.g., wet spots, dead vegetation);

    Note: Section 265.15(c) requires the owner or operator to remedy any 
deterioration or malfunction he finds. Section 265.196 requires the 
owner or operator to notify the Regional Administrator within 24 hours 
of confirming a release. Also, 40 CFR part 302 may require the owner or 
operator to notify the National Response Center of a release.

    (b) The owner or operator must inspect cathodic protection systems, 
if present, according to, at a minimum, the following schedule to ensure 
that they are functioning properly:
    (1) The proper operation of the cathodic protection system must be 
confirmed within six months after initial installation, and annually 
thereafter; and
    (2) All sources of impressed current must be inspected and/or 
tested, as appropriate, at least bimonthly (i.e., every other month).

    Note: The practices described in the National Association of 
Corrosion Engineers (NACE) standard, ``Recommended Practice (RP-02-85)--
Control of External Corrosion on Metallic Buried, Partially Buried, or 
Submerged Liquid Storage Systems,'' and the American Petroleum Institute 
(API) Publication 1632, ``Cathodic Protection of Underground Petroleum 
Storage Tanks and Piping Systems,'' may be used, where applicable, as 
guidelines in maintaining and inspecting cathodic protection systems.

    (c) The owner or operator must document in the operating record of 
the facility an inspection of those items in paragraphs (a) and (b) of 
this section.


<R05>
Sec. 265.196  Response to leaks or spills and disposition of leaking or unfit-for-use tank systems.

    A tank system or secondary containment system from which there has 
been a leak or spill, or which is unfit for use, must be removed from 
service immediately, and the owner or operator must satisfy the 
following requirements:
    (a) Cessation of use; prevent flow or addition of wastes. The owner 
or operator must immediately stop the flow of hazardous waste into the 
tank system or secondary containment system and inspect the system to 
determine the cause of the release.
    (b) Removal of waste from tank system or secondary containment 
system. (1) If the release was from the tank system, the owner or 
operator must, within 24 hours after detection of the leak or, if the 
owner or operator demonstrates that that is not possible, at the 
earliest practicable time remove as much of the waste as is necessary to 
prevent further release of hazardous waste to the environment and to 
allow inspection and repair of the tank system to be performed.
    (2) If the release was to a secondary containment system, all 
released materials must be removed within 24 hours or in as timely a 
manner as is possible to prevent harm to human health and the 
environment.
    (c) Containment of visible releases to the environment. The owner or 
operator must immediately conduct a visual inspection of the release 
and, based upon that inspection:
    (1) Prevent further migration of the leak or spill to soils or 
surface water; and
    (2) Remove, and properly dispose of, any visible contamination of 
the soil or surface water.
    (d) Notifications, reports. (1) Any release to the environment, 
except as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, must be reported 
to the Regional Administrator within 24 hours of detection. If the 
release has been reported

[[Page 448]]

pursuant to 40 CFR part 302, that report will satisfy this requirement.
    (2) A leak or spill of hazardous waste that is:
    (i) Less than or equal to a quantity of one (1) pound, and
    (ii) Immediately contained and cleaned-up is exempted from the 
requirements of this paragraph.
    (3) Within 30 days of detection of a release to the environment, a 
report containing the following information must be submitted to the 
Regional Administrator:
    (i) Likely route of migration of the release;
    (ii) Characteristics of the surrounding soil (soil composition, 
geology, hydrogeology, climate);
    (iii) Results of any monitoring or sampling conducted in connection 
with the release, (if available). If sampling or monitoring data 
relating to the release are not available within 30 days, these data 
must be submitted to the Regional Administrator as soon as they become 
available;
    (iv) Proximity to downgradient drinking water, surface water, and 
population areas; and
    (v) Description of response actions taken or planned.
    (e) Provision of secondary containment, repair, or closure. (1) 
Unless the owner or operator satisfies the requirements of paragraphs 
(e) (2) through (4) of this section, the tank system must be closed in 
accordance with Sec. 265.197.
    (2) If the cause of the release was a spill that has not damaged the 
integrity of the system, the owner/operator may return the system to 
service as soon as the released waste is removed and repairs, if 
necessary, are made.
    (3) If the cause of the release was a leak from the primary tank 
system into the secondary containment system, the system must be 
repaired prior to returning the tank system to service.
    (4) If the source of the release was a leak to the environment from 
a component of a tank system without secondary containment, the owner/
operator must provide the component of the system from which the leak 
occurred with secondary containment that satisfies the requirements of 
Sec. 265.193 before it can be returned to service, unless the source of 
the leak is an aboveground portion of a tank system. If the source is an 
aboveground component that can be inspected visually, the component must 
be repaired and may be returned to service without secondary containment 
as long as the requirements of paragraph (f) of this section are 
satisfied. If a component is replaced to comply with the requirements of 
this subparagraph, that component must satisfy the requirements for new 
tank systems or components in Secs. 265.192 and 265.193. Additionally, 
if a leak has occurred in any portion of a tank system component that is 
not readily accessible for visual inspection (e.g., the bottom of an 
inground or onground tank), the entire component must be provided with 
secondary containment in accordance with Sec. 265.193 prior to being 
returned to use.
    (f) Certification of major repairs. If the owner or operator has 
repaired a tank system in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section, 
and the repair has been extensive (e.g., installation of an internal 
liner; repair of a ruptured primary containment or secondary containment 
vessel), the tank system must not be returned to service unless the 
owner/operator has obtained a certification by an independent, 
qualified, registered professional engineer in accordance with 
Sec. 270.11(d) that the repaired system is capable of handling hazardous 
wastes without release for the intended life of the system. This 
certification must be submitted to the Regional Administrator within 
seven days after returning the tank system to use.

    Note: The Regional Administrator may, on the basis of any 
information received that there is or has been a release of hazardous 
waste or hazardous constituents into the environment, issue an order 
under RCRA section 3004(v), 3008(h), or 7003(a) requiring corrective 
action or such other response as deemed necessary to protect human 
health or the environment.


    Note: See Sec. 265.15(c) for the requirements necessary to remedy a 
failure. Also, 40 CFR Part 302 requires the owner or operator to notify 
the National Response Center of a release of any ``reportable 
quantity.''

[51 FR 25479, July 14, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 34087, Sept. 2, 1988]

[[Page 449]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.197  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure of a tank system, the owner or operator must remove 
or decontaminate all waste residues, contaminated containment system 
components (liners, etc.), contaminated soils, and structures and 
equipment contaminated with waste, and manage them as hazardous waste, 
unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this Chapter applies. The closure plan, closure 
activities, cost estimates for closure, and financial responsibility for 
tank systems must meet all of the requirements specified in subparts G 
and H of this part.
    (b) If the owner or operator demonstrates that not all contaminated 
soils can be practicably removed or decontaminated as required in 
paragraph (a) of this section, then the owner or operator must close the 
tank system and perform post-closure care in accordance with the closure 
and post-closure care requirements that apply to landfills 
(Sec. 265.310) In addition, for the purposes of closure, post-closure, 
and financial responsibility, such a tank system is then considered to 
be a landfill, and the owner or operator must meet all of the 
requirements for landfills specified in subparts G and H of this part.
    (c) If an owner or operator has a tank system which does not have 
secondary containment that meets the requirements of Sec. 265.193(b) 
through (f) and which is not exempt from the secondary containment 
requirements in accordance with Sec. 265.193(g), then,
    (1) The closure plan for the tank system must include both a plan 
for complying with paragraph (a) of this section and a contingent plan 
for complying with paragraph (b) of this section.
    (2) A contingent post-closure plan for complying with paragraph (b) 
of this section must be prepared and submitted as part of the permit 
application.
    (3) The cost estimates calculated for closure and post-closure care 
must reflect the costs of complying with the contingent closure plan and 
the contingent post-closure plan, if these costs are greater than the 
costs of complying with the closure plan prepared for the expected 
closure under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (4) Financial assurance must be based on the cost estimates in 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (5) For the purposes of the contingent closure and post-closure 
plans, such a tank system is considered to be a landfill, and the 
contingent plans must meet all of the closure, post-closure, and 
financial responsibility requirements for landfills under subparts G and 
H of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 265.198  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive wastes.

    (a) Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a tank system, 
unless:
    (1) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately 
after placement in the tank system so that:
    (i) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolved material no longer 
meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under Secs. 261.21 
or 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (ii) Section 265.17(b) is complied with; or
    (2) The waste is stored or treated in such a way that it is 
protected from any material or conditions that may cause the waste to 
ignite or react; or
    (3) The tank system is used solely for emergencies.
    (b) The owner or operator of a facility where ignitable or reactive 
waste is stored or treated in tanks must comply with the requirements 
for the maintenance of protective distances between the waste management 
area and any public ways, streets, alleys, or an adjoining property line 
that can be built upon as required in Tables 2-1 through 2-6 of the 
National Fire Protection Association's ``Flammable and Combustible 
Liquids Code,'' (1977 or 1981), (incorporated by reference, see 
Sec. 260.11).


<R05>
Sec. 265.199  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    (a) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible waste and materials, must 
not be placed in the same tank system, unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied 
with.
    (b) Hazardous waste must not be placed in a tank system that has not 
been decontaminated and that previously held an incompatible waste or 
material, unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.

[[Page 450]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.200  Waste analysis and trial tests.

    In addition to performing the waste analysis required by 
Sec. 265.13, the owner or operator must, whenever a tank system is to be 
used to treat chemically or to store a hazardous waste that is 
substantially different from waste previously treated or stored in that 
tank system; or treat chemically a hazardous waste with a substantially 
different process than any previously used in that tank system:
    (a) Conduct waste analyses and trial treatment or storage tests 
(e.g., bench-scale or pilot-plant scale tests); or
    (b) Obtain written, documented information on similar waste under 
similar operating conditions to show that the proposed treatment or 
storage will meet the requirements of Sec. 265.194(a).

    Note: Section 265.13 requires the waste analysis plan to include 
analyses needed to comply with Secs. 265.198 and 265.199. Section 265.73 
requires the owner or operator to place the results from each waste 
analysis and trial test, or the documented information, in the operating 
record of the facility.


<R05>
Sec. 265.201  Special requirements for generators of between 100 and 1,000 kg/mo that accumulate hazardous waste in tanks.

    (a) The requirements of this section apply to small quantity 
generators of more than 100 kg but less than 1,000 kg of hazardous waste 
in a calendar month, that accumulate hazardous waste in tanks for less 
than 180 days (or 270 days if the generator must ship the waste greater 
than 200 miles), and do not accumulate over 6,000 kg on-site at any 
time.
    (b) Generators of between 100 and 1,000 kg/mo hazardous waste must 
comply with the following general operating requirements:
    (1) Treatment or storage of hazardous waste in tanks must comply 
with Sec. 265.17(b).
    (2) Hazardous wastes or treatment reagents must not be placed in a 
tank if they could cause the tank or its inner liner to rupture, leak, 
corrode, or otherwise fail before the end of its intended life.
    (3) Uncovered tanks must be operated to ensure at least 60 
centimeters (2 feet) of freeboard, unless the tank is equipped with a 
containment structure (e.g., dike or trench), a drainage control system, 
or a diversion structure (e.g., standby tank) with a capacity that 
equals or exceeds the volume of the top 60 centimeters (2 feet) of the 
tank.
    (4) Where hazardous waste is continuously fed into a tank, the tank 
must be equipped with a means to stop this inflow (e.g., waste feed 
cutoff system or by-pass system to a stand-by tank).

    Note: These systems are intended to be used in the event of a leak 
or overflow from the tank due to a system failure (e.g., a malfunction 
in the treatment process, a crack in the tank, etc.).

    (c) Generators of between 100 and 1,000 kg/mo accumulating hazardous 
waste in tanks must inspect, where present:
    (1) Discharge control equipment (e.g., waste feed cutoff systems, 
by-pass systems, and drainage systems) at least once each operating day, 
to ensure that it is in good working order;
    (2) Data gathered from monitoring equipment (e.g., pressure and 
temperature gauges) at least once each operating day to ensure that the 
tank is being operated according to its design;
    (3) The level of waste in the tank at least once each operating day 
to ensure compliance with Sec. 265.201(b)(3);
    (4) The construction materials of the tank at least weekly to detect 
corrosion or leaking of fixtures or seams; and
    (5) The construction materials of, and the area immediately 
surrounding, discharge confinement structures (e.g., dikes) at least 
weekly to detect erosion or obvious signs of leakage (e.g., wet spots or 
dead vegetation).

    Note: As required by Sec. 265.15(c), the owner or operator must 
remedy any deterioration or malfunction he finds.

    (d) Generators of between 100 and 1,000 kg/mo accumulating hazardous 
waste in tanks must, upon closure of the facility, remove all hazardous 
waste from tanks, discharge control equipment, and discharge confinement 
structures.

    Note: At closure, as throughout the operating period, unless the 
owner or operator can demonstrate, in accordance with Sec. 261.3(c) or 
(d) of this chapter, that any solid waste removed from his tank is not a 
hazardous waste, the owner or operator becomes a

[[Page 451]]

generator of hazardous waste and must manage it in accordance with all 
applicable requirements of parts 262, 263, and 265 of this chapter.

    (e) Generators of between 100 and 1,000 kg/mo must comply with the 
following special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste:
    (1) Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a tank, 
unless:
    (i) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately 
after placement in a tank so that (A) the resulting waste, mixture, or 
dissolution of material no longer meets the definition of ignitable or 
reactive waste under Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter, and (B) 
Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with; or
    (ii) The waste is stored or treated in such a way that it is 
protected from any material or conditions that may cause the waste to 
ignite or react; or
    (iii) The tank is used solely for emergencies.
    (2) The owner or operator of a facility which treats or stores 
ignitable or reactive waste in covered tanks must comply with the buffer 
zone requirements for tanks contained in Tables 2-1 through 2-6 of the 
National Fire Protection Association's ``Flammable and Combustible 
Liquids Code,'' (1977 or 1981) (incorporated by reference, see 
Sec. 260.11).
    (f) Generators of between 100 and 1,000 kg/mo must comply with the 
following special requirements for incompatible wastes:
    (1) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V for examples) must not be placed in the same tank, unless 
Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.
    (2) Hazardous waste must not be placed in an unwashed tank which 
previously held an incompatible waste or material, unless Sec. 265.17(b) 
is complied with.
[51 FR 25479, July 14, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 34087, Sept. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 265.202  Air emission standards.

    The owner or operator shall manage all hazardous waste placed in a 
tank in accordance with the applicable requirements of subparts AA, BB, 
and CC of this part.
[61 FR 59968, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R04>
                     Subpart K--Surface Impoundments


<R05>
Sec. 265.220  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that use surface impoundments to treat, store, or dispose of 
hazardous waste, except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 265.221  Design and operating requirements.

    (a) The owner or operator of each new surface impoundment unit on 
which construction commences after January 29, 1992, each lateral 
expansion of a surface impoundment unit on which construction commences 
after July 29, 1992, and each replacement of an existing surface 
impoundment unit that is to commence reuse after July 29, 1992 must 
install two or more liners and a leachate collection and removal system 
between such liners, and operate the leachate collection and removal 
system, in accordance with Sec. 264.221(c), unless exempted under 
Sec. 264.221(d), (e), or (f), of this chapter. ``Construction 
commences'' is as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter under 
``existing facility.''
    (b) The owner or operator of each unit referred to in paragraph (a) 
of this section must notify the Regional Administrator at least sixty 
days prior to receiving waste. The owner or operator of each facility 
submitting notice must file a part B application within six months of 
the receipt of such notice.
    (c) The owner or operator of any replacement surface impoundment 
unit is exempt from paragraph (a) of this section if:
    (1) The existing unit was constructed in compliance with the design 
standards of Sec. 3004(o)(1)(A)(i) and (o)(5) of the Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act; and
    (2) There is no reason to believe that the liner is not functioning 
as designed.
    (d) The double liner requirement set forth in paragraph (a) of this 
section may be waived by the Regional Administrator for any monofill, 
if:
    (1) The monofill contains only hazardous wastes from foundry furnace 
emission controls or metal casting

[[Page 452]]

molding sand, and such wastes do not contain constituents which would 
render the wastes hazardous for reasons other than the Toxicity 
Characteristic in Sec. 261.24 of this chapter, with EPA Hazardous Waste 
Numbers D004 through D017; and
    (2)(i)(A) The monofill has at least one liner for which there is no 
evidence that such liner in leaking. For the purposes of this paragraph 
the term ``liner'' means a liner designed, constructed, installed, and 
operated to prevent hazardous waste from passing into the liner at any 
time during the active life of the facility, or a liner designed, 
constructed, installed, and operated to prevent hazardous waste from 
migrating beyond the liner to adjacent subsurface soil, ground water, or 
surface water at any time during the active life of the facility. In the 
case of any surface impoundment which has been exempted from the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section on the basis of a liner 
designed, constructed, installed, and operated to prevent hazardous 
waste from passing beyond the liner, at the closure of such impoundment 
the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate all waste residues, 
all contaminated liner material, and contaminated soil to the extent 
practicable. If all contaminated soil it is not removed or 
decontaminated, the owner of operator of such impoundment must comply 
with appropriate post-closure requirements, including but not limited to 
ground-water monitoring and corrective action;
    (B) The monofill is located more than one-quarter mile from an 
underground source of drinking water (as that term is defined in 
Sec. 144.3 of this chapter); and
    (C) The monofill is in compliance with generally applicable ground-
water monitoring requirements for facilities with permits under RCRA 
section 3005(c); or
    (ii) The owner or operator demonstrates that the monofill is 
located, designed and operated so as to assure that there will be no 
migration of any hazardous constituent into ground water or surface 
water at any future time.
    (e) In the case of any unit in which the liner and leachate 
collection system has been installed pursuant to the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section and in good faith compliance with 
paragraph (a) of this section and with guidance documents governing 
liners and leachate collection systems under paragraph (a) of this 
section, no liner or leachate collection system which is different from 
that which was so installed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section 
will be required for such unit by the Regional Administrator when 
issuing the first permit to such facility, except that the Regional 
Administrator will not be precluded from requiring installation of a new 
liner when the Regional Administrator has reason to believe that any 
liner installed pursuant to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section is leaking.
    (f) A surface impoundment must maintain enough freeboard to prevent 
any overtopping of the dike by overfilling, wave action, or a storm. 
Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, there must be at 
least 60 centimeters (two feet) of freeboard.
    (g) A freeboard level less than 60 centimeters (two feet) may be 
maintained if the owner or operator obtains certification by a qualified 
engineer that alternate design features or operating plans will, to the 
best of his knowledge and opinion, prevent overtopping of the dike. The 
certification, along with a written identification of alternate design 
features or operating plans preventing overtopping, must be maintained 
at the facility.
    (h) Surface impoundments that are newly subject to RCRA section 
3005(j)(1) due to the promulgation of additional listings or 
characteristics for the identification of hazardous waste must be in 
compliance with paragraphs (a), (c) and (d) of this section not later 
than 48 months after the promulgation of the additional listing or 
characteristic. This compliance period shall not be cut short as the 
result of the promulgation of land disposal prohibitions under part 268 
of this chapter or the granting of an extension to the effective date of 
a prohibition pursuant to Sec. 268.5 of this chapter, within this 48-
month period.
[50 FR 16048, Apr. 23, 1985. Redesignated at 57 FR 3492, Jan. 29, 1992. 
50 FR 28749, July 15, 1985, as amended at 55 FR 11876, Mar. 29, 1990; 57 
FR 3492, Jan. 29, 1992; 57 FR 37267, Aug. 18, 1992]

[[Page 453]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.222  Action leakage rate.

    (a) The owner or operator of surface impoundment units subject to 
Sec. 265.221(a) must submit a proposed action leakage rate to the 
Regional Administrator when submitting the notice required under 
Sec. 265.221(b). Within 60 days of receipt of the notification, the 
Regional Administrator will: Establish an action leakage rate, either as 
proposed by the owner or operator or modified using the criteria in this 
section; or extend the review period for up to 30 days. If no action is 
taken by the Regional Administrator before the original 60 or extended 
90 day review periods, the action leakage rate will be approved as 
proposed by the owner or operator.
    (b) The Regional Administrator shall approve an action leakage rate 
for surface impoundment units subject to Sec. 265.221(a). The action 
leakage rate is the maximum design flow rate that the leak detection 
system (LDS) can remove without the fluid head on the bottom liner 
exceeding 1 foot. The action leakage rate must include an adequate 
safety margin to allow for uncertainties in the design (e.g., slope, 
hydraulic conductivity, thickness of drainage material), construction, 
operation, and location of the LDS, waste and leachate characteristics, 
likelihood and amounts of other sources of liquids in the LDS, and 
proposed response actions (e.g., the action leakage rate must consider 
decreases in the flow capacity of the system over time resulting from 
siltation and clogging, rib layover and creep of synthetic components of 
the system, overburden pressures, etc.).
    (c) To determine if the action leakage rate has been exceeded, the 
owner or operator must convert the weekly or monthly flow rate from the 
monitoring data obtained under Sec. 265.226(b), to an average daily flow 
rate (gallons per acre per day) for each sump. Unless the Regional 
Administrator approves a different calculation, the average daily flow 
rate for each sump must be calculated weekly during the active life and 
closure period, and if the unit closes in accordance with 
Sec. 265.228(a)(2), monthly during the post-closure care period when 
monthly monitoring is required under Sec. 265.226(b).
[57 FR 3492, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.223  Containment system.

    All earthen dikes must have a protective cover, such as grass, 
shale, or rock, to minimize wind and water erosion and to preserve their 
structural integrity.

    Editorial Note: At 57 FR 3492, Jan. 29, 1992 the Environmental 
Protection Agency added Sec. 265.223, effective July 29, 1992. Since a 
Sec. 265.223 already exists, both sections appear. An agency correction 
will be published in the Federal Register at a later date.


<R05>
Sec. 265.223  Response actions.

    (a) The owner or operator of surface impoundment units subject to 
Sec. 265.221(a) must submit a response action plan to the Regional 
Administrator when submitting the proposed action leakage rate under 
Sec. 265.222. The response action plan must set forth the actions to be 
taken if the action leakage rate has been exceeded. At a minimum, the 
response action plan must describe the actions specified in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (b) If the flow rate into the leak detection system exceeds the 
action leakage rate for any sump, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing of the exceedence 
within 7 days of the determination;
    (2) Submit a preliminary written assessment to the Regional 
Administrator within 14 days of the determination, as to the amount of 
liquids, likely sources of liquids, possible location, size, and cause 
of any leaks, and short-term actions taken and planned;
    (3) Determine to the extent practicable the location, size, and 
cause of any leak;
    (4) Determine whether waste receipt should cease or be curtailed, 
whether any waste should be removed from the unit for inspection, 
repairs, or controls, and whether or not the unit should be closed;
    (5) Determine any other short-term and longer-term actions to be 
taken to mitigate or stop any leaks; and
    (6) Within 30 days after the notification that the action leakage 
rate has been exceeded, submit to the Regional

[[Page 454]]

Administrator the results of the analyses specified in paragraphs 
(b)(3), (4), and (5) of this section, the results of actions taken, and 
actions planned. Monthly thereafter, as long as the flow rate in the 
leak detection system exceeds the action leakage rate, the owner or 
operator must submit to the Regional Administrator a report summarizing 
the results of any remedial actions taken and actions planned.
    (c) To make the leak and/or remediation determinations in paragraphs 
(b)(3), (4), and (5) of this section, the owner or operator must:
    (1)(i) Assess the source of liquids and amounts of liquids by 
source,
    (ii) Conduct a fingerprint, hazardous constituent, or other analyses 
of the liquids in the leak detection system to identify the source of 
liquids and possible location of any leaks, and the hazard and mobility 
of the liquid; and
    (iii) Assess the seriousness of any leaks in terms of potential for 
escaping into the environment; or
    (2) Document why such assessments are not needed.
[57 FR 3492, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.224  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.225  Waste analysis and trial tests.

    (a) In addition to the waste analyses required by Sec. 265.13, 
whenever a surface impoundment is to be used to:
    (1) Chemically treat a hazardous waste which is substantially 
different from waste previously treated in that impoundment; or
    (2) Chemically treat hazardous waste with a substantially different 
process than any previously used in that impoundment; the owner or 
operator must, before treating the different waste or using the 
different process:
    (i) Conduct waste analyses and trial treatment tests (e.g., bench 
scale or pilot plant scale tests); or
    (ii) Obtain written, documented information on similar treatment of 
similar waste under similar operating conditions; to show that this 
treatment will comply with Sec. 265.17(b).

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.13, the waste analysis plan must 
include analyses needed to comply with Secs. 265.229 and 265.230. As 
required by Sec. 265.73, the owner or operator must place the results 
from each waste analysis and trial test, or the documented information, 
in the operating record of the facility.]

    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.226  Monitoring and inspection.

    (a) The owner or operator must inspect:
    (1) The freeboard level at least once each operating day to ensure 
compliance with Sec. 265.222, and
    (2) The surface impoundment, including dikes and vegetation 
surrounding the dike, at least once a week to detect any leaks, 
deterioration, or failures in the impoundment.
    (b)(1) An owner or operator required to have a leak detection system 
under Sec. 265.221(a) must record the amount of liquids removed from 
each leak detection system sump at least once each week during the 
active life and closure period.
    (2) After the final cover is installed, the amount of liquids 
removed from each leak detection system sump must be recorded at least 
monthly. If the liquid level in the sump stays below the pump operating 
level for two consecutive months, the amount of liquids in the sumps 
must be recorded at least quarterly. If the liquid level in the sump 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive quarters, the 
amount of liquids in the sumps must be recorded at least semi-annually. 
If at any time during the post-closure care period the pump operating 
level is exceeded at units on quarterly or semi-annual recording 
schedules, the owner or operator must return to monthly recording of 
amounts of liquids removed from each sump until the liquid level again 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive months.
    (3) ``Pump operating level'' is a liquid level proposed by the owner 
or operator and approved by the Regional Administrator based on pump 
activation level, sump dimensions, and level that avoids backup into the 
drainage layer and minimizes head in the sump. The timing for submission 
and approval of the proposed ``pump operating level'' will be in 
accordance with Sec. 265.222(a).


[[Page 455]]


[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.15(c), the owner or operator must 
remedy any deterioration or malfunction he finds.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 57 FR 3493, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.227  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.228  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Remove or decontaminate all waste residues, contaminated 
containment system components (liners, etc.), contaminated subsoils, and 
structures and equipment contaminated with waste and leachate, and 
manage them as hazardous waste unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this chapter 
applies; or
    (2) Close the impoundment and provide post-closure care for a 
landfill under subpart G and Sec. 265.310, including the following:
    (i) Eliminate free liquids by removing liquid wastes or solidifying 
the remaining wastes and waste residues;
    (ii) Stabilize remaining wastes to a bearing capacity sufficient to 
support the final cover; and
    (iii) Cover the surface impoundment with a final cover designed and 
constructed to:
    (A) Provide long-term minimization of the migration of liquids 
through the closed impoundment;
    (B) Function with minimum maintenance;
    (C) Promote drainage and minimize erosion or abrasion of the cover;
    (D) Accomodate settling and subsidence so that the cover's integrity 
is maintained; and
    (E) Have a permeability less than or equal to the permeability of 
any bottom liner system or natural subsoils present.
    (b) In addition to the requirements of subpart G, and Sec. 265.310, 
during the post-closure care period, the owner or operator of a surface 
impoundment in which wastes, waste residues, or contaminated materials 
remain after closure in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section must:
    (1) Maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the final cover, 
including making repairs to the cover as necessary to correct the 
effects of settling, subsidence, erosion, or other events;
    (2) Maintain and monitor the leak detection system in accordance 
with Secs. 265.221(c)(2)(iv) and (3) of this chapter and 265.226(b) and 
comply with all other applicable leak detection system requirements of 
this part;
    (3) Maintain and monitor the ground-water monitoring system and 
comply with all other applicable requirements of subpart F of this part; 
and
    (4) Prevent run-on and run-off from eroding or otherwise damaging 
the final cover.
[52 FR 8708, Mar. 19, 1987, as amended at 57 FR 3493, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.229  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a surface 
impoundment, unless the waste and impoundment satisfy all applicable 
requirements of 40 CFR part 268, and:
    (a) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately 
after placement in the impoundment so that:
    (1) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no 
longer meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under 
Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (2) Section 265.17(b) is complied with; or
    (b)(1) The waste is managed in such a way that it is protected from 
any material or conditions which may cause it to ignite or react; and
    (2) Maintain and monitor the leak detection system in accordance 
with Secs. 265.221(c)(2)(iv) and (3) of this chapter and 265.226(b) and 
comply with all other applicable leak detection system requirements of 
this part;
    (3) The owner or operator obtains a certification from a qualified 
chemist or engineer that, to the best of his knowledge and opinion, the 
design features or operating plans of the facility will prevent ignition 
or reaction; and
    (4) The certification and the basis for it are maintained at the 
facility; or
    (c) The surface impoundment is used solely for emergencies.
[50 FR 16048, Apr. 23, 1985, as amended at 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990; 57 
FR 3493, Jan. 29, 1992]

[[Page 456]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.230  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V for examples) must not be placed in the same surface 
impoundment, unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.


<R05>
Sec. 265.231  Air emission standards.

    The owner or operator shall manage all hazardous waste placed in a 
surface impoundment in accordance with the applicable requirements of 
subparts BB and CC of this part.
[61 FR 59968, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R04>
                         Subpart L--Waste Piles


<R05>
Sec. 265.250  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that treat or store hazardous waste in piles, except as 
Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise. Alternatively, a pile of hazardous waste 
may be managed as a landfill under subpart N.


<R05>
Sec. 265.251  Protection from wind.

    The owner or operator of a pile containing hazardous waste which 
could be subject to dispersal by wind must cover or otherwise manage the 
pile so that wind dispersal is controlled.


<R05>
Sec. 265.252  Waste analysis.

    In addition to the waste analyses required by Sec. 265.13, the owner 
or operator must analyze a representative sample of waste from each 
incoming movement before adding the waste to any existing pile, unless 
(1) The only wastes the facility receives which are amenable to piling 
are compatible with each other, or (2) the waste received is compatible 
with the waste in the pile to which it is to be added. The analysis 
conducted must be capable of differentiating between the types of 
hazardous waste the owner or operator places in piles, so that mixing of 
incompatible waste does not inadvertently occur. The analysis must 
include a visual comparison of color and texture.

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.13, the waste analysis plan must 
include analyses needed to comply with Secs. 265.256 and 265.257. As 
required by Sec. 265.73, the owner or operator must place the results of 
this analysis in the operating record of the facility.]

    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.253  Containment.

    If leachate or run-off from a pile is a hazardous waste, then 
either:
    (a)(1) The pile must be placed on an impermeable base that is 
compatible with the waste under the conditions of treatment or storage;
    (2) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
active portion of the pile during peak discharge from at least a 25-year 
storm;
    (3) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-off management system to collect and control at least the 
water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-year storm; and
    (4) Collection and holding facilities (e.g., tanks or basins) 
associated with run-on and run-off control systems must be emptied or 
otherwise managed expeditiously to maintain design capacity of the 
system; or
    (b)(1) The pile must be protected from precipitation and run-on by 
some other means; and
    (2) No liquids or wastes containing free liquids may be placed in 
the pile.

[Comment: If collected leachate or run-off is discharged through a point 
source to waters of the United States, it is subject to the requirements 
of section 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 32367, July 26, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 265.254  Design and operating requirements.

    The owner or operator of each new waste pile on which construction 
commences after January 29, 1992, each lateral expansion of a waste pile 
unit on which construction commences after July 29, 1992, and each such 
replacement of an existing waste pile unit that is to commence reuse 
after July 29, 1992 must install two or more liners and a leachate 
collection and removal system above and between such liners, and operate 
the leachate collection and removal systems, in accordance with 
Sec. 264.251(c), unless exempted under Sec. 264.251(d), (e), or (f), of 
this chapter;

[[Page 457]]

and must comply with the procedures of Sec. 265.221(b). ``Construction 
commences'' is as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter under 
``existing facility''.
[57 FR 3493, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.255  Action leakage rates.

    (a) The owner or operator of waste pile units subject to 
Sec. 265.254 must submit a proposed action leakage rate to the Regional 
Administrator when submitting the notice required under Sec. 265.254. 
Within 60 days of receipt of the notification, the Regional 
Administrator will: Establish an action leakage rate, either as proposed 
by the owner or operator or modified using the criteria in this section; 
or extend the review period for up to 30 days. If no action is taken by 
the Regional Administrator before the original 60 or extended 90 day 
review periods, the action leakage rate will be approved as proposed by 
the owner or operator.
    (b) The Regional Administrator shall approve an action leakage rate 
for surface impoundment units subject to Sec. 265.254. The action 
leakage rate is the maximum design flow rate that the leak detection 
system (LDS) can remove without the fluid head on the bottom liner 
exceeding 1 foot. The action leakage rate must include an adequate 
safety margin to allow for uncertainties in the design (e.g., slope, 
hydraulic conductivity, thickness of drainage material), construction, 
operation, and location of the LDS, waste and leachate characteristics, 
likelihood and amounts of other sources of liquids in the LDS, and 
proposed response actions (e.g., the action leakage rate must consider 
decreases in the flow capacity of the system over time resulting from 
siltation and clogging, rib layover and creep of synthetic components of 
the system, overburden pressures, etc.).
    (c) To determine if the action leakage rate has been exceeded, the 
owner or operator must convert the weekly flow rate from the monitoring 
data obtained under Sec. 265.260, to an average daily flow rate (gallons 
per acre per day) for each sump. Unless the Regional Administrator 
approves a different calculation, the average daily flow rate for each 
sump must be calculated weekly during the active life and closure 
period.
[57 FR 3493, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.256  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    (a) Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a pile unless 
the waste and pile satisfy all applicable requirements of 40 CFR part 
268, and:
    (1) Addition of the waste to an existing pile (i) results in the 
waste or mixture no longer meeting the definition of ignitable or 
reactive waste under Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter, and 
(ii) complies with Sec. 265.17(b); or
    (2) The waste is managed in such a way that it is protected from any 
material or conditions which may cause it to ignite or react.
    (b) [Reserved]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 55 FR 22685, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 265.257  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    (a) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V for examples) must not be placed in the same pile, unless 
Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.
    (b) A pile of hazardous waste that is incompatible with any waste or 
other material stored nearby in other containers, piles, open tanks, or 
surface impoundments must be separated from the other materials, or 
protected from them by means of a dike, berm, wall, or other device.

[Comment: The purpose of this is to prevent fires, explosions, gaseous 
emissions, leaching, or other discharge of hazardous waste or hazardous 
waste constituents which could result from the contact or mixing of 
incompatible wastes or materials.]

    (c) Hazardous waste must not be piled on the same area where 
incompatible wastes or materials were previously piled, unless that area 
has been decontaminated sufficiently to ensure compliance with 
Sec. 265.17(b).


<R05>
Sec. 265.258  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure, the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate 
all waste residues, contaminated containment system components (liners, 
etc.),

[[Page 458]]

contaminated subsoils, and structures and equipment contaminated with 
waste and leachate, and manage them as hazardous waste unless 
Sec. 261.3(d) of this chapter applies; or
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed or decontaminated, 
he must close the facility and perform post-closure care in accordance 
with the closure and post-closure requirements that apply to landfills 
(Sec. 265.310).
[47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 265.259  Response actions.

    (a) The owner or operator of waste pile units subject to 
Sec. 265.254 must submit a response action plan to the Regional 
Administrator when submitting the proposed action leakage rate under 
Sec. 265.255. The response action plan must set forth the actions to be 
taken if the action leakage rate has been exceeded. At a minimum, the 
response action plan must describe the actions specified in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (b) If the flow rate into the leak determination system exceeds the 
action leakage rate for any sump, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing of the exceedence 
within 7 days of the determination;
    (2) Submit a preliminary written assessment to the Regional 
Administrator within 14 days of the determination, as to the amount of 
liquids, likely sources of liquids, possible location, size, and cause 
of any leaks, and short-term actions taken and planned;
    (3) Determine to the extent practicable the location, size, and 
cause of any leak;
    (4) Determine whether waste receipts should cease or be curtailed, 
whether any waste should be removed from the unit for inspection, 
repairs, or controls, and whether or not the unit should be closed;
    (5) Determine any other short-term and longer-term actions to be 
taken to mitigate or stop any leaks; and
    (6) Within 30 days after the notification that the action leakage 
rate has been exceeded, submit to the Regional Administrator the results 
of the analyses specified in paragraphs (b)(3), (4), and (5) of this 
section, the results of actions taken, and actions planned. Monthly 
thereafter, as long as the flow rate in the leak detection system 
exceeds the action leakage rate, the owner or operator must submit to 
the Regional Administrator a report summarizing the results of any 
remedial actions taken and actions planned.
    (c) To make the leak and/or remediation determinations in paragraphs 
(b)(3), (4), and (5) of this section, the owner or operator must:
    (1)(i) Assess the source of liquids and amounts of liquids by 
source,
    (ii) Conduct a fingerprint, hazardous constituent, or other analyses 
of the liquids in the leak detection system to identify the source of 
liquids and possible location of any leaks, and the hazard and mobility 
of the liquid; and
    (iii) Assess the seriousness of any leaks in terms of potential for 
escaping into the environment; or
    (2) Document why such assessments are not needed.
[57 FR 3494, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.260  Monitoring and inspection.

    An owner or operator required to have a leak detection system under 
Sec. 265.254 must record the amount of liquids removed from each leak 
detection system sump at least once each week during the active life and 
closure period.
[57 FR 3494, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R04>
                        Subpart M--Land Treatment


<R05>
Sec. 265.270  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
hazardous waste land treatment facilities, except as Sec. 265.1 provides 
otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 265.271  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.272  General operating requirements.

    (a) Hazardous waste must not be placed in or on a land treatment 
facility unless the waste can be made less

[[Page 459]]

hazardous or nonhazardous by degradation, transformation, or 
immobilization processes occurring in or on the soil.
    (b) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
active portions of the facility during peak discharge from at least a 
25-year storm.
    (c) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-off management system capable of collecting and 
controlling a water volume at least equivalent to a 24-hour, 25-year 
storm.
    (d) Collection and holding facilities (e.g., tanks or basins) 
associated with run-on and run-off control systems must be emptied or 
otherwise managed expeditiously after storms to maintain design capacity 
of the system.
    (e) If the treatment zone contains particulate matter which may be 
subject to wind dispersal, the owner or operator must manage the unit to 
control wind dispersal.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982; 50 
FR 16048, Apr. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.273  Waste analysis.

    In addition to the waste analyses required by Sec. 265.13, before 
placing a hazardous waste in or on a land treatment facility, the owner 
or operator must:
    (a) Determine the concentrations in the waste of any substances 
which equal or exceed the maximum concentrations contained in Table 1 of 
Sec. 261.24 of this chapter that cause a waste to exhibit the Toxicity 
Characteristic;
    (b) For any waste listed in part 261, subpart D, of this chapter, 
determine the concentrations of any substances which caused the waste to 
be listed as a hazardous waste; and
    (c) If food chain crops are grown, determine the concentrations in 
the waste of each of the following constituents: arsenic, cadmium, lead, 
and mercury, unless the owner or operator has written, documented data 
that show that the constituent is not present.

[Comment: Part 261 of this chapter specifies the substances for which a 
waste is listed as a hazardous waste. As required by Sec. 265.13, the 
waste analysis plan must include analyses needed to comply with 
Secs. 265.281 and 265.282. As required by Sec. 265.73, the owner or 
operator must place the results from each waste analysis, or the 
documented information, in the operating record of the facility.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 55 FR 11876, Mar. 29, 1990]


<R05>
Secs. 265.274--265.275  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.276  Food chain crops.

    (a) An owner or operator of a hazardous waste land treatment 
facility on which food chain crops are being grown, or have been grown 
and will be grown in the future, must notify the Regional Administrator 
within 60 days after the effective date of this part.

[Comment: The growth of food chain crops at a facility which has never 
before been used for this purpose is a significant change in process 
under Sec. 122.72(c) of this chapter. Owners or operators of such land 
treatment facilities who propose to grow food chain crops after the 
effective date of this part must comply with Sec. 122.72(c) of this 
chapter.]

    (b)(1) Food chain crops must not be grown on the treated area of a 
hazardous waste land treatment facility unless the owner or operator can 
demonstrate, based on field testing, that any arsenic, lead, mercury, or 
other constituents identified under Sec. 265.273(b):
    (i) Will not be transferred to the food portion of the crop by plant 
uptake or direct contact, and will not otherwise be ingested by food 
chain animals (e.g., by grazing); or
    (ii) Will not occur in greater concentrations in the crops grown on 
the land treatment facility than in the same crops grown on untreated 
soils under similar conditions in the same region.
    (2) The information necessary to make the demonstration required by 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section must be kept at the facility and must, 
at a minimum:
    (i) Be based on tests for the specific waste and application rates 
being used at the facility; and
    (ii) Include descriptions of crop and soil characteristics, sample 
selection criteria, sample size determination, analytical methods, and 
statistical procedures.

[[Page 460]]

    (c) Food chain crops must not be grown on a land treatment facility 
receiving waste that contains cadmium unless all requirements of 
paragraphs (c)(1) (i) through (iii) of this section or all requirements 
of paragraphs (c)(2) (i) through (iv) of this section are met.
    (1)(i) The pH of the waste and soil mixture is 6.5 or greater at the 
time of each waste application, except for waste containing cadmium at 
concentrations of 2 mg/kg (dry weight) or less;
    (ii) The annual application of cadmium from waste does not exceed 
0.5 kilograms per hectare (kg/ha) on land used for production of 
tobacco, leafy vegetables, or root crops grown for human consumption. 
For other food chain crops, the annual cadmium application rate does not 
exceed:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Annual Cd
                                                             application
                        Time period                           rate (kg/
                                                                 ha)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Present to June 30, 1984...................................          2.0
July 1, 1984 to December 31, 1986..........................         1.25
Beginning January 1, 1987..................................          0.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) The cumulative application of cadmium from waste does not 
exceed the levels in either paragraph (c)(1)(iii)(A) or (B) of this 
section.
    (A)

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Maximum cumulative
                                                    application (kg/ha)
                                                 -----------------------
    Soil caption exchange capacity (meq/100g)     Background  Background
                                                    soil pH     soil pH
                                                   less than    greater
                                                      6.5      than 6.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Less than 5.....................................           5           5
5 to 15.........................................           5          10
Greater than 15.................................           5          20
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (B) For soils with a background pH of less than 6.5, the cumulative 
cadmium application rate does not exceed the levels below: Provided, 
that the pH of the waste and soil mixture is adjusted to and maintained 
at 6.5 or greater whenever food chain crops are grown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Maximum
                                                              cumulative
         Soil caption exchange capacity (meq/100g)           application
                                                               (kg/ha)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Less than 5................................................            5
5 to 15....................................................           10
Greater than 15............................................           20
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2)(i) The only food chain crop produced is animal feed.
    (ii) The pH of the waste and soil mixture is 6.5 or greater at the 
time of waste application or at the time the crop is planted, whichever 
occurs later, and this pH level is maintained whenever food chain crops 
are grown.
    (iii) There is a facility operating plan which demonstrates how the 
animal feed will be distributed to preclude ingestion by humans. The 
facility operating plan describes the measures to be taken to safeguard 
against possible health hazards from cadmium entering the food chain, 
which may result from alternative land uses.
    (iv) Future property owners are notified by a stipulation in the 
land record or property deed which states that the property has received 
waste at high cadmium application rates and that food chain crops must 
not be grown except in compliance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section.

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.73, if an owner or operator grows food 
chain crops on his land treatment facility, he must place the 
information developed in this section in the operating record of the 
facility.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982; 48 
FR 14295, Apr. 1, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 265.277  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.278  Unsaturated zone (zone of aeration) monitoring.

    (a) The owner or operator must have in writing, and must implement, 
an unsaturated zone monitoring plan which is designed to:
    (1) Detect the vertical migration of hazardous waste and hazardous 
waste constituents under the active portion of the land treatment 
facility, and
    (2) Provide information on the background concentrations of the 
hazardous waste and hazardous waste constituents in similar but 
untreated soils nearby; this background monitoring must be conducted 
before or in conjunction with the monitoring required under paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section.
    (b) The unsaturated zone monitoring plan must include, at a minimum:
    (1) Soil monitoring using soil cores, and
    (2) Soil-pore water monitoring using devices such as lysimeters.

[[Page 461]]

    (c) To comply with paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the owner or 
operator must demonstrate in his unsaturated zone monitoring plan that:
    (1) The depth at which soil and soil-pore water samples are to be 
taken is below the depth to which the waste is incorporated into the 
soil;
    (2) The number of soil and soil-pore water samples to be taken is 
based on the variability of:
    (i) The hazardous waste constituents (as identified in 
Sec. 265.273(a) and (b)) in the waste and in the soil; and
    (ii) The soil type(s); and
    (3) The frequency and timing of soil and soil-pore water sampling is 
based on the frequency, time, and rate of waste application, proximity 
to ground water, and soil permeability.
    (d) The owner or operator must keep at the facility his unsaturated 
zone monitoring plan, and the rationale used in developing this plan.
    (e) The owner or operator must analyze the soil and soil-pore water 
samples for the hazardous waste constituents that were found in the 
waste during the waste analysis under Sec. 265.273 (a) and (b).

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.73, all data and information developed 
by the owner or operator under this section must be placed in the 
operating record of the facility.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.279  Recordkeeping.

    The owner or operator must include hazardous waste application dates 
and rates in the operating record required under Sec. 265.73.
[47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 265.280  Closure and post-closure.

    (a) In the closure plan under Sec. 265.112 and the post-closure plan 
under Sec. 265.118, the owner or operator must address the following 
objectives and indicate how they will be achieved:
    (1) Control of the migration of hazardous waste and hazardous waste 
constituents from the treated area into the ground water;
    (2) Control of the release of contaminated run-off from the facility 
into surface water;
    (3) Control of the release of airborne particulate contaminants 
caused by wind erosion; and
    (4) Compliance with Sec. 265.276 concerning the gowth of food-chain 
crops.
    (b) The owner or operator must consider at least the following 
factors in addressing the closure and post-closure care objectives of 
paragraph (a) of this section:
    (1) Type and amount of hazardous waste and hazardous waste 
constituents applied to the land treatment facility;
    (2) The mobility and the expected rate of migration of the hazardous 
waste and hazardous waste constituents;
    (3) Site location, topography, and surrounding land use, with 
respect to the potential effects of pollutant migration (e.g., proximity 
to ground water, surface water and drinking water sources);
    (4) Climate, including amount, frequency, and pH of precipitation;
    (5) Geological and soil profiles and surface and subsurface 
hydrology of the site, and soil characteristics, including cation 
exchange capacity, total organic carbon, and pH;
    (6) Unsaturated zone monitoring information obtained under 
Sec. 265.278; and
    (7) Type, concentration, and depth of migration of hazardous waste 
constituents in the soil as compared to their background concentrations.
    (c) The owner or operator must consider at least the following 
methods in addressing the closure and post-closure care objectives of 
paragraph (a) of this section:
    (1) Removal of contaminated soils;
    (2) Placement of a final cover, considering:
    (i) Functions of the cover (e.g., infiltration control, erosion and 
run-off control, and wind erosion control); and
    (ii) Characteristics of the cover, including material, final surface 
contours, thickness, porosity and permeability, slope, length of run of 
slope, and type of vegetation on the cover; and
    (3) Monitoring of ground water.
    (d) In addition to the requirements of subpart G of this part, 
during the closure period the owner or operator of a land treatment 
facility must:
    (1) Continue unsaturated zone monitoring in a manner and frequency 
specified in the closure plan, except

[[Page 462]]

that soil pore liquid monitoring may be terminated 90 days after the 
last application of waste to the treatment zone;
    (2) Maintain the run-on control system required under 
Sec. 265.272(b);
    (3) Maintain the run-off management system required under 
Sec. 265.272(c); and
    (4) Control wind dispersal of particulate matter which may be 
subject to wind dispersal.
    (e) For the purpose of complying with Sec. 265.115, when closure is 
completed the owner or operator may submit to the Regional Administrator 
certification both by the owner or operator and by an independent 
qualified soil scientist, in lieu of an independent registered 
professional engineer, that the facility has been closed in accordance 
with the specifications in the approved closure plan.
    (f) In addition to the requirements of Sec. 265.117, during the 
post-closure care period the owner or operator of a land treatment unit 
must:
    (1) Continue soil-core monitoring by collecting and analyzing 
samples in a manner and frequency specified in the post-closure plan;
    (2) Restrict access to the unit as appropriate for its post-closure 
use;
    (3) Assure that growth of food chain crops complies with 
Sec. 265.276; and
    (4) Control wind dispersal of hazardous waste.
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 265.281  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    The owner or operator must not apply ignitable or reactive waste to 
the treatment zone unless the waste and treatment zone meet all 
applicable requirements of 40 CFR part 268, and:
    (a) The waste is immediately incorporated into the soil so that:
    (1) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no 
longer meets the definition of ignitable or reactive waste under 
Sec. 265.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (2) Section 264.17(b) is complied with; or
    (b) The waste is managed in such a way that it is protected from any 
material or conditions which may cause it to ignite or react.
[47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982, as amended at 55 FR 22686, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 265.282  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials (see 
appendix V for examples), must not be placed in the same land treatment 
area, unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.


<R04>
                          Subpart N--Landfills


<R05>
Sec. 265.300  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that dispose of hazardous waste in landfills, except as 
Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise. A waste pile used as a disposal facility 
is a landfill and is governed by this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 265.301  Design and operating requirements.

    (a) The owner or operator of each new landfill unit on which 
construction commences after January 29, 1992, each lateral expansion of 
a landfill unit on which construction commences after July 29, 1992, and 
each replacement of an existing landfill unit that is to commence reuse 
after July 29, 1992 must install two or more liners and a leachate 
collection and removal system above and between such liners, and operate 
the leachate collection and removal systems, in accordance with 
Sec. 264.301(d), (e), or (f), of this chapter. ``Construction 
commences'' is as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this chapter under 
``existing facility''.
    (b) The owner or operator of each unit referred to in paragraph (a) 
of this section must notify the Regional Administrator at least sixty 
days prior to receiving waste. The owner or operator of each facility 
submitting notice must file a part B application within six months of 
the receipt of such notice.
    (c) The owner or operator of any replacement landfill unit is exempt 
from paragraph (a) of this section if:
    (1) The existing unit was constructed in compliance with the design 
standards of section 3004(o)(1)(A)(i) and (o)(5)

[[Page 463]]

of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; and
    (2) There is no reason to believe that the liner is not functioning 
as designed.
    (d) The double liner requirement set forth in paragraph (a) of this 
section may be waived by the Regional Administrator for any monofill, 
if:
    (1) The monofill contains only hazardous wastes from foundry furnace 
emission controls or metal casting molding sand, and such waste does not 
contain constituents which would render the wastes hazardous for reasons 
other than the Toxicity Characteristic in Sec. 261.4 of this chapter, 
with EPA Hazardous Waste Number D004 through D017; and
    (2)(i)(A) The monofill has at least one liner for which there is no 
evidence that such liner is leaking;
    (B) The monofill is located more than one-quarter mile from an 
underground source of drinking water (as that term is defined in 
Sec. 144.3 of this chapter); and
    (C) The monofill is in compliance with generally applicable ground-
water monitoring requirements for facilities with permits under RCRA 
section 3005(c); or
    (ii) The owner or operator demonstrates that the monofill is 
located, designed and operated so as to assure that there will be no 
migration of any hazardous constituent into ground water or surface 
water at any future time.
    (e) In the case of any unit in which the liner and leachate 
collection system has been installed pursuant to the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section and in good faith compliance with 
paragraph (a) of this section and with guidance documents governing 
liners and leachate collection systems under paragraph (a) of this 
section, no liner or leachate collection system which is different from 
that which was so installed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section 
will be required for such unit by the Regional Administrator when 
issuing the first permit to such facility, except that the Regional 
Administrator will not be precluded from requiring installation of a new 
liner when the Regional Administrator has reason to believe that any 
liner installed pursuant to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section is leaking.
    (f) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate, and 
maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
active portion of the landfill during peak discharge from at least a 25-
year storm.
    (g) The owner or operator must design, construct, operate and 
maintain a run-off management system to collect and control at least the 
water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-year storm.
    (h) Collection and holding facilities (e.g., tanks or basins) 
associated with run-on and run-off control systems must be emptied or 
otherwise managed expeditiously after storms to maintain design capacity 
of the system.
    (i) The owner or operator of a landfill containing hazardous waste 
which is subject to dispersal by wind must cover or otherwise manage the 
landfill so that wind dispersal of the hazardous waste is controlled.

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.13, the waste analysis plan must 
include analyses needed to comply with Secs. 265.312, 265.313, and 
265.314. As required by Sec. 265.73, the owner or operator must place 
the results of these analyses in the operating record of the facility.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982; 50 
FR 18374, Apr. 30, 1985. Redesignated from Sec. 265.302 at 57 FR 3494, 
Jan. 29, 1992; 50 FR 28750, July 15, 1985, as amended at 57 FR 3494, 
Jan. 29, 1992; 57 FR 30658, July 10, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.302  Action leakage rate.

    (a) The owner or operator of landfill units subject to 
Sec. 265.301(a) must submit a proposed action leakage rate to the 
Regional Administrator when submitting the notice required under 
Sec. 265.301(b). Within 60 days of receipt of the notification, the 
Regional Administrator will: Establish an action leakage rate, either as 
proposed by the owner or operator or modified using the criteria in this 
section; or extend the review period for up to 30 days. If no action is 
taken by the Regional Administrator before the original 60 or extended 
90 day review periods, the action leakage rate will be approved as 
proposed by the owner or operator.
    (b) The Regional Administrator shall approve an action leakage rate 
for surface impoundment units subject to

[[Page 464]]

Sec. 265.301(a). The action leakage rate is the maximum design flow rate 
that the leak detection system (LDS) can remove without the fluid head 
on the bottom liner exceeding 1 foot. The action leakage rate must 
include an adequate safety margin to allow for uncertainties in the 
design (e.g., slope, hydraulic conductivity, thickness of drainage 
material), construction, operation, and location of the LDS, waste and 
leachate characteristics, likelihood and amounts of other sources of 
liquids in the LDS, and proposed response actions (e.g., the action 
leakage rate must consider decreases in the flow capacity of the system 
over time resulting from siltation and clogging, rib layover and creep 
of synthetic components of the system, overburden pressures, etc.).
    (c) To determine if the action leakage rate has been exceeded, the 
owner or operator must convert the weekly or monthly flow rate from the 
monitoring data obtained under Sec. 265.304 to an average daily flow 
rate (gallons per acre per day) for each sump. Unless the Regional 
Administrator approves a different calculation, the average daily flow 
rate for each sump must be calculated weekly during the active life and 
closure period, and monthly during the post-closure care period when 
monthly monitoring is required under Sec. 265.304(b).
[57 FR 3494, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.303  Response actions.

    (a) The owner or operator of landfill units subject to 
Sec. 265.301(a) must submit a response action plan to the Regional 
Administrator when submitting the proposed action leakage rate under 
Sec. 265.302. The response action plan must set forth the actions to be 
taken if the action leakage rate has been exceeded. At a minimum, the 
response action plan must describe the actions specified in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (b) If the flow rate into the leak detection system exceeds the 
action leakage rate for any sump, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Notify the Regional Administrator in writing of the exceedence 
within 7 days of the determination;
    (2) Submit a preliminary written assessment to the Regional 
Administrator within 14 days of the determination, as to the amount of 
liquids, likely sources of liquids, possible location, size, and cause 
of any leaks, and short-term actions taken and planned;
    (3) Determine to the extent practicable the location, size, and 
cause of any leak;
    (4) Determine whether waste receipt should cease or be curtailed, 
whether any waste should be removed from the unit for inspection, 
repairs, or controls, and whether or not the unit should be closed;
    (5) Determine any other short-term and longer-term actions to be 
taken to mitigate or stop any leaks; and
    (6) Within 30 days after the notification that the action leakage 
rate has been exceeded, submit to the Regional Administrator the results 
of the analyses specified in paragraphs (b)(3), (4), and (5) of this 
section, the results of actions taken, and actions planned. Monthly 
thereafter, as long as the flow rate in the leak detection system 
exceeds the action leakage rate, the owner or operator must submit to 
the Regional Administrator a report summarizing the results of any 
remedial actions taken and actions planned.
    (c) To make the leak and/or remediation determinations in paragraphs 
(b)(3), (4), and (5) of this section, the owner or operator must:
    (1)(i) Assess the source of liquids and amounts of liquids by 
source,
    (ii) Conduct a fingerprint, hazardous constituent, or other analyses 
of the liquids in the leak detection system to identify the source of 
liquids and possible location of any leaks, and the hazard and mobility 
of the liquid; and
    (iii) Assess the seriousness of any leaks in terms of potential for 
escaping into the environment; or
    (2) Document why such assessments are not needed.
[57 FR 3494, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.304  Monitoring and inspection.

    (a) An owner or operator required to have a leak detection system 
under Sec. 265.301(a) must record the amount of liquids removed from 
each leak detection system sump at least once each week during the 
active life and closure period.

[[Page 465]]

    (b) After the final cover is installed, the amount of liquids 
removed from each leak detection system sump must be recorded at least 
monthly. If the liquid level in the sump stays below the pump operating 
level for two consecutive months, the amount of liquids in the sumps 
must be recorded at least quarterly. If the liquid level in the sump 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive quarters, the 
amount of liquids in the sumps must be recorded at least semi-annually. 
If at any time during the post-closure care period the pump operating 
level is exceeded at units on quarterly or semi-annual recording 
schedules, the owner or operator must return to monthly recording of 
amounts of liquids removed from each sump until the liquid level again 
stays below the pump operating level for two consecutive months.
    (c) ``Pump operating level'' is a liquid level proposed by the owner 
or operator and approved by the Regional Administrator based on pump 
activation level, sump dimensions, and level that avoids backup into the 
drainage layer and minimizes head in the sump. The timing for submission 
and approval of the proposed ``pump operating level'' will be in 
accordance with Sec. 265.302(a).
[57 FR 3495, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Secs. 265.305--265.308  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.309  Surveying and recordkeeping.

    The owner or operator of a landfill must maintain the following 
items in the operating record required in Sec. 265.73:
    (a) On a map, the exact location and dimensions, including depth, of 
each cell with respect to permanently surveyed benchmarks; and
    (b) The contents of each cell and the approximate location of each 
hazardous waste type within each cell.


<R05>
Sec. 265.310  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At final closure of the landfill or upon closure of any cell, 
the owner or operator must cover the landfill or cell with a final cover 
designed and constructed to:
    (1) Provide long-term minimization of migration of liquids through 
the closed landfill;
    (2) Function with minimum maintenance;
    (3) Promote drainage and minimize erosion or abrasion of the cover;
    (4) Accommodate settling and subsidence so that the cover's 
integrity is maintained; and
    (5) Have a permeability less than or equal to the permeability of 
any bottom liner system or natural subsoils present.
    (b) After final closure, the owner or operator must comply with all 
post-closure requirements contained in Secs. 265.117 through 265.120 
including maintenance and monitoring throughout the post-closure care 
period. The owner or operator must:
    (1) Maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the final cover, 
including making repairs to the cover as necessary to correct the 
effects of settling, subsidence, erosion, or other events;
    (2) Maintain and monitor the leak detection system in accordance 
with Secs. 264.301(c)(3)(iv) and (4) of this chapter and 265.304(b), and 
comply with all other applicable leak detection system requirements of 
this part;
    (3) Maintain and monitor the ground-water monitoring system and 
comply with all other applicable requirements of subpart F of this part;
    (4) Prevent run-on and run-off from eroding or otherwise damaging 
the final cover; and
    (5) Protect and maintain surveyed benchmarks used in complying with 
Sec. 265.309.
[50 FR 16048, Apr. 23, 1985, as amended at 57 FR 3495, Jan. 29, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.311  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.312  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, and in 
Sec. 265.316, ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a 
landfill, unless the waste and landfill meets all applicable 
requirements of 40 CFR part 268, and:
    (1) The resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution or material no 
longer meets the definition of ignitable or reactive

[[Page 466]]

waste under Sec. 261.21 or Sec. 261.23 of this chapter; and
    (2) Section 265.17(b) is complied with.
    (b) Except for prohibited wastes which remain subject to treatment 
standards in subpart D of part 268, ignitable wastes in containers may 
be landfilled without meeting the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section, provided that the wastes are disposed of in such a way that 
they are protected from any material or conditions which may cause them 
to ignite. At a minimum, ignitable wastes must be disposed of in non-
leaking containers which are carefully handled and placed so as to avoid 
heat, sparks, rupture, or any other condition that might cause ignition 
of the wastes; must be covered daily with soil or other non-combustible 
material to minimize the potential for ignition of the wastes; and must 
not be disposed of in cells that contain or will contain other wastes 
which may generate heat sufficient to cause ignition of the waste.
[47 FR 32368, July 26, 1982, as amended at 55 FR 22686, June 1, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 265.313  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V for examples) must not be placed in the same landfill cell, 
unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.


<R05>
Sec. 265.314  Special requirements for bulk and containerized liquids.

    (a) Bulk or non-containerized liquid waste or waste containing free 
liquids may be placed in a landfill prior to May 8, 1985 only if:
    (1) The landfill has a liner and leachate collection and removal 
system that meets the requirements of Sec. 264.301(a) of this chapter; 
or
    (2) Before disposal, the liquid waste or waste containing free 
liquids is treated or stabilized, chemically or physically (e.g., by 
mixing with a sorbent solid), so that free liquids are no longer 
present.
    (b) Effective May 8, 1985, the placement of bulk or non-
containerized liquid hazardous waste or hazardous waste containing free 
liquids (whether or not sorbents have been added) in any landfill is 
prohibited.
    (c) Containers holding free liquids must not be placed in a landfill 
unless:
    (1) All free-standing liquid,
    (i) has been removed by decanting, or other methods,
    (ii) has been mixed with sorbent or solidified so that free-standing 
liquid is no longer observed; or
    (iii) had been otherwise eliminated; or
    (2) The container is very small, such as an ampule; or
    (3) The container is designed to hold free liquids for use other 
than storage, such as a battery or capacitor; or
    (4) The container is a lab pack as defined in Sec. 265.316 and is 
disposed of in accordance with Sec. 265.316.
    (d) To demonstrate the absence or presence of free liquids in either 
a containerized or a bulk waste, the following test must be used: Method 
9095 (Paint Filter Liquids Test) as described in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-
846, as incorporated by reference in Sec. 260.11 of this chapter.
    (e) The date for compliance with paragraph (a) of this section is 
November 19, 1981. The date for compliance with paragraph (c) of this 
section is March 22, 1982.
    (f) Sorbents used to treat free liquids to be disposed of in 
landfills must be nonbiodegradable. Nonbiodegradable sorbents are: 
materials listed or described in paragraph (f)(1) of this section; 
materials that pass one of the tests in paragraph (f)(2) of this 
section; or materials that are determined by EPA to be nonbiodegradable 
through the Part 260 petition process.
    (1) Nonbiodegradable sorbents. (i) Inorganic minerals, other 
inorganic materials, and elemental carbon (e.g., aluminosilicates, 
clays, smectites, Fuller's earth, bentonite, calcium bentonite, 
montmorillonite, calcined montmorillonite, kaolinite, micas (illite), 
vermiculites, zeolites; calcium carbonate (organic free limestone); 
oxides/hydroxides, alumina, lime, silica (sand), diatomaceous earth; 
perlite (volcanic glass); expanded volcanic rock; volcanic ash; cement 
kiln dust; fly ash; rice hull ash; activated charcoal/activated carbon); 
or

[[Page 467]]

    (ii) High molecular weight synthetic polymers (e.g., polyethylene, 
high density polyethylene (HDPE), polypropylene, polystyrene, 
polyurethane, polyacrylate, polynorborene, polysobutylene, ground 
synthetic rubber, cross-linked allylstyrene and tertiary butyl 
copolymers). This does not include polymers derived from biological 
material or polymers specifically designed to be degradable; or
    (iii) Mixtures of these nonbiodegradable materials.
    (2) Tests for nonbiodegradable sorbents. (i) The sorbent material is 
determined to be nonbiodegradable under ASTM Method G21-70 (1984a)--
Standard Practice for Determining Resistance of Synthetic Polymer 
Materials to Fungi; or
    (ii) The sorbent material is determined to be nonbiodegradable under 
ASTM Method G22-76 (1984b)--Standard Practice for Determining Resistance 
of Plastics to Bacteria; or
    (iii) The sorbent material is determined to be non-biodegradable 
under OECD test 301B: [CO<INF>2</INF> Evolution (Modified Sturm Test)].
    (g) Effective November 8, 1985, the placement of any liquid which is 
not a hazardous waste in a landfill is prohibited unless the owner or 
operator of such landfill demonstrates to the Regional Administrator, or 
the Regional Administrator determines, that:
    (1) The only reasonably available alternative to the placement in 
such landfill is placement in a landfill or unlined surface impoundment, 
whether or not permitted or operating under interim status, which 
contains, or may reasonably be anticipated to contain, hazardous waste; 
and
    (2) Placement in such owner or operator's landfill will not present 
a risk of contamination of any underground source of drinking water (as 
that term is defined in Sec. 144.3 of this chapter).
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 12318, Mar. 22, 1982; 47 
FR 32369, July 26, 1982; 50 FR 18374, Apr. 30, 1985; 50 FR 28750, July 
15, 1985; 51 FR 19177, May 28, 1986; 57 FR 54461, Nov. 18, 1992; 58 FR 
46050, Aug. 31, 1993; 60 FR 35705, July 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.315  Special requirements for containers.

    Unless they are very small, such as an ampule, containers must be 
either:
    (a) At least 90 percent full when placed in the landfill; or
    (b) Crushed, shredded, or similarly reduced in volume to the maximum 
practical extent before burial in the landfill.
[50 FR 16048, Apr. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 265.316  Disposal of small containers of hazardous waste in overpacked drums (lab packs).

    Small containers of hazardous waste in overpacked drums (lab packs) 
may be placed in a landfull if the following requirements are met:
    (a) Hazardous waste must be packaged in non-leaking inside 
containers. The inside containers must be of a design and constructed of 
a material that will not react dangerously with, be decomposed by, or be 
ignited by the waste held therein. Inside containers must be tightly and 
securely sealed. The inside containers must be of the size and type 
specified in the Department of Transportation (DOT) hazardous materials 
regulations (49 CFR parts 173, 178 and 179), if those regulations 
specify a particular inside container for the waste.
    (b) The inside containers must be overpacked in an open head DOT-
specification metal shipping container (49 CFR parts 178 and 179) of no 
more than 416-liter (110 gallon) capacity and surrounded by, at a 
minimum, a sufficient quantity of sorbent material, determined to be 
nonbiodegradable in accordance with Sec. 265.314(f), to completely sorb 
all of the liquid contents of the inside containers. The metal outer 
container must be full after it has been packed with inside containers 
and sorbent material.
    (c) The sorbent material used must not be capable of reacting 
dangerously with, being decomposed by, or being ignited by the contents 
of the inside container's in accordance with Sec. 265.17(b).
    (d) Incompatible wastes, as defined in Sec. 260.10(a) of this 
chapter, must not be placed in the same outside container.

[[Page 468]]

    (e) Reactive waste, other than cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste as 
defined in Sec. 261.23(a)(5) of this chapter, must be treated or 
rendered non-reactive prior to packaging in accordance with paragraphs 
(a) through (d) of this section. Cyanide- and sulfide-bearing reactive 
waste may be packaged in accordance with paragraphs (a) through (d) of 
this section without first being treated or rendered non-reactive.
    (f) Such disposal is in compliance with the requirements of 40 CFR 
part 268. Persons who incinerate lab packs according to the requirements 
in 40 CFR 268.42(c)(1) may use fiber drums in place of metal outer 
containers. Such fiber drums must meet the DOT specifications in 49 CFR 
173.12 and be overpacked according to the requirements in paragraph (b) 
of this section.
[46 FR 56596, Nov. 17, 1981, as amended at 55 FR 22686, June 1, 1990; 57 
FR 54461, Nov. 18, 1992]


<R04>
                         Subpart O--Incinerators

    Source: 46 FR 7680, Jan. 23, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.340  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations of this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
hazardous waste incinerators (as defined in Sec. 260.10 of this 
chapter), except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise.
    (b) Owners and operators of incinerators burning hazardous waste are 
exempt from all of the requirements of this subpart, except Sec. 265.351 
(Closure), provided that the owner or operator has documented, in 
writing, that the waste would not reasonably be expected to contain any 
of the hazardous constituents listed in part 261, appendix VIII, of this 
chapter, and such documentation is retained at the facility, if the 
waste to be burned is:
    (1) Listed as a hazardous waste in part 261, subpart D, of this 
chapter solely because it is ignitable (Hazard Code I), corrosive 
(Hazard Code C), or both; or
    (2) Listed as a hazardous waste in part 261, subpart D, of this 
chapter solely because it is reactive (Hazard Code R) for 
characteristics other than those listed in Sec. 261.23(a) (4) and (5), 
and will not be burned when other hazardous wastes are present in the 
combustion zone; or
    (3) A hazardous waste solely because it possesses the characteristic 
of ignitability, corrosivity, or both, as determined by the tests for 
characteristics of hazardous wastes under part 261, subpart C, of this 
chapter; or
    (4) A hazardous waste solely because it possesses the reactivity 
characteristics described by Sec. 261.23(a) (1), (2), (3), (6), (7), or 
(8) of this chapter, and will not be burned when other hazardous wastes 
are present in the combustion zone.
[47 FR 27533, June 24, 1982 and 50 FR 666, Jan. 4, 1985, as amended at 
50 FR 49203, Nov. 29, 1985; 56 FR 7208, Feb. 21, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 265.341  Waste analysis.

    In addition to the waste analyses required by Sec. 265.13, the owner 
or operator must sufficiently analyze any waste which he has not 
previously burned in his incinerator to enable him to establish steady 
state (normal) operating conditions (including waste and auxiliary fuel 
feed and air flow) and to determine the type of pollutants which might 
be emitted. At a minimum, the analysis must determine:
    (a) Heating value of the waste;
    (b) Halogen content and sulfur content in the waste; and
    (c) Concentrations in the waste of lead and mercury, unless the 
owner or operator has written, documented data that show that the 
element is not present.

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.73, the owner or operator must place 
the results from each waste analysis, or the documented information, in 
the operating record of the facility.]


<R05>
Secs. 265.342--265.344  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.345  General operating requirements.

    During start-up and shut-down of an incinerator, the owner or 
operator must not feed hazardous waste unless the incinerator is at 
steady state (normal) conditions of operation, including steady state 
operating temperature and air flow.

[[Page 469]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.346  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.347  Monitoring and inspections.

    The owner or operator must conduct, as a minimum, the following 
monitoring and inspections when incinerating hazardous waste:
    (a) Existing instruments which relate to combustion and emission 
control must be monitored at least every 15 minutes. Appropriate 
corrections to maintain steady state combustion conditions must be made 
immediately either automatically or by the operator. Instruments which 
relate to combustion and emission control would normally include those 
measuring waste feed, auxiliary fuel feed, air flow, incinerator 
temperature, scrubber flow, scrubber pH, and relevant level controls.
    (b) The complete incinerator and associated equipment (pumps, 
valves, conveyors, pipes, etc.) must be inspected at least daily for 
leaks, spills, and fugitive emissions, and all emergency shutdown 
controls and system alarms must be checked to assure proper operation.
[46 FR 7678, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 27533, June 24, 1982]


<R05>
Secs. 265.348--265.350  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.351  Closure.

    At closure, the owner or operator must remove all hazardous waste 
and hazardous waste residues (including but not limited to ash, scrubber 
waters, and scrubber sludges) from the incinerator.

[Comment: At closure, as throughout the operating period, unless the 
owner or operator can demonstrate, in accordance with Sec. 261.3(d) of 
this chapter, that the residue removed from his incinerator is not a 
hazardous waste, the owner or operator becomes a generator of hazardous 
waste and must manage it in accordance with all applicable requirements 
of parts 262 through 266 of this chapter.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.352  Interim status incinerators burning particular hazardous wastes.

    (a) Owners or operators of incinerators subject to this subpart may 
burn EPA Hazardous Wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, or FO27 if they 
receive a certification from the Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste 
and Emergency Response that they can meet the performance standards of 
subpart O of part 264 when they burn these wastes.
    (b) The following standards and procedures will be used in 
determining whether to certify an incinerator:
    (1) The owner or operator will submit an application to the 
Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste and Emergency Response 
containing applicable information in Secs. 270.19 and 270.62 
demonstrating that the incinerator can meet the performance standards in 
subpart O of part 264 when they burn these wastes.
    (2) The Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste and Emergency 
Response will issue a tentative decision as to whether the incinerator 
can meet the performance standards in subpart O of part 264. 
Notification of this tentative decision will be provided by newspaper 
advertisement and radio broadcast in the jurisdiction where the 
incinerator is located. The Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste and 
Emergency Response will accept comment on the tentative decision for 60 
days. The Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste and Emergency Response 
also may hold a public hearing upon request or at his discretion.
    (3) After the close of the public comment period, the Assistant 
Administrator for Solid Waste and Emergency Response will issue a 
decision whether or not to certify the incinerator.
[50 FR 2005, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R05>
Secs. 265.353--265.369  [Reserved]


<R04>
                      Subpart P--Thermal Treatment


<R05>
Sec. 265.370  Other thermal treatment.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners or operators of 
facilities that thermally treat hazardous waste in devices other than 
enclosed devices using controlled flame combustion, except as Sec. 265.1 
provides otherwise. Thermal treatment in enclosed devices using 
controlled flame combustion is subject to the requirements of subpart O 
if the unit is an incinerator, and subpart H of

[[Page 470]]

part 266, if the unit is a boiler or an industrial furnace as defined in 
Sec. 260.10.
[50 FR 666, Jan. 4, 1985, as amended at 56 FR 32692, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Secs. 265.371--265.372  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.373  General operating requirements.

    Before adding hazardous waste, the owner or operator must bring his 
thermal treatment process to steady state (normal) conditions of 
operation--including steady state operating temperature--using auxiliary 
fuel or other means, unless the process is a non-continuous (batch) 
thermal treatment process which requires a complete thermal cycle to 
treat a discrete quantity of hazardous waste.


<R05>
Sec. 265.374  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.375  Waste analysis.

    In addition to the waste analyses required by Sec. 265.13, the owner 
or operator must sufficiently analyze any waste which he has not 
previously treated in his thermal process to enable him to establish 
steady state (normal) or other appropriate (for a non-continuous 
process) operating conditions (including waste and auxiliary fuel feed) 
and to determine the type of pollutants which might be emitted. At a 
minimum, the analysis must determine:
    (a) Heating value of the waste;
    (b) Halogen content and sulfur content in the waste; and
    (c) Concentrations in the waste of lead and mercury, unless the 
owner or operator has written, documented data that show that the 
element is not present.

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.73, the owner or operator must place 
the results from each waste analysis, or the documented information, in 
the operating record of the facility.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.376  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.377  Monitoring and inspections.

    (a) The owner or operator must conduct, as a minimum, the following 
monitoring and inspections when thermally treating hazardous waste:
    (1) Existing instruments which relate to temperature and emission 
control (if an emission control device is present) must be monitored at 
least every 15 minutes. Appropriate corrections to maintain steady state 
or other appropriate thermal treatment conditions must be made 
immediately either automatically or by the operator. Instruments which 
relate to temperature and emission control would normally include those 
measuring waste feed, auxiliary fuel feed, treatment process 
temperature, and relevant process flow and level controls.
    (2) The stack plume (emissions), where present, must be observed 
visually at least hourly for normal appearance (color and opacity). The 
operator must immediately make any indicated operating corrections 
necessary to return any visible emissions to their normal appearance.
    (3) The complete thermal treatment process and associated equipment 
(pumps, valves, conveyors, pipes, etc.) must be inspected at least daily 
for leaks, spills, and fugitive emissions, and all emergency shutdown 
controls and system alarms must be checked to assure proper operation.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Secs. 265.378--265.380  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.381  Closure.

    At closure, the owner or operator must remove all hazardous waste 
and hazardous waste residues (including, but not limited to, ash) from 
the thermal treatment process or equipment.

[Comment: At closure, as throughout the operating period, unless the 
owner or operator can demonstrate, in accordance with Sec. 261.3 (c) or 
(d) of this chapter, that any solid waste removed from his thermal 
treatment process or equipment is not a hazardous waste, the owner or 
operator becomes a generator of hazardous waste and must manage it in 
accordance with all applicable requirements of parts 262, 263, and 265 
of this chapter.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.382  Open burning; waste explosives.

    Open burning of hazardous waste is prohibited except for the open 
burning and detonation of waste explosives. Waste explosives include 
waste which has the potential to detonate and bulk military propellants 
which cannot safely be disposed of through other modes

[[Page 471]]

of treatment. Detonation is an explosion in which chemical 
transformation passes through the material faster than the speed of 
sound (0.33 kilometers/second at sea level). Owners or operators 
choosing to open burn or detonate waste explosives must do so in 
accordance with the following table and in a manner that does not 
threaten human health or the environment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Minimum distance from open
 Pounds of waste explosives or propellants  burning or detonation to the
                                                 property of others
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0 to 100..................................  204 meters (670 feet).
101 to 1,000..............................  380 meters (1,250 feet).
1,001 to 10,000...........................  530 meters (1,730 feet).
10,001 to 30,000..........................  690 meters (2,260 feet).
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 265.383  Interim status thermal treatment devices burning particular hazardous waste.

    (a) Owners or operators of thermal treatment devices subject to this 
subpart may burn EPA Hazardous Wastes FO20, FO21, FO22, FO23, FO26, or 
FO27 if they receive a certification from the Assistant Administrator 
for Solid Waste and Emergency Response that they can meet the 
performance standards of subpart O of part 264 when they burn these 
wastes.
    (b) The following standards and procedures will be used in 
determining whether to certify a thermal treatment unit:
    (1) The owner or operator will submit an application to the 
Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste and Emergency Response 
containing the applicable information in Secs. 270.19 and 270.62 
demonstrating that the thermal treatment unit can meet the performance 
standard in subpart O of part 264 when they burn these wastes.
    (2) The Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste and Emergency 
Response will issue a tentative decision as to whether the thermal 
treatment unit can meet the performance standards in subpart O of part 
264. Notification of this tentative decision will be provided by 
newspaper advertisement and radio broadcast in the jurisdiction where 
the thermal treatment device is located. The Assistant Administrator for 
Solid Waste and Emergency Response will accept comment on the tentative 
decision for 60 days. The Assistant Administrator for Solid Waste and 
Emergency Response also may hold a public hearing upon request or at his 
discretion.
    (3) After the close of the public comment period, the Assistant 
Administrator for Solid Waste and Emergency Response will issue a 
decision whether or not to certify the thermal treatment unit.
[50 FR 2005, Jan. 14, 1985]


<R04>
         Subpart Q--Chemical, Physical, and Biological Treatment


<R05>
Sec. 265.400  Applicability.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities which treat hazardous wastes by chemical, physical, or 
biological methods in other than tanks, surface impoundments, and land 
treatment facilities, except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise. Chemical, 
physical, and biological treatment of hazardous waste in tanks, surface 
impoundments, and land treatment facilities must be conducted in 
accordance with subparts J, K, and M, respectively.


<R05>
Sec. 265.401  General operating requirements.

    (a) Chemical, physical, or biological treatment of hazardous waste 
must comply with Sec. 265.17(b).
    (b) Hazardous wastes or treatment reagents must not be placed in the 
treatment process or equipment if they could cause the treatment process 
or equipment to rupture, leak, corrode, or otherwise fail before the end 
of its intended life.
    (c) Where hazardous waste is continuously fed into a treatment 
process or equipment, the process or equipment must be equipped with a 
means to stop this inflow (e.g., a waste feed cut-off system or by-pass 
system to a standby containment device).

[Comment: These systems are intended to be used in the event of a 
malfunction in the treatment process or equipment.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.402  Waste analysis and trial tests.

    (a) In addition to the waste analysis required by Sec. 265.13, 
whenever:
    (1) A hazardous waste which is substantially different from waste 
previously treated in a treatment process

[[Page 472]]

or equipment at the facility is to be treated in that process or 
equipment, or
    (2) A substantially different process than any previously used at 
the facility is to be used to chemically treat hazardous waste;

the owner or operator must, before treating the different waste or using 
the different process or equipment:
    (i) Conduct waste analyses and trial treatment tests (e.g., bench 
scale or pilot plant scale tests); or
    (ii) Obtain written, documented information on similar treatment of 
similar waste under similar operating conditions;

to show that this proposed treatment will meet all applicable 
requirements of Sec. 265.401 (a) and (b).
    [(b) [Reserved]

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.13, the waste analysis plan must 
include analyses needed to comply with Secs. 265.405 and 265.406. As 
required by Sec. 265.73, the owner or operator must place the results 
from each waste analysis and trial test, or the documented information, 
in the operating record of the facility.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.403  Inspections.

    (a) The owner or operator of a treatment facility must inspect, 
where present:
    (1) Discharge control and safety equipment (e.g., waste feed cut-off 
systems, by-pass systems, drainage systems, and pressure relief systems) 
at least once each operating day, to ensure that it is in good working 
order;
    (2) Data gathered from monitoring equipment (e.g., pressure and 
temperature gauges), at least once each operating day, to ensure that 
the treatment process or equipment is being operated according to its 
design;
    (3) The construction materials of the treatment process or 
equipment, at least weekly, to detect corrosion or leaking of fixtures 
or seams; and
    (4) The construction materials of, and the area immediately 
surrounding, discharge confinement structures (e.g., dikes), at least 
weekly, to detect erosion or obvious signs of leakage (e.g., wet spots 
or dead vegetation).
    (b) [Reserved]

[Comment: As required by Sec. 265.15(c), the owner or operator must 
remedy any deterioration or malfunction he finds.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.404  Closure.

    At closure, all hazardous waste and hazardous waste residues must be 
removed from treatment processes or equipment, discharge control 
equipment, and discharge confinement structures.

[Comment: At closure, as throughout the operating period, unless the 
owner or operator can demonstrate, in accordance with Sec. 261.3 (c) or 
(d) of this chapter, that any solid waste removed from his treatment 
process or equipment is not a hazardous waste, the owner or operator 
becomes a generator of hazardous waste and must manage it in accordance 
with all applicable requirements of parts 262, 263, and 265 of this 
chapter.]


<R05>
Sec. 265.405  Special requirements for ignitable or reactive waste.

    (a) Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a treatment 
process or equipment unless:
    (1) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately 
after placement in the treatment process or equipment so that (i) the 
resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no longer meets the 
definition of ignitable or reactive waste under Sec. 261.21 or 261.23 or 
this chapter, and (ii) Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with; or
    (2) The waste is treated in such a way that it is protected from any 
material or conditions which may cause the waste to ignite or react.
    (b)[Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 265.406  Special requirements for incompatible wastes.

    (a) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see 
appendix V for examples) must not be placed in the same treatment 
process or equipment, unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.
    (b) Hazardous waste must not be placed in unwashed treatment 
equipment which previously held an incompatible waste or material, 
unless Sec. 265.17(b) is complied with.

[[Page 473]]


<R04>
                    Subpart R--Underground Injection


<R05>
Sec. 265.430  Applicability.

    Except as Sec. 265.1 provides otherwise:
    (a) The owner or operator of a facility which disposes of hazardous 
waste by underground injection is excluded from the requirements of 
subparts G and H of this part.
    (b) The requirements of this subpart apply to owners and operators 
of wells used to dispose of hazardous waste which are classified as 
Class I under Sec. 144.6(a) of this chapter and which are classified as 
Class IV under Sec. 144.6(d) of this chapter.

[Comment: In addition to the requirements of subparts A through E of 
this part, the owner or operator of a facility which disposes of 
hazardous waste by underground injection ultimately must comply with the 
requirements of Secs. 265.431 through 265.437. These sections are 
reserved at this time. The Agency will propose regulations that would 
establish those requirements.]
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 48 FR 30115, June 30, 1983]

                        Subparts S--V  [Reserved]


<R04>
                          Subpart W--Drip Pads

    Source: 55 FR 50486, Dec. 6, 1990, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.440  Applicability.

    (a) The requirements of this subpart apply to owners and operators 
of facilities that use new or existing drip pads to convey treated wood 
drippage, precipitation, and/or surface water run-off to an associated 
collection system. Existing drip pads are those constructed before 
December 6, 1990 and those for which the owner or operator has a design 
and has entered into binding financial or other agreements for 
construction prior to December 6, 1990. All other drip pads are new drip 
pads. The requirement at Sec. 265.443(b)(3) to install a leak collection 
system applies only to those drip pads that are constructed after 
December 24, 1992 except for those constructed after December 24, 1992 
for which the owner or operator has a design and has entered into 
binding financial or other agreements for construction prior to December 
24, 1992.
    (b) The owner or operator of any drip pad that is inside or under a 
structure that provides protection from precipitation so that neither 
run-off nor run-on is generated is not subject to regulation under 
Sec. 265.443(e) or Sec. 265.443(f), as appropriate.
    (c) The requirements of this subpart are not applicable to the 
management of infrequent and incidental drippage in storage yards 
provided that:
    (1) The owner or operator maintains and complies with a written 
contingency plan that describes how the owner or operator will respond 
immediately to the discharge of such infrequent and incidental drippage. 
At a minimum, the contingency plan must describe how the facility will 
do the following:
    (i) Clean up the drippage;
    (ii) Document the cleanup of the drippage;
    (iii) Retain documents regarding cleanup for three years; and
    (iv) Manage the contaminated media in a manner consistent with 
Federal regulations.
[55 FR 50486, Dec. 6, 1990, as amended by 56 FR 30198, July 1, 1991; 57 
FR 61503, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.441  Assessment of existing drip pad integrity.

    (a) For each existing drip pad as defined in Sec. 265.440 of this 
subpart, the owner or operator must evaluate the drip pad and determine 
that it meets all of the requirements of this subpart, except the 
requirements for liners and leak detection systems of Sec. 265.443(b). 
No later than the effective date of this rule, the owner or operator 
must obtain and keep on file at the facility a written assessment of the 
drip pad, reviewed and certified by an independent, qualified registered 
professional engineer that attests to the results of the evaluation. The 
assessment must be reviewed, updated and re-certified annually until all 
upgrades, repairs, or modifications necessary to achieve compliance with 
all of the standards of Sec. 265.443 of this subpart are complete. The 
evaluation must document the extent to which the drip pad meets each of 
the design and operating standards of Sec. 265.443 of this subpart, 
except the standards for liners and leak detection

[[Page 474]]

systems, specified in Sec. 265.443(b) of this subpart.
    (b) The owner or operator must develop a written plan for upgrading, 
repairing, and modifying the drip pad to meet the requirements of 
Sec. 265.443(b) of this subpart, and submit the plan to the Regional 
Administrator no later than 2 years before the date that all repairs, 
upgrades, and modifications are complete. This written plan must 
describe all changes to be made to the drip pad in sufficient detail to 
document compliance with all the requirements of Sec. 265.443 of this 
subpart. The plan must be reviewed and certified by an independent 
qualified registered professional engineer.
    (c) Upon completion of all, repairs, and modifications, the owner or 
operator must submit to the Regional Administrator or State Director, 
the as-built drawings for the drip pad together with a certification by 
an independent, qualified registered professional engineer attesting 
that the drip pad conforms to the drawings.
    (d) If the drip pad is found to be leaking or unfit for use, the 
owner or operator must comply with the provisions of Sec. 265.443(m) of 
this subpart or close the drip pad in accordance with Sec. 265.445 of 
this subpart.
[55 FR 50486, Dec. 6, 1990, as amended at 57 FR 61504, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.442  Design and installation of new drip pads.

    Owners and operators of new drip pads must ensure that the pads are 
designed, installed, and operated in accordance with one of the 
following:
    (a) All of the applicable requirements of Secs. 265.443 (except 
Sec. 265.443(a)(4)), 265.444 and 265.445 of this subpart, or
    (b) All of the applicable requirements of Secs. 265.443 (except 
Sec. 265.443(b)), 265.444 and 265.445 of this subpart.
[57 FR 61504, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.443  Design and operating requirements.

    (a) Drip pads must:
    (1) Be constructed of non-earthen materials, excluding wood and non-
structurally supported asphalt;
    (2) Be sloped to free-drain treated wood drippage, rain and other 
waters, or solutions of drippage and water or other wastes to the 
associated collection system;
    (3) Have a curb or berm around the perimeter;
    (4)(i) Have a hydraulic conductivity of less than or equal to 
1 x 10<SUP>-7</SUP> centimeters per second, e.g., existing concrete drip 
pads must be sealed, coated, or covered with a surface material with a 
hydraulic conductivity of less than or equal to 1 x 10<SUP>-7</SUP> 
centimeters per second such that the entire surface where drippage 
occurs or may run across is capable of containing such drippage and 
mixtures of drippage and precipitation, materials, or other wastes while 
being routed to an associated collection system. This surface material 
must be maintained free of cracks and gaps that could adversely affect 
its hydraulic conductivity, and the material must be chemically 
compatible with the preservatives that contact the drip pad. The 
requirements of this provision apply only to existing drip pads and 
those drip pads for which the owner or operator elects to comply with 
Sec. 265.442(a) instead of Sec. 265.442(b).
    (ii) The owner or operator must obtain and keep on file at the 
facility a written assessment of the drip pad, reviewed and certified by 
an independent, qualified registered professional engineer that attests 
to the results of the evaluation. The assessment must be reviewed, 
updated and recertified annually. The evaluation must document the 
extent to which the drip pad meets the design and operating standards of 
this section, except for subsection (b).
    (5) Be of sufficient structural strength and thickness to prevent 
failure due to physical contact, climatic conditions, the stress of 
installation, and the stress of daily operations, e.g., variable and 
moving loads such as vehicle traffic, movement of wood, etc.

    Note: EPA will generally consider applicable standards established 
by professional organizations generally recognized by industry such as 
the American Concrete Institute (ACI) and the American Society of 
Testing Materials (ASTM) in judging the structural integrity requirement 
of this paragraph.

    (b) If an owner/operator elects to comply with Sec. 265.442(b) 
instead of Sec. 265.442(a), the drip pad must have:

[[Page 475]]

    (1) A synthetic liner installed below the drip pad that is designed, 
constructed, and installed to prevent leakage from the drip pad into the 
adjacent subsurface soil or groundwater or surface water at any time 
during the active life (including the closure period) of the drip pad. 
The liner must be constructed of materials that will prevent waste from 
being absorbed into the liner and prevent releases into the adjacent 
subsurface soil or ground water or surface water during the active life 
of the facility. The liner must be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that have appropriate chemical 
properties and sufficient strength and thickness to prevent failure due 
to pressure gradients (including static head and external hydrogeologic 
forces), physical contact with the waste or drip pad leakage to which 
they are exposed, climatic conditions, the stress of installation, and 
the stress of daily operation (including stresses from vehicular traffic 
on the drip pad);
    (ii) Placed upon a foundation or base capable of providing support 
to the liner and resistance to pressure gradients above and below the 
liner to prevent failure of the liner due to settlement, compression or 
uplift; and
    (iii) Installed to cover all surrounding earth that could come in 
contact with the waste or leakage; and
    (2) A leakage detection system immediately above the liner that is 
designed, constructed, maintained and operated to detect leakage from 
the drip pad. The leakage detection system must be:
    (i) Constructed of materials that are:
    (A) Chemically resistant to the waste managed in the drip pad and 
the leakage that might be generated; and
    (B) Of sufficient strength and thickness to prevent collapse under 
the pressures exerted by overlaying materials and by any equipment used 
at the drip pad; and
    (ii) Designed and operated to function without clogging through the 
scheduled closure of the drip pad.
    (iii) Designed so that it will detect the failure of the drip pad or 
the presence of a release of hazardous waste or accumulated liquid at 
the earliest practicable time.
    (3) A leakage collection system immediately above the liner that is 
designed, constructed, maintained and operated to collect leakage from 
the drip pad such that it can be removed from below the drip pad. The 
date, time, and quantity of any leakage collected in this system and 
removed must be documented in the operating log.
    (c) Drip pads must be maintained such that they remain free of 
cracks, gaps, corrosion, or other deterioration that could cause 
hazardous waste to be released from the drip pad.

    Note: See Sec. 265.443(m) for remedial action required if 
deterioration or leakage is detected.

    (d) The drip pad and associated collection system must be designed 
and operated to convey, drain, and collect liquid resulting from 
drippage or precipitation in order to prevent run-off.
    (e) Unless protected by a structure, as described in Sec. 265.440(b) 
of this subpart, the owner or operator must design, construct, operate 
and maintain a run-on control system capable of preventing flow onto the 
drip pad during peak discharge from at least a 24-hour, 25-year storm 
unless the system has sufficient excess capacity to contain any run-on 
that might enter the system, or the drip pad is protected by a structure 
or cover, as described in Sec. 265.440(b) of this subpart.
    (f) Unless protected by a structure or cover, as described in 
Sec. 265.440(b) of this subpart, the owner or operator must design, 
construct, operate and maintain a run-off management system to collect 
and control at least the water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-year 
storm.
    (g) The drip pad must be evaluated to determine that it meets the 
requirements of paragraphs (a) through (f) of this section and the owner 
or operator must obtain a statement from an independent, qualified 
registered professional engineer certifying that the drip pad design 
meets the requirements of this section.
    (h) Drippage and accumulated precipitation must be removed from the 
associated collection system as necessary to prevent overflow onto the 
drip pad.

[[Page 476]]

    (i) The drip pad surface must be cleaned thoroughly in a manner and 
frequency such that accumulated residues of hazardous waste or other 
materials are removed, with residues being properly managed as hazardous 
waste, so as to allow weekly inspections of the entire drip pad surface 
without interference or hindrance from accumulated residues of hazardous 
waste or other materials on the drip pad. The owner or operator must 
document the date and time of each cleaning and the cleaning procedure 
used in the facility's operating log.
    (j) Drip pads must be operated and maintained in a manner to 
minimize tracking of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents off 
the drip pad as a result of activities by personnel or equipment.
    (k) After being removed from the treatment vessel, treated wood from 
pressure and non-pressure processes must be held on the drip pad until 
drippage has ceased. The owner or operator must maintain records 
sufficient to document that all treated wood is held on the pad 
following treatment in accordance with this requirement.
    (l) Collection and holding units associated with run-on and run-off 
control systems must be emptied or otherwise managed as soon as possible 
after storms to maintain design capacity of the system.
    (m) Throughout the active life of the drip pad, if the owner or 
operator detects a condition that may have caused or has caused a 
release of hazardous waste, the condition must be repaired within a 
reasonably prompt period of time following discovery, in accordance with 
the following procedures:
    (1) Upon detection of a condition that may have caused or has caused 
a release of hazardous waste (e.g., upon detection of leakage by the 
leak detection system), the owner or operator must:
    (i) Enter a record of the discovery in the facility operating log;
    (ii) Immediately remove the portion of the drip pad affected by the 
condition from service;
    (iii) Determine what steps must be taken to repair the drip pad, 
remove any leakage from below the drip pad, and establish a schedule for 
accomplishing the clean up and repairs;
    (iv) Within 24 hours after discovery of the condition, notify the 
Regional Administrator of the condition and, within 10 working days, 
provide a written notice to the Regional Administrator with a 
description of the steps that will be taken to repair the drip pad, and 
clean up any leakage, and the schedule for accomplishing this work.
    (2) The Regional Administrator will review the information 
submitted, make a determination regarding whether the pad must be 
removed from service completely or partially until repairs and clean up 
are complete, and notify the owner or operator of the determination and 
the underlying rationale in writing.
    (3) Upon completing all repairs and clean up, the owner or operator 
must notify the Regional Administrator in writing and provide a 
certification, signed by an independent qualified, registered 
professional engineer, that the repairs and clean up have been completed 
according to the written plan submitted in accordance with paragraph 
(m)(1)(iv) of this section.
    (n) The owner or operator must maintain, as part of the facility 
operating log, documentation of past operating and waste handling 
practices. This must include identification of preservative formulations 
used in the past, a description of drippage management practices, and a 
description of treated wood storage and handling practices.
[55 FR 50486, Dec. 6, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 30198, July 1, 1991; 57 
FR 5861, Feb. 18, 1992; 57 FR 61504, Dec. 24, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 265.444  Inspections.

    (a) During construction or installation, liners and cover systems 
(e.g., membranes, sheets, or coatings) must be inspected for uniformity, 
damage, and imperfections (e.g., holes, cracks, thin spots, or foreign 
materials). Immediately after construction or installation, liners must 
be inspected and certified as meeting the requirements of Sec. 265.443 
of this subpart by an independent qualified, registered professional 
engineer. The certification must be maintained at the facility as part 
of

[[Page 477]]

the facility operating record. After installation liners and covers must 
be inspected to ensure tight seams and joints and the absence of tears, 
punctures, or blisters.
    (b) While a drip pad is in operation, it must be inspected weekly 
and after storms to detect evidence of any of the following:
    (1) Deterioration, malfunctions or improper operation of run-on and 
run-off control systems;
    (2) The presence of leakage in and proper functioning of leakage 
detection system.
    (3) Deterioration or cracking of the drip pad surface.


    Note: See Sec. 265.443(m) for remedial action required if 
deterioration or leakage is detected.


<R05>
Sec. 265.445  Closure.

    (a) At closure, the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate 
all waste residues, contaminated containment system components (pad, 
liners, etc.), contaminated subsoils, and structures and equipment 
contaminated with waste and leakage, and manage them as hazardous waste.
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practically removed or decontaminated, 
he must close the facility and perform post/closure care in accordance 
with closure and post-closure care requirements that apply to landfills 
(Sec. 265.310). For permitted units, the requirement to have a permit 
continues throughout the post-closure period.
    (c)(1) The owner or operator of an existing drip pad, as defined in 
Sec. 265.440 of this subpart, that does not comply with the liner 
requirements of Sec. 265.443(b)(1) must:
    (i) Include in the closure plan for the drip pad under Sec. 265.112 
both a plan for complying with paragraph (a) of this section and a 
contingent plan for complying with paragraph (b) of this section in case 
not all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at closure; and
    (ii) Prepare a contingent post-closure plan under Sec. 265.118 of 
this part for complying with paragraph (b) of this section in case not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed at closure.
    (2) The cost estimates calculated under Secs. 265.112 and 265.144 of 
this part for closure and post-closure care of a drip pad subject to 
this paragraph must include the cost of complying with the contingent 
closure plan and the contingent post-closure plan, but are not required 
to include the cost of expected closure under paragraph (a) of this 
section.

                        Subparts X--Z  [Reserved]


<R04>
          Subpart AA--Air Emission Standards for Process Vents

    Source: 55 FR 25507, June 21, 1990, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1030  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that treat, store, or dispose of hazardous wastes (except as 
provided in Sec. 265.1).
    (b) Except for Secs. 265.1034, paragraphs (d) and (e), this subpart 
applies to process vents associated with distillation, fractionation, 
thin-film evaporation, solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping 
operations that manage hazardous wastes with organic concentrations of 
at least 10 ppmw, if these operations are conducted in one of the 
following:
    (1) A unit that is subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR 
part 270, or
    (2) A unit (including a hazardous waste recycling unit) that is not 
exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 CFR 262.34(a) (i.e., a 
hazardous waste recycling unit that is not a 90-day tank or container) 
and that is located at a hazardous waste management facility otherwise 
subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR part 270, or
    (3) A unit that is exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 
CFR

[[Page 478]]

262.34(a) (i.e., a ``90-day'' tank or container) and is not a recycling 
unit under the requirements of 40 CFR 261.6.

    Note: The requirements of Secs. 265.1032 through 265.1036 apply to 
process vents on hazardous waste recycling units previously exempt under 
paragraph 261.6(c)(1). Other exemptions under Secs. 261.4, and 265.1(c) 
are not affected by these requirements.]

    (c) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the 
pharmaceutical manufacturing facility, commonly referred to as the 
Stonewall Plant, located at Route 340 South, Elkton, Virginia, provided 
that facility is operated in compliance with the requirements contained 
in a Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454. The 
requirements of this subpart shall apply to the facility upon 
termination of the Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 
52.2454.
    (d) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the process 
vents at a facility where the facility owner or operator certifies that 
all of the process vents that would otherwise be subject to this subpart 
are equipped with and operating air emission controls in accordance with 
the process vent requirements of an applicable Clean Air Act regulation 
codified under 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63. The documentation of 
compliance under regulations at 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63 
shall be kept with, or made readily available with, the facility 
operating record.
[55 FR 25507, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 
61 FR 59968, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 52642, Oct. 8, 1997; 62 FR 64661, Dec. 
8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1031  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, all terms shall have the meaning given them 
in Sec. 264.1031, the Act, and parts 260-266.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1032  Standards: Process vents.

    (a) The owner or operator of a facility with process vents 
associated with distillation, fractionation, thin-film evaporation, 
solvent extraction or air or steam stripping operations managing 
hazardous wastes with organic concentrations at least 10 ppmw shall 
either:
    (1) Reduce total organic emissions from all affected process vents 
at the facility below 1.4 kg/h (3 lb/h) and 2.8 Mg/yr (3.1 tons/yr), or
    (2) Reduce, by use of a control device, total organic emissions from 
all affected process vents at the facility by 95 weight percent.
    (b) If the owner or operator installs a closed-vent system and 
control device to comply with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this 
section, the closed-vent system and control device must meet the 
requirements of Sec. 265.1033.
    (c) Determinations of vent emissions and emission reductions or 
total organic compound concentrations achieved by add-on control devices 
may be based on engineering calculations or performance tests. If 
performance tests are used to determine vent emissions, emission 
reductions, or total organic compound concentrations achieved by add-on 
control devices, the performance tests must conform with the 
requirements of Sec. 265.1034(c).
    (d) When an owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree on determinations of vent emissions and/or emission reductions or 
total organic compound concentrations achieved by add-on control devices 
based on engineering calculations, the test methods in Sec. 265.1034(c) 
shall be used to resolve the disagreement.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1033  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.

    (a)(1) Owners or operators of closed-vent systems and control 
devices used to comply with provisions of this part shall comply with 
the provisions of this section.
    (2)(i) The owner or operator of an existing facility who cannot 
install a closed-vent system and control device to comply with the 
provisions of this subpart on the effective date that the facility 
becomes subject to the requirements of this subpart must prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes dates by which the closed-vent 
system and control device will be installed and in operation. The 
controls must be installed as soon as possible, but the implementation 
schedule may allow up to 30 months after the effective date that the 
facility becomes subject to this subpart for installation and startup.
    (ii) Any unit that begins operation after December 21, 1990, and is 
subject

[[Page 479]]

to the requirements of this subpart when operation begins, must comply 
with the rules immediately (i.e., must have control devices installed 
and operating on startup of the affected unit); the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply.
    (iii) The owner or operator of any facility in existence on the 
effective date of a statutory or EPA regulatory amendment that renders 
the facility subject to this subpart shall comply with all requirements 
of this subpart as soon as practicable but no later than 30 months after 
the amendment's effective date. When control equipment required by this 
subpart can not be installed and begin operation by the effective date 
of the amendment, the facility owner or operator shall prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes the following information: 
Specific calendar dates for award of contracts or issuance of purchase 
orders for the control equipment, initiation of on-site installation of 
the control equipment, completion of the control equipment installation, 
and performance of any testing to demonstrate that the installed 
equipment meets the applicable standards of this subpart. The owner or 
operator shall enter the implementation schedule in the operating record 
or in a permanent, readily available file located at the facility.
    (iv) Owners and operators of facilities and units that become newly 
subject to the requirements of this subpart after December 8, 1997, due 
to an action other than those described in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this 
section must comply with all applicable requirements immediately (i.e., 
must have control devices installed and operating on the date the 
facility or unit becomes subject to this subpart; the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply).
    (b) A control device involving vapor recovery (e.g., a condenser or 
adsorber) shall be designed and operated to recover the organic vapors 
vented to it with an efficiency of 95 weight percent or greater unless 
the total organic emission limits of Sec. 265.1032(a)(1) for all 
affected process vents can be attained at an efficiency less than 95 
weight percent.
    (c) An enclosed combustion device (e.g., a vapor incinerator, 
boiler, or process heater) shall be designed and operated to reduce the 
organic emissions vented to it by 95 weight percent or greater; to 
achieve a total organic compound concentration of 20 ppmv, expressed as 
the sum of the actual compounds, not carbon equivalents, on a dry basis 
corrected to 3 percent oxygen; or to provide a minimum residence time of 
0.50 seconds at a minimum temperature of 760  deg.C. If a boiler or 
process heater is used as the control device, then the vent stream shall 
be introduced into the flame combustion zone of the boiler or process 
heater.
    (d)(1) A flare shall be designed for and operated with no visible 
emissions as determined by the methods specified in paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section, except for periods not to exceed a total of 5 minutes 
during any 2 consecutive hours.
    (2) A flare shall be operated with a flame present at all times, as 
determined by the methods specified in paragraph (f)(2)(iii) of this 
section.
    (3) A flare shall be used only if the net heating value of the gas 
being combusted is 11.2 MJ/scm (300 Btu/scf) or greater, if the flare is 
steam-assisted or air-assisted; or if the net heating value of the gas 
being combusted is 7.45 MJ/scm (200 Btu/scf) or greater if the flare is 
nonassisted. The net heating value of the gas being combusted shall be 
determined by the methods specified in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
    (4)(i) A steam-assisted or nonassisted flare shall be designed for 
and operated with an exit velocity, as determined by the methods 
specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, of less than 18.3 m/s (60 
ft/s), except as provided in paragraphs (d)(4) (ii) and (iii) of this 
section.
    (ii) A steam-assisted or nonassisted flare designed for and operated 
with an exit velocity, as determined by the methods specified in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section, equal to or greater than 18.3 m/s (60 
ft/s) but less than 122 m/s (400 ft/s) is allowed if the net heating 
value of the gas being combusted is greater than 37.3 MJ/scm (1,000 Btu/
scf).
    (iii) A steam-assisted or nonassisted flare designed for and 
operated with an exit velocity, as determined by the

[[Page 480]]

methods specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, less than the 
velocity, V<INF>max</INF>, as determined by the method specified in 
paragraph (e)(4) of this section, and less than 122 m/s (400 ft/s) is 
allowed.
    (5) An air-assisted flare shall be designed and operated with an 
exit velocity less than the velocity, V<INF>max</INF>, as determined by 
the method specified in paragraph (e)(5) of this section.
    (6) A flare used to comply with this section shall be steam-
assisted, air-assisted, or nonassisted.
    (e)(1) Reference Method 22 in 40 CFR part 60 shall be used to 
determine the compliance of a flare with the visible emission provisions 
of this subpart. The observation period is 2 hours and shall be used 
according to Method 22.
    (2) The net heating value of the gas being combusted in a flare 
shall be calculated using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.178

where:

H<INF>T</INF>=Net heating value of the sample, MJ/scm; where the net 
          enthalpy per mole of offgas is based on combustion at 25 
          deg.C and 760 mm Hg, but the standard temperature for 
          determining the volume corresponding to 1 mol is 20  deg.C;
K=Constant, 1.74 x 10<SUP>-7</SUP> (1/ppm) (g mol/scm) (MJ/kcal) where 
          standard temperature for (g mol/scm) is 20  deg.C;
C<INF>i</INF>=Concentration of sample component i in ppm on a wet basis, 
          as measured for organics by Reference Method 18 in 40 CFR part 
          60 and measured for hydrogen and carbon monoxide by ASTM D 
          1946-82 (incorporated by reference as specified in 
          Sec. 260.11); and
H<INF>i</INF>=Net heat of combustion of sample component i, kcal/g mol 
          at 25  deg.C and 760 mm Hg. The heats of combustion may be 
          determined using ASTM D 2382-83 (incorporated by reference as 
          specified in Sec. 260.11) if published values are not 
          available or cannot be calculated.

    (3) The actual exit velocity of a flare shall be determined by 
dividing the volumetric flow rate (in units of standard temperature and 
pressure), as determined by Reference Methods 2, 2A, 2C, or 2D in 40 CFR 
part 60 as appropriate, by the unobstructed (free) cross-sectional area 
of the flare tip.
    (4) The maximum allowed velocity in m/s, V<INF>max</INF>, for a 
flare complying with paragraph (d)(4)(iii) of this section shall be 
determined by the following equation:

Log<INF>10</INF>(V<INF>max</INF>)=(H<INF>T</INF>+28.8)/31.7

where:

H<INF>T</INF>=The net heating value as determined in paragraph (e)(2) of 
          this section.
28.8=Constant,
31.7=Constant.

    (5) The maximum allowed velocity in m/s, V<INF>max</INF>, for an 
air-assisted flare shall be determined by the following equation:

V<INF>max</INF> = 8.706 + 0.7084 (H<INF>T</INF>)

where:
8.706 = Constant.
0.7084 = Constant.
H<INF>T</INF> = The net heating value as determined in paragraph (e)(2) 
          of this section.

    (f) The owner or operator shall monitor and inspect each control 
device required to comply with this section to ensure proper operation 
and maintenance of the control device by implementing the following 
requirements:
    (1) Install, calibrate, maintain, and operate according to the 
manufacturer's specifications a flow indicator that provides a record of 
vent stream flow from each affected process vent to the control device 
at least once every hour. The flow indicator sensor shall be installed 
in the vent stream at the nearest feasible point to the control device 
inlet, but before being combined with other vent streams.
    (2) Install, calibrate, maintain, and operate according to the 
manufacturer's specifications a device to continuously monitor control 
device operation as specified below:
    (i) For a thermal vapor incinerator, a temperature monitoring device 
equipped with a continuous recorder. The device shall have an accuracy 
of <plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in  deg. C 
or <plus-minus>0.5  deg. C, whichever is greater. The temperature sensor 
shall be installed at a location in the combustion chamber downstream of 
the combustion zone.
    (ii) For a catalytic vapor incinerator, a temperature monitoring 
device equipped with a continuous recorder. The device shall be capable 
of monitoring temperature at two locations and have an accuracy of 
<plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in  deg. C or

[[Page 481]]

<plus-minus>0.5  deg. C. whichever is greater. One temperature sensor 
shall be installed in the vent stream at the nearest feasible point to 
the catalyst bed inlet and a second temperature sensor shall be 
installed in the vent stream at the nearest feasible point to the 
catalyst bed outlet.
    (iii) For a flare, a heat sensing monitoring device equipped with a 
continuous recorder that indicates the continuous ignition of the pilot 
flame.
    (iv) For a boiler or process heater having a design heat input 
capacity less than 44 MW, a temperature monitoring device equipped with 
a continuous recorder. The device shall have an accuracy of 
<plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in  deg. C or 
<plus-minus>0.5  deg. C, whichever is greater. The temperature sensor 
shall be installed at a location in the furnace downstream of the 
combustion zone.
    (v) For a boiler or process heater having a design heat input 
capacity greater than or equal to 44 MW, a monitoring device equipped 
with a continuous recorder to measure a parameter(s) that indicates good 
combustion operating practices are being used.
    (vi) For a condenser, either:
    (A) A monitoring device equipped with a continuous recorder to 
measure the concentration level of the organic compounds in the exhaust 
vent stream from the condenser; or
    (B) A temperature monitoring device equipped with a continuous 
recorder. The device shall be capable of monitoring temperature with an 
accuracy of <plus-minus>1 percent of the temperature being monitored in 
degrees Celsius ( deg.C) or <plus-minus>0.5  deg.C, whichever is 
greater. The temperature sensor shall be installed at a location in the 
exhaust vent stream from the condenser exit (i.e., product side).
    (vii) For a carbon adsorption system such as a fixed-bed carbon 
adsorber that regenerates the carbon bed directly in the control device, 
either:
    (A) A monitoring device equipped with a continuous recorder to 
measure the concentration level of the organic compounds in the exhaust 
vent stream from the carbon bed, or
    (B) A monitoring device equipped with a continuous recorder to 
measure a parameter that indicates the carbon bed is regenerated on a 
regular, predetermined time cycle.
    (3) Inspect the readings from each monitoring device required by 
paragraphs (f) (1) and (2) of this section at least once each operating 
day to check control device operation and, if necessary, immediately 
implement the corrective measures necessary to ensure the control device 
operates in compliance with the requirements of this section.
    (g) An owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system such as a 
fixed-bed carbon adsorber that regenerates the carbon bed directly 
onsite in the control device, shall replace the existing carbon in the 
control device with fresh carbon at a regular, predetermined time 
interval that is no longer than the carbon service life established as a 
requirement of Sec. 265.1035(b)(4)(iii)(F).
    (h) An owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system such as a 
carbon canister that does not regenerate the carbon bed directly onsite 
in the control device shall replace the existing carbon in the control 
device with fresh carbon on a regular basis by using one of the 
following procedures:
    (1) Monitor the concentration level of the organic compounds in the 
exhaust vent stream from the carbon adsorption system on a regular 
schedule and replace the existing carbon with fresh carbon immediately 
when carbon breakthrough is indicated. The monitoring frequency shall be 
daily or at an interval no greater than 20 percent of the time required 
to consume the total carbon working capacity established as a 
requirement of Sec. 265.1035(b)(4)(iii)(G), whichever is longer.
    (2) Replace the existing carbon with fresh carbon at a regular, 
predetermined time interval that is less than the design carbon 
replacement interval established as a requirement of 
Sec. 265.1035(b)(4)(iii)(G).
    (i) An owner or operator of an affected facility seeking to comply 
with the provisions of this part by using a control device other than a 
thermal vapor incinerator, catalytic vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, 
process heater, condenser, or carbon adsorption system is required to 
develop documentation

[[Page 482]]

including sufficient information to describe the control device 
operation and identify the process parameter or parameters that indicate 
proper operation and maintenance of the control device.
    (j) A closed-vent system shall meet either of the following design 
requirements:
    (1) A closed-vent system shall be designed to operate with no 
detectable emissions, as indicated by an instrument reading of less than 
500 ppmv above background as determined by the procedure in 
Sec. 265.1034(b) of this subpart, and by visual inspections; or
    (2) A closed-vent system shall be designed to operate at a pressure 
below atmospheric pressure. The system shall be equipped with at least 
one pressure gauge or other pressure measurement device that can be read 
from a readily accessible location to verify that negative pressure is 
being maintained in the closed-vent system when the control device is 
operating.
    (k) The owner or operator shall monitor and inspect each closed-vent 
system required to comply with this section to ensure proper operation 
and maintenance of the closed-vent system by implementing the following 
requirements:
    (1) Each closed-vent system that is used to comply with paragraph 
(j)(1) of this section shall be inspected and monitored in accordance 
with the following requirements:
    (i) An initial leak detection monitoring of the closed-vent system 
shall be conducted by the owner or operator on or before the date that 
the system becomes subject to this section. The owner or operator shall 
monitor the closed-vent system components and connections using the 
procedures specified in Sec. 265.1034(b) of this subpart to demonstrate 
that the closed-vent system operates with no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppmv above 
background.
    (ii) After initial leak detection monitoring required in paragraph 
(k)(1)(i) of this section, the owner or operator shall inspect and 
monitor the closed-vent system as follows:
    (A) Closed-vent system joints, seams, or other connections that are 
permanently or semi-permanently sealed (e.g., a welded joint between two 
sections of hard piping or a bolted and gasketed ducting flange) shall 
be visually inspected at least once per year to check for defects that 
could result in air pollutant emissions. The owner or operator shall 
monitor a component or connection using the procedures specified in 
Sec. 265.1034(b) of this subpart to demonstrate that it operates with no 
detectable emissions following any time the component is repaired or 
replaced (e.g., a section of damaged hard piping is replaced with new 
hard piping) or the connection is unsealed (e.g., a flange is unbolted).
    (B) Closed-vent system components or connections other than those 
specified in paragraph (k)(1)(ii)(A) of this section shall be monitored 
annually and at other times as requested by the Regional Administrator, 
except as provided for in paragraph (n) of this section, using the 
procedures specified in Sec. 265.1034(b) of this subpart to demonstrate 
that the components or connections operate with no detectable emissions.
    (iii) In the event that a defect or leak is detected, the owner or 
operator shall repair the defect or leak in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (k)(3) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
and monitoring in accordance with the requirements specified in 
Sec. 265.1035 of this subpart.
    (2) Each closed-vent system that is used to comply with paragraph 
(j)(2) of this section shall be inspected and monitored in accordance 
with the following requirements:
    (i) The closed-vent system shall be visually inspected by the owner 
or operator to check for defects that could result in air pollutant 
emissions. Defects include, but are not limited to, visible cracks, 
holes, or gaps in ductwork or piping or loose connections.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the closed-vent system on or before the date that the system becomes 
subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or operator shall perform 
the inspections at least once every year.

[[Page 483]]

    (iii) In the event that a defect or leak is detected, the owner or 
operator shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (k)(3) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
and monitoring in accordance with the requirements specified in 
Sec. 265.1035 of this subpart.
    (3) The owner or operator shall repair all detected defects as 
follows:
    (i) Detectable emissions, as indicated by visual inspection, or by 
an instrument reading greater than 500 ppmv above background, shall be 
controlled as soon as practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days 
after the emission is detected, except as provided for in paragraph 
(k)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) A first attempt at repair shall be made no later than 5 
calendar days after the emission is detected.
    (iii) Delay of repair of a closed-vent system for which leaks have 
been detected is allowed if the repair is technically infeasible without 
a process unit shutdown, or if the owner or operator determines that 
emissions resulting from immediate repair would be greater than the 
fugitive emissions likely to result from delay of repair. Repair of such 
equipment shall be completed by the end of the next process unit 
shutdown.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the defect 
repair in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1035 of 
this subpart.
    (l) Closed-vent systems and control devices used to comply with 
provisions of this subpart shall be operated at all times when emissions 
may be vented to them.
    (m) The owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system to 
control air pollutant emissions shall document that all carbon that is a 
hazardous waste and that is removed from the control device is managed 
in one of the following manners, regardless of the average volatile 
organic concentration of the carbon:
    (1) Regenerated or reactivated in a thermal treatment unit that 
meets one of the following:
    (i) The owner or operator of the unit has been issued a final permit 
under 40 CFR part 270 which implements the requirements of 40 CFR part 
264 subpart X; or
    (ii) The unit is equipped with and operating air emission controls 
in accordance with the applicable requirements of subparts AA and CC of 
either this part or of 40 CFR part 264; or
    (iii) The unit is equipped with and operating air emission controls 
in accordance with a national emission standard for hazardous air 
pollutants under 40 CFR part 61 or 40 CFR part 63.
    (2) Incinerated in a hazardous waste incinerator for which the owner 
or operator either:
    (i) Has been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of 40 CFR part 264, subpart O; or
    (ii) Has designed and operates the incinerator in accordance with 
the interim status requirements of subpart O of this part.
    (3) Burned in a boiler or industrial furnace for which the owner or 
operator either:
    (i) Has been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H; or
    (ii) Has designed and operates the boiler or industrial furnace in 
accordance with the interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 266, 
subpart H.
    (n) Any components of a closed-vent system that are designated, as 
described in Sec. 265.1035(c)(9) of this subpart, as unsafe to monitor 
are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (k)(1)(ii)(B) of this 
section if:
    (1) The owner or operator of the closed-vent system determines that 
the components of the closed-vent system are unsafe to monitor because 
monitoring personnel would be exposed to an immediate danger as a 
consequence of complying with paragraph (k)(1)(ii)(B) of this section; 
and
    (2) The owner or operator of the closed-vent system adheres to a 
written plan that requires monitoring the closed-vent system components 
using the procedure specified in paragraph (k)(1)(ii)(B) of this section 
as frequently as practicable during safe-to-monitor times.
[59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 4913, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 
FR 59969, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 64661, Dec. 8, 1997]

[[Page 484]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1034  Test methods and procedures.

    (a) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this subpart 
shall comply with the test methods and procedures requirements provided 
in this section.
    (b) When a closed-vent system is tested for compliance with no 
detectable emissions, as required in Sec. 265.1033(k) of this subpart, 
the test shall comply with the following requirements:
    (1) Monitoring shall comply with Reference Method 21 in 40 CFR part 
60.
    (2) The detection instrument shall meet the performance criteria of 
Reference Method 21.
    (3) The instrument shall be calibrated before use on each day of its 
use by the procedures specified in Reference Method 21.
    (4) Calibration gases shall be:
    (i) Zero air (less than 10 ppm of hydrocarbon in air).
    (ii) A mixture of methane or n-hexane and air at a concentration of 
approximately, but less than, 10,000 ppm methane or n-hexane.
    (5) The background level shall be determined as set forth in 
Reference Method 21.
    (6) The instrument probe shall be traversed around all potential 
leak interfaces as close to the interface as possible as described in 
Reference Method 21.
    (7) The arithmetic difference between the maximum concentration 
indicated by the instrument and the background level is compared with 
500 ppm for determining compliance.
    (c) Performance tests to determine compliance with Sec. 265.1032(a) 
and with the total organic compound concentration limit of 
Sec. 265.1033(c) shall comply with the following:
    (1) Performance tests to determine total organic compound 
concentrations and mass flow rates entering and exiting control devices 
shall be conducted and data reduced in accordance with the following 
reference methods and calculation procedures:
    (i) Method 2 in 40 CFR part 60 for velocity and volumetric flow 
rate.
    (ii) Method 18 in 40 CFR part 60 for organic content.
    (iii) Each performance test shall consist of three separate runs; 
each run conducted for at least 1 hour under the conditions that exist 
when the hazardous waste management unit is operating at the highest 
load or capacity level reasonably expected to occur. For the purpose of 
determining total organic compound concentrations and mass flow rates, 
the average of results of all runs shall apply. The average shall be 
computed on a time-weighted basis.
    (iv) Total organic mass flow rates shall be determined by the 
following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC15NO91.179

where:

E<INF>h</INF>=Total organic mass flow rate, kg/h;
Q<INF>sd</INF>=Volumetric flow rate of gases entering or exiting control 
          device, as determined by Method 2, dscm/h;
n=Number of organic compounds in the vent gas;
C<INF>i</INF>=Organic concentration in ppm, dry basis, of compound i in 
          the vent gas, as determined by Method 18;
MW<INF>i</INF>=Molecular weight of organic compound i in the vent gas, 
          kg/kg-mol;
0.0416=Conversion factor for molar volume, kg-mol/m<SUP>3</SUP> (@ 293 K 
          and 760 mm Hg);
10<SUP>-6</SUP>=Conversion from ppm, ppm<SUP>-1</SUP>.

    (v) The annual total organic emission rate shall be determined by 
the following equation:

E<INF>A</INF>=(E<INF>h</INF>) (H)

where:

E<INF>A</INF>=Total organic mass emission rate, kg/y;
E<INF>h</INF>=Total organic mass flow rate for the process vent, kg/h;
H=Total annual hours of operations for the affected unit, h.

    (vi) Total organic emissions from all affected process vents at the 
facility shall be determined by summing the hourly total organic mass 
emission rates (E<INF>h</INF>, as determined in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of 
this section) and by summing the annual total organic mass emission 
rates (E<INF>A</INF>, as determined in paragraph (c)(1)(v) of this 
section) for all affected process vents at the facility.
    (2) The owner or operator shall record such process information as 
may be necessary to determine the conditions of the performance tests. 
Operations during periods of startup,

[[Page 485]]

shutdown, and malfunction shall not constitute representative conditions 
for the purpose of a performance test.
    (3) The owner or operator of an affected facility shall provide, or 
cause to be provided, performance testing facilities as follows:
    (i) Sampling ports adequate for the test methods specified in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (ii) Safe sampling platform(s).
    (iii) Safe access to sampling platform(s).
    (iv) Utilities for sampling and testing equipment.
    (4) For the purpose of making compliance determinations, the time-
weighted average of the results of the three runs shall apply. In the 
event that a sample is accidentally lost or conditions occur in which 
one of the three runs must be discontinued because of forced shutdown, 
failure of an irreplaceable portion of the sample train, extreme 
meteorological conditions, or other circumstances beyond the owner or 
operator's control, compliance may, upon the Regional Administrator's 
approval, be determined using the average of the results of the two 
other runs.
    (d) To show that a process vent associated with a hazardous waste 
distillation, fractionation, thin-film evaporation, solvent extraction, 
or air or steam stripping operation is not subject to the requirements 
of this subpart, the owner or operator must make an initial 
determination that the time-weighted, annual average total organic 
concentration of the waste managed by the waste management unit is less 
than 10 ppmw using one of the following two methods:
    (1) Direct measurement of the organic concentration of the waste 
using the following procedures:
    (i) The owner or operator must take a minimum of four grab samples 
of waste for each waste stream managed in the affected unit under 
process conditions expected to cause the maximum waste organic 
concentration.
    (ii) For waste generated onsite, the grab samples must be collected 
at a point before the waste is exposed to the atmosphere such as in an 
enclosed pipe or other closed system that is used to transfer the waste 
after generation to the first affected distillation fractionation, thin-
film evaporation, solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping 
operation. For waste generated offsite, the grab samples must be 
collected at the inlet to the first waste management unit that receives 
the waste provided the waste has been transferred to the facility in a 
closed system such as a tank truck and the waste is not diluted or mixed 
with other waste.
    (iii) Each sample shall be analyzed and the total organic 
concentration of the sample shall be computed using Method 9060 or 8260 
of SW-846 (incorporated by reference under Sec. 260.11).
    (iv) The arithmetic mean of the results of the analyses of the four 
samples shall apply for each waste stream managed in the unit in 
determining the time-weighted, annual average total organic 
concentration of the waste. The time-weighted average is to be 
calculated using the annual quantity of each waste stream processed and 
the mean organic concentration of each waste stream managed in the unit.
    (2) Using knowledge of the waste to determine that its total organic 
concentration is less than 10 ppmw. Documentation of the waste 
determination is required. Examples of documentation that shall be used 
to support a determination under this provision include production 
process information documenting that no organic compounds are used, 
information that the waste is generated by a process that is identical 
to a process at the same or another facility that has previously been 
demonstrated by direct measurement to generate a waste stream having a 
total organic content less than 10 ppmw, or prior speciation analysis 
results on the same waste stream where it can also be documented that no 
process changes have occurred since that analysis that could affect the 
waste total organic concentration.
    (e) The determination that distillation fractionation, thin-film 
evaporation, solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping operations 
manage hazardous wastes with time-weighted annual average total organic 
concentrations less than 10 ppmw shall be made as follows:
    (1) By the effective date that the facility becomes subject to the 
provisions of this subpart or by the date

[[Page 486]]

when the waste is first managed in a waste management unit, whichever is 
later; and
    (2) For continuously generated waste, annually; or
    (3) Whenever there is a change in the waste being managed or a 
change in the process that generates or treats the waste.
    (f) When an owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree on whether a distillation, fractionation, thin-film evaporation, 
solvent extraction, or air or steam stripping operation manages a 
hazardous waste with organic concentrations of at least 10 ppmw based on 
knowledge of the waste, the procedures in Method 8260 of SW-846 
(incorporated by reference under Sec. 260.11) may be used to resolve the 
dispute.
[55 FR 25507, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 
61 FR 59970, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 32463, June 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1035  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a)(1) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this 
subpart shall comply with the recordkeeping requirements of this 
section.
    (2) An owner or operator of more than one hazardous waste management 
unit subject to the provisions of this subpart may comply with the 
recordkeeping requirements for these hazardous waste management units in 
one recordkeeping system if the system identifies each record by each 
hazardous waste management unit.
    (b) Owners and operators must record the following information in 
the facility operating record:
    (1) For facilities that comply with the provisions of 
Sec. 265.1033(a)(2), an implementation schedule that includes dates by 
which the closed-vent system and control device will be installed and in 
operation. The schedule must also include a rationale of why the 
installation cannot be completed at an earlier date. The implementation 
schedule must be in the facility operating record by the effective date 
that the facility becomes subject to the provisions of this subpart.
    (2) Up-to-date documentation of compliance with the process vent 
standards in Sec. 265.1032. including:
    (i) Information and data identifying all affected process vents, 
annual throughput end operating hours of each affected unit, estimated 
emission rates for each affected vent and for the overall facility 
(i.e., the total emissions for all affected vents at the facility), and 
the approximate location within the facility of each affected unit 
(e.g., identify the hazardous waste management units on a facility plot 
plan); and
    (ii) Information and data supporting determinations of vent 
emissions and emission reductions achieved by add-on control devices 
based on engineering calculations or source tests. For the purpose of 
determining compliance, determinations of vent emissions and emission 
reductions must be made using operating parameter values (e.g., 
temperatures, flow rates or vent stream organic compounds and 
concentrations) that represent the conditions that result in maximum 
organic emissions, such as when the waste management unit is operating 
at the highest load or capacity level reasonably expected to occur. If 
the owner or operator takes any action (e.g., managing a waste of 
different composition or increasing operating hours of affected waste 
management units) that would result in an increase in total organic 
emissions from affected process vents at the facility, then a new 
determination is required.
    (3) Where an owner or operator chooses to use test data to determine 
the organic removal efficiency or total organic compound concentration 
achieved by the control device, a performance test plan. The test plan 
must include:
    (i) A description of how it is determined that the planned test is 
going to be conducted when the hazardous waste management unit is 
operating at the highest load or capacity level reasonably expected to 
occur. This shall include the estimated or design flow rate and organic 
content of each vent stream and define the acceptable operating ranges 
of key process and control device parameters during the test program.
    (ii) A detailed engineering description of the closed-vent system 
and control device including:

[[Page 487]]

    (A) Manufacturer's name and model number of control device.
    (B) Type of control device.
    (C) Dimensions of the control device.
    (D) Capacity.
    (E) Construction materials.
    (iii) A detailed description of sampling and monitoring procedures, 
including sampling and monitoring locations in the system, the equipment 
to be used, sampling and monitoring frequency, and planned analytical 
procedures for sample analysis.
    (4) Documentation of compliance with Sec. 265.1033 shall include the 
following information:
    (i) A list of all information references and sources used in 
preparing the documentation.
    (ii) Records, including the dates, of each compliance test required 
by Sec. 265.1033(j).
    (iii) If engineering calculations are used, a design analysis, 
specifications, drawings, schematics, and piping and instrumentation 
diagrams based on the appropriate sections of ``APTI Course 415: Control 
of Gaseous Emissions'' (incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 260.11) or other engineering texts acceptable to the Regional 
Administrator that present basic control device design information. 
Documentation provided by the control device manufacturer or vendor that 
describes the control device design in accordance with paragraphs 
(b)(4)(iii)(A) through (b)(4)(iii)(G) of this section may be used to 
comply with this requirement. The design analysis shall address the vent 
stream characteristics and control device operation parameters as 
specified below.
    (A) For a thermal vapor incinerator, the design analysis shall 
consider the vent stream composition, constituent concentrations, and 
flow rate. The design analysis shall also establish the design minimum 
and average temperature in the combustion zone and the combustion zone 
residence time.
    (B) For a catalytic vapor incinerator, the design analysis shall 
consider the vent stream composition, constituent concentrations, and 
flow rate. The design analysis shall also establish the design minimum 
and average temperatures across the catalyst bed inlet and outlet.
    (C) For a boiler or process heater, the design analysis shall 
consider the vent stream composition, constituent concentrations, and 
flow rate. The design analysis shall also establish the design minimum 
and average flame zone temperatures, combustion zone residence time, and 
description of method and location where the vent stream is introduced 
into the combustion zone.
    (D) For a flare, the design analysis shall consider the vent stream 
composition, constituent concentrations, and flow rate. The design 
analysis shall also consider the requirements specified in 
Sec. 265.1033(d).
    (E) For a condenser, the design analysis shall consider the vent 
stream composition, constituent concentrations, flow rate, relative 
humidity, and temperature. The design analysis shall also establish the 
design outlet organic compound concentration level, design average 
temperature of the condenser exhaust vent stream, and design average 
temperatures of the coolant fluid at the condenser inlet and outlet.
    (F) For a carbon adsorption system such as a fixed-bed adsorber that 
regenerates the carbon bed directly onsite in the control device, the 
design analysis shall consider the vent stream composition, constituent 
concentrations, flow rate, relative humidity, and temperature. The 
design analysis shall also establish the design exhaust vent stream 
organic compound concentration level, number and capacity of carbon 
beds, type and working capacity of activated carbon used for carbon 
beds, design total steam flow over the period of each complete carbon 
bed regeneration cycle, duration of the carbon bed steaming and cooling/
drying cycles, design carbon bed temperature after regeneration, design 
carbon bed regeneration time, and design service life of carbon.
    (G) For a carbon adsorption system such as a carbon canister that 
does not regenerate the carbon bed directly onsite in the control 
device, the design analysis shall consider the vent stream composition, 
constituent concentrations, flow rate, relative humidity, and 
temperature. The design analysis shall also establish the design outlet 
organic concentration level, capacity of carbon

[[Page 488]]

bed, type and working capacity of activated carbon used for carbon bed, 
and design carbon replacement interval based on the total carbon working 
capacity of the control device and source operating schedule.
    (iv) A statement signed and dated by the owner or operator 
certifying that the operating parameters used in the design analysis 
reasonably represent the conditions that exist when the hazardous waste 
management unit is or would be operating at the highest load or capacity 
level reasonably expected to occur.
    (v) A statement signed and dated by the owner or operator certifying 
that the control device is designed to operate at an efficiency of 95 
percent or greater unless the total organic concentration limit of 
Sec. 265.1032(a) is achieved at an efficiency less than 95 weight 
percent or the total organic emission limits of Sec. 265.1032(a) for 
affected process vents at the facility can be attained by a control 
device involving vapor recovery at an efficiency less than 95 weight 
percent. A statement provided by the control device manufacturer or 
vendor certifying that the control equipment meets the design 
specifications may be used to comply with this requirement.
    (vi) If performance tests are used to demonstrate compliance, all 
test results.
    (c) Design documentation and monitoring, operating, and inspection 
information for each closed-vent system and control device required to 
comply with the provisions of this part shall be recorded and kept up-
to-date in the facility operating record. The information shall include:
    (1) Description and date of each modification that is made to the 
closed-vent system or control device design.
    (2) Identification of operating parameter, description of monitoring 
device, and diagram of monitoring sensor location or locations used to 
comply with Sec. 265.1033(f)(1) and (f)(2).
    (3) Monitoring, operating and inspection information required by 
paragraphs (f) through (k) of Sec. 265.1033 of this subpart.
    (4) Date, time, and duration of each period that occurs while the 
control device is operating when any monitored parameter exceeds the 
value established in the control device design analysis as specified 
below:
    (i) For a thermal vapor incinerator designed to operate with a 
minimum residence time of 0.50 seconds at a minimum temperature of 760 
deg.C. period when the combustion temperature is below 760  deg.C.
    (ii) For a thermal vapor incinerator designed to operate with an 
organic emission reduction efficiency of 95 percent or greater, period 
when the combustion zone temperature is more than 28  deg.C below the 
design average combustion zone temperature established as a requirement 
of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(A) of this section.
    (iii) For a catalytic vapor incinerator, period when:
    (A) Temperature of the vent stream at the catalyst bed inlet is more 
than 28  deg.C below the average temperature of the inlet vent stream 
established as a requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(B) of this 
section; or
    (B) Temperature difference across the catalyst bed is less than 80 
percent of the design average temperature difference established as a 
requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(B) of this section.
    (iv) For a boiler or process heater, period when:
    (A) Flame zone temperature is more than 28  deg.C below the design 
average flame zone temperature established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(C) of this section; or
    (B) Position changes where the vent stream is introduced to the 
combustion zone from the location established as a requirement of 
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(C) of this section.
    (v) For a flare, period when the pilot flame is not ignited.
    (vi) For a condenser that complies with Sec. 265.1033(f)(2)(vi)(A), 
period when the organic compound concentration level or readings of 
organic compounds in the exhaust vent stream from the condenser are more 
than 20 percent greater than the design outlet organic compound 
concentration level established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(E) of this section.
    (vii) For a condenser that complies with Sec. 265.1033(f)(2)(vi)(B), 
period when:

[[Page 489]]

    (A) Temperature of the exhaust vent stream from the condenser is 
more than 6  deg.C above the design average exhaust vent stream 
temperature established as a requirement of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of 
this section; or
    (B) Temperature of the coolant fluid exiting the condenser is more 
than 6  deg.C above the design average coolant fluid temperature at the 
condenser outlet established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(E) of this section.
    (viii) For a carbon adsorption system such as a fixed-bed carbon 
adsorber that regenerates the carbon bed directly onsite in the control 
device and complies with Sec. 265.1033(f)(2)(vii)(A), period when the 
organic compound concentration level or readings of organic compounds in 
the exhaust vent stream from the carbon bed are more than 20 percent 
greater than the design exhaust vent stream organic compound 
concentration level established as a requirement of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(F) of this section.
    (ix) For a carbon adsorption system such as a fixed-bed carbon 
adsorber that regenerates the carbon bed directly onsite in the control 
device and complies with Sec. 265.1033(f)(2)(vii)(B), period when the 
vent stream continues to flow through the control device beyond the 
predetermined carbon bed regeneration time established as a requirement 
of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(F) of this section.
    (5) Explanation for each period recorded under paragraph (c)(4) of 
this section of the cause for control device operating parameter 
exceeding the design value and the measures implemented to correct the 
control device operation.
    (6) For carbon adsorption systems operated subject to requirements 
specified in Sec. 265.1033(g) or Sec. 265.1033(h)(2), date when existing 
carbon in the control device is replaced with fresh carbon.
    (7) For carbon adsorption systems operated subject to requirements 
specified in Sec. 265.1033(h)(1), a log that records:
    (i) Date and time when control device is monitored for carbon 
breakthrough and the monitoring device reading.
    (ii) Date when existing carbon in the control device is replaced 
with fresh carbon.
    (8) Date of each control device startup and shutdown.
    (9) An owner or operator designating any components of a closed-vent 
system as unsafe to monitor pursuant to Sec. 265.1033(n) of this subpart 
shall record in a log that is kept in the facility operating record the 
identification of closed-vent system components that are designated as 
unsafe to monitor in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1033(n) of this subpart, an explanation for each closed-vent 
system component stating why the closed-vent system component is unsafe 
to monitor, and the plan for monitoring each closed-vent system 
component.
    (10) When each leak is detected as specified in Sec. 265.1033(k) of 
this subpart, the following information shall be recorded:
    (i) The instrument identification number, the closed-vent system 
component identification number, and the operator name, initials, or 
identification number.
    (ii) The date the leak was detected and the date of first attempt to 
repair the leak.
    (iii) The date of successful repair of the leak.
    (iv) Maximum instrument reading measured by Method 21 of 40 CFR part 
60, appendix A after it is successfully repaired or determined to be 
nonrepairable.
    (v) ``Repair delayed'' and the reason for the delay if a leak is not 
repaired within 15 calendar days after discovery of the leak.
    (A) The owner or operator may develop a written procedure that 
identifies the conditions that justify a delay of repair. In such cases, 
reasons for delay of repair may be documented by citing the relevant 
sections of the written procedure.
    (B) If delay of repair was caused by depletion of stocked parts, 
there must be documentation that the spare parts were sufficiently 
stocked on-site before depletion and the reason for depletion.
    (d) Records of the monitoring, operating, and inspection information 
required by paragraphs (c)(3) through

[[Page 490]]

(c)(10) of this section shall be maintained by the owner or operator for 
at least 3 years following the date of each occurrence, measurement, 
maintenance, corrective action, or record.
    (e) For a control device other than a thermal vapor incinerator, 
catalytic vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, process heater, condenser, 
or carbon adsorption system, monitoring and inspection information 
indicating proper operation and maintenance of the control device must 
be recorded in the facility operating record.
    (f) Up-to-date information and data used to determine whether or not 
a process vent is subject to the requirements in Sec. 265.1032 including 
supporting documentation as required by Sec. 265.1034(d)(2) when 
application of the knowledge of the nature of the hazardous waste stream 
or the process by which it was produced is used, shall be recorded in a 
log that is kept in the facility operating record.
[55 FR 25507, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 
61 FR 59970, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Secs. 265.1036--265.1049  [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart BB--Air Emission Standards for Equipment Leaks

    Source: 55 FR 25512, June 21, 1990, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1050  Applicability.

    (a) The regulations in this subpart apply to owners and operators of 
facilities that treat, store, or dispose of hazardous wastes (except as 
provided in Sec. 265.1).
    (b) Except as provided in Sec. 265.1064(k), this subpart applies to 
equipment that contains or contacts hazardous wastes with organic 
concentrations of at least 10 percent by weight that are managed in one 
of the following:
    (1) A unit that is subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR 
part 270, or
    (2) A unit (including a hazardous waste recycling unit) that is not 
exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 CFR 262.34(a) (i.e., a 
hazardous waste recycling unit that is not a 90-day tank or container) 
and that is located at a hazardous waste management facility otherwise 
subject to the permitting requirements of 40 CFR part 270, or
    (3) A unit that is exempt from permitting under the provisions of 40 
CFR 262.34(a) (i.e., a ``90-day'' tank or container) and is not a 
recycling unit under the provisions of 40 CFR 261.6.
    (c) Each piece of equipment to which this subpart applies shall be 
marked in such a manner that it can be distinguished readily from other 
pieces of equipment.
    (d) Equipment that is in vacuum service is excluded from the 
requirements of Sec. 265.1052 to Sec. 265.1060 if it is identified as 
required in Sec. 265.1064(g)(5).
    (e) Equipment that contains or contacts hazardous waste with an 
organic concentration of at least 10 percent by weight for less than 300 
hours per calendar year is excluded from the requirements of 
Secs. 265.1052 through 265.1060 of this subpart if it is identified, as 
required in Sec. 265.1064(g)(6) of this subpart.
    (f) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the 
pharmaceutical manufacturing facility, commonly referred to as the 
Stonewall Plant, located at Route 340 South, Elkton, Virginia, provided 
that facility is operated in compliance with the requirements contained 
in a Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454. The 
requirements of this subpart shall apply to the facility upon 
termination of the Clean Air Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 
52.2454.

[Note: The requirements of Secs. 265.1052 through 265.1064 apply to 
equipment associated with hazardous waste recycling units previously 
exempt under paragraph 261.6(c)(1). Other exemptions under Secs. 261.4 
and 265.1(c) are not affected by these requirements.]

[55 FR 25512, June 21, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 59970, Nov. 25, 1996; 
62 FR 52642, Oct. 8, 1997; 62 FR 64661, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1051  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, all terms shall have the meaning given them 
in Sec. 264.1031, the Act, and parts 260-266.

[[Page 491]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1052  Standards: Pumps in light liquid service.

    (a)(1) Each pump in light liquid service shall be monitored monthly 
to detect leaks by the methods specified in Sec. 265.1063(b), except as 
provided in paragraphs (d), (e), and (f) of this section.
    (2) Each pump in light liquid service shall be checked by visual 
inspection each calendar week for indications of liquids dripping from 
the pump seal.
    (b)(1) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is 
measured, a leak is detected.
    (2) If there are indications of liquids dripping from the pump seal, 
a leak is detected.
    (c)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected, 
except as provided in Sec. 265.1059.
    (2) A first attempt at repair (e.g., tightening the packing gland) 
shall be made no later than 5 calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (d) Each pump equipped with a dual mechanical seal system that 
includes a barrier fluid system is exempt from the requirements of 
paragraph (a), provided the following requirements are met:
    (1) Each dual mechanical seal system must be:
    (i) Operated with the barrier fluid at a pressure that is at all 
times greater than the pump stuffing box pressure, or
    (ii) Equipped with a barrier fluid degassing reservoir that is 
connected by a closed-vent system to a control device that complies with 
the requirements of Sec. 265.1060, or
    (iii) Equipped with a system that purges the barrier fluid into a 
hazardous waste stream with no detectable emissions to the atmosphere.
    (2) The barrier fluid system must not be a hazardous waste with 
organic concentrations 10 percent or greater by weight.
    (3) Each barrier fluid system must be equipped with a sensor that 
will detect failure of the seal system, the barrier fluid system or 
both.
    (4) Each pump must be checked by visual inspection, each calendar 
week, for indications of liquids dripping from the pump seals.
    (5)(i) Each sensor as described in paragraph (d)(3) of this section 
must be checked daily or be equipped with an audible alarm that must be 
checked monthly to ensure that it is functioning properly.
    (ii) The owner or operator must determine, based on design 
considerations and operating experience, a criterion that indicates 
failure of the seal system, the barrier fluid system, or both.
    (6)(i) If there are indications of liquids dripping from the pump 
seal or the sensor indicates failure of the seal system, the barrier 
fluid system, or both based on the criterion determined in paragraph 
(d)(5)(ii) of this section, a leak is detected.
    (ii) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected, 
except as provided in Sec. 265.1059.
    (iii) A first attempt at repair (e.g., relapping the seal) shall be 
made no later than 5 calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (e) Any pump that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 265.1064(g)(2), for no detectable emissions, as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background, is exempt from 
the requirements of paragraphs (a), (c), and (d) of this section if the 
pump meets the following requirements:
    (1) Must have no externally actuated shaft penetrating the pump 
housing.
    (2) Must operate with no detectable emissions as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background as measured by 
the methods specified in Sec. 265.1063(c).
    (3) Must be tested for compliance with paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section initially upon designation, annually, and at other times as 
requested by the Regional Administrator.
    (f) If any pump is equipped with a closed-vent system capable of 
capturing and transporting any leakage from the seal or seals to a 
control device that complies with the requirements of Sec. 265.1060, it 
is exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) through (e) of this 
section.
[55 FR 25512, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991]

[[Page 492]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1053  Standards: Compressors.

    (a) Each compressor shall be equipped with a seal system that 
includes a barrier fluid system and that prevents leakage of total 
organic emissions to the atmosphere, except as provided in paragraphs 
(h) and (i) of this section.
    (b) Each compressor seal system as required in paragraph (a) of this 
section shall be:
    (1) Operated with the barrier fluid at a pressure that is at all 
times greater than the compressor stuffing box pressure, or
    (2) Equipped with a barrier fluid system that is connected by a 
closed-vent system to a control device that complies with the 
requirements of Sec. 265.1060, or
    (3) Equipped with a system that purges the barrier fluid into a 
hazardous waste stream with no detectable emissions to atmosphere.
    (c) The barrier fluid must not be a hazardous waste with organic 
concentrations 10 percent or greater by weight.
    (d) Each barrier fluid system as described in paragraphs (a) through 
(c) of this section shall be equipped with a sensor that will detect 
failure of the seal system, barrier fluid system, or both.
    (e)(1) Each sensor as required in paragraph (d) of this section 
shall be checked daily or shall be equipped with an audible alarm that 
must be checked monthly to ensure that it is functioning properly unless 
the compressor is located within the boundary of an unmanned plant site, 
in which case the sensor must be checked daily.
    (2) The owner or operator shall determine, based on design 
considerations and operating experience, a criterion that indicates 
failure of the seal system, the barrier fluid system or both.
    (f) If the sensor indicates failure of the seal system, the barrier 
fluid system, or both based on the criterion determined under paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section, a leak is detected.
    (g)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected, 
except as provided in Sec. 265.1059.
    (2) A first attempt at repair (e.g., tightening the packing gland) 
shall be made no later than 5 calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (h) A compressor is exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this section if it is equipped with a closed-vent system 
capable of capturing and transporting any leakage from the seal to a 
control device that complies with the requirements of Sec. 265.1060, 
except as provided in paragraph (i) of this section.
    (i) Any compressor that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 265.1064(g)(2), for no detectable emission as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background is exempt from 
the requirements of paragraphs (a) through (h) of this section if the 
compressor:
    (1) Is determined to be operating with no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above 
background, as measured by the method specified in Sec. 265.1063(c).
    (2) Is tested for compliance with paragraph (i)(1) of this section 
initially upon designation, annually, and at other times as requested by 
the Regional Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1054  Standards: Pressure relief devices in gas/vapor service.

    (a) Except during pressure releases, each pressure relief device in 
gas/vapor service shall be operated with no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above 
background, as measured by the method specified in Sec. 265.1063(c).
    (b)(1) After each pressure release, the pressure relief device shall 
be returned to a condition of no detectable emissions, as indicated by 
an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background, as soon as 
practicable, but no later than 5 calendar days after each pressure 
release, except as provided in Sec. 265.1059.
    (2) No later than 5 calendar days after the pressure release, the 
pressure relief device shall be monitored to confirm the condition of no 
detectable emissions, as indicated by an instrument reading of less than 
500 ppm above background, as measured by the method specified in 
Sec. 265.1063(c).

[[Page 493]]

    (c) Any pressure relief device that is equipped with a closed-vent 
system capable of capturing and transporting leakage from the pressure 
relief device to a control device as described in Sec. 265.1060 is 
exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1055  Standards: Sampling connection systems.

    (a) Each sampling connection system shall be equipped with a closed-
purge, closed-loop, or closed-vent system. This system shall collect the 
sample purge for return to the process or for routing to the appropriate 
treatment system. Gases displaced during filling of the sample container 
are not required to be collected or captured.
    (b) Each closed-purge, closed-loop, or closed-vent system as 
required in paragraph (a) of this section shall:
    (1) Return the purged process fluid directly to the process line; or
    (2) Collect and recycle the purged process fluid; or
    (3) Be designed and operated to capture and transport all the purged 
process fluid to a waste management unit that complies with the 
applicable requirements of Sec. 265.1085 through Sec. 265.1087 of this 
subpart or a control device that complies with the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1060 of this subpart.
    (c) In-situ sampling systems and sampling systems without purges are 
exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
[61 FR 59971, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1056  Standards: Open-ended valves or lines.

    (a)(1) Each open-ended valve or line shall be equipped with a cap, 
blind flange, plug, or a second valve.
    (2) The cap, blind flange, plug, or second valve shall seal the open 
end at all times except during operations requiring hazardous waste 
stream flow through the open-ended valve or line.
    (b) Each open-ended valve or line equipped with a second valve shall 
be operated in a manner such that the valve on the hazardous waste 
stream end is closed before the second valve is closed.
    (c) When a double block and bleed system is being used, the bleed 
valve or line may remain open during operations that require venting the 
line between the block valves but shall comply with paragraph (a) of 
this section at all other times.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1057  Standards: Valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid service.

    (a) Each valve in gas/vapor or light liquid service shall be 
monitored monthly to detect leaks by the methods specified in 
Sec. 265.1063(b) and shall comply with paragraphs (b) through (e) of 
this section, except as provided in paragraphs (f), (g), and (h) of this 
section' and Secs. 265.1061 and 265.1062.
    (b) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is measured, a 
leak is detected.
    (c)(1) Any valve for which a leak is not detected for two successive 
months may be monitored the first month of every succeeding quarter, 
beginning with the next quarter, until a leak is detected.
    (2) If a leak is detected, the valve shall be monitored monthly 
until a leak is not detected for 2 successive months.
    (d)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but no later than 15 calendar days after the leak is 
detected, except as provided in Sec. 265.1059.
    (2) A first attempt at repair shall be made no later than 5 calendar 
days after each leak is detected.
    (e) First attempts at repair include, but are not limited to, the 
following best practices where practicable:
    (1) Tightening of bonnet bolts.
    (2) Replacement of bonnet bolts.
    (3) Tightening of packing gland nuts.
    (4) Injection of lubricant into lubricated packing.
    (f) Any valve that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 265.1064(g)(2), for no detectable emissions, as indicated by an 
instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above background, is exempt from 
the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if the valve:
    (1) Has no external actuating mechanism in contact with the 
hazardous waste stream.

[[Page 494]]

    (2) Is operated with emissions less than 500 ppm above background as 
determined by the method specified in Sec. 265.1063(c).
    (3) Is tested for compliance with paragraph (f)(2) of this section 
initially upon designation, annually, and at other times as requested by 
the Regional Administrator.
    (g) Any valve that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 265.1064(h)(1), as an unsafe-to-monitor valve is exempt from the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if:
    (1) The owner or operator of the valve determines that the valve is 
unsafe to monitor because monitoring personnel would be exposed to an 
immediate danger as a consequence of complying with paragraph (a) of 
this section.
    (2) The owner or operator of the valve adheres to a written plan 
that requires monitoring of the valve as frequently as practicable 
during safe-to-monitor times.
    (h) Any valve that is designated, as described in 
Sec. 265.1064(h)(2), as a difficult-to-monitor valve is exempt from the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if:
    (1) The owner or operator of the valve determines that the valve 
cannot be monitored without elevating the monitoring personnel more than 
2 meters above a support surface.
    (2) The hazardous waste management unit within which the valve is 
located was in operation before June 21, 1990.
    (3) The owner or operator of the valve follows a written plan that 
requires monitoring of the valve at least once per calendar year.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1058  Standards: Pumps and valves in heavy liquid service, pressure relief devices in light liquid or heavy liquid service, and flanges and other 
          connectors.

    (a) Pumps and valves in heavy liquid service, pressure relief 
devices in light liquid or heavy liquid service, and flanges and other 
connectors shall be monitored within 5 days by the method specified in 
Sec. 265.1063(b) if evidence of a potential leak is found by visual, 
audible, olfactory, or any other detection method.
    (b) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is measured, a 
leak is detected.
    (c)(1) When a leak is detected, it shall be repaired as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 15 calendar days after it is detected, 
except as provided in Sec. 265.1059.
    (2) The first attempt at repair shall be made no later than 5 
calendar days after each leak is detected.
    (d) First attempts at repair include, but are not limited to, the 
best practices described under Sec. 265.1057(e).
    (e) Any connector that is inaccessible or is ceramic or ceramic-
lined (e.g., porcelain, glass, or glass-lined) is exempt from the 
monitoring requirements of paragraph (a) of this section and from the 
recordkeeping requirements of Sec. 265.1064 of this subpart.
[55 FR 25512, June 21, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 59971, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1059  Standards: Delay of repair.

    (a) Delay of repair of equipment for which leaks have been detected 
will be allowed if the repair is technically infeasible without a 
hazardous waste management unit shutdown. In such a case, repair of this 
equipment shall occur before the end of the next hazardous waste 
management unit shutdown.
    (b) Delay of repair of equipment for which leaks have been detected 
will be allowed for equipment that is isolated from the hazardous waste 
management unit and that does not continue to contain or contact 
hazardous waste with organic concentrations at least 10 percent by 
weight.
    (c) Delay of repair for valves will be allowed if:
    (1) The owner or operator determines that emissions of purged 
material resulting from immediate repair are greater than the emissions 
likely to result from delay of repair.
    (2) When repair procedures are effected, the purged material is 
collected and destroyed or recovered in a control device complying with 
Sec. 265.1060.
    (d) Delay of repair for pumps will be allowed if:
    (1) Repair requires the use of a dual mechanical seal system that 
includes a barrier fluid system.

[[Page 495]]

    (2) Repair is completed as soon as practicable, but not later than 6 
months after the leak was detected.
    (e) Delay of repair beyond a hazardous waste management unit 
shutdown will be allowed for a valve if valve assembly replacement is 
necessary during the hazardous waste management unit shutdown, valve 
assembly supplies have been depleted, and valve assembly supplies had 
been sufficiently stocked before the supplies were depleted. Delay of 
repair beyond the next hazardous waste management unit shutdown will not 
be allowed unless the next hazardous waste management unit shutdown 
occurs sooner than 6 months after the first hazardous waste management 
unit shutdown.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1060  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.

    (a) Owners and operators of closed-vent systems and control devices 
subject to this subpart shall comply with the provisions of 
Sec. 265.1033 of this part.
    (b)(1) The owner or operator of an existing facility who can not 
install a closed-vent system and control device to comply with the 
provisions of this subpart on the effective date that the facility 
becomes subject to the provisions of this subpart must prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes dates by which the closed-vent 
system and control device will be installed and in operation. The 
controls must be installed as soon as possible, but the implementation 
schedule may allow up to 30 months after the effective date that the 
facility becomes subject to this subpart for installation and startup.
    (2) Any units that begin operation after December 21, 1990, and are 
subject to the provisions of this subpart when operation begins, must 
comply with the rules immediately (i.e., must have control devices 
installed and operating on startup of the affected unit); the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply.
    (3) The owner or operator of any facility in existence on the 
effective date of a statutory or EPA regulatory amendment that renders 
the facility subject to this subpart shall comply with all requirements 
of this subpart as soon as practicable but no later than 30 months after 
the amendment's effective date. When control equipment required by this 
subpart can not be installed and begin operation by the effective date 
of the amendment, the facility owner or operator shall prepare an 
implementation schedule that includes the following information: 
Specific calendar dates for award of contracts or issuance of purchase 
orders for the control equipment, initiation of on-site installation of 
the control equipment, completion of the control equipment installation, 
and performance of any testing to demonstrate that the installed 
equipment meets the applicable standards of this subpart. The owner or 
operator shall enter the implementation schedule in the operating record 
or in a permanent, readily available file located at the facility.
    (4) Owners and operators of facilities and units that become newly 
subject to the requirements of this subpart after December 8, 1997 due 
to an action other than those described in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section must comply with all applicable requirements immediately (i.e., 
must have control devices installed and operating on the date the 
facility or unit becomes subject to this subpart; the 30-month 
implementation schedule does not apply).
[62 FR 64662, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1061  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid service: percentage of valves allowed to leak.

    (a) An owner or operator subject to the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1057 may elect to have all valves within a hazardous waste 
management unit comply with an alternative standard which allows no 
greater than 2 percent of the valves to leak.
    (b) The following requirements shall be met if an owner or operator 
decides to comply with the alternative standard of allowing 2 percent of 
valves to leak:
    (1) An owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator that 
the owner or operator has elected to comply with the requirements of 
this section.
    (2) A performance test as specified in paragraph (c) of this section 
shall be conducted initially upon designation,

[[Page 496]]

annually, and at other times requested by the Regional Administrator.
    (3) If a valve leak is detected, it shall be repaired in accordance 
with Sec. 265.1057 (d) and (e).
    (c) Performance tests shall be conducted in the following manner:
    (1) All valves subject to the requirements in Sec. 265.1057 within 
the hazardous waste management unit shall be monitored within 1 week by 
the methods specified in Sec. 265.1063(b).
    (2) If an instrument reading of 10,000 ppm or greater is measured, a 
leak is detected.
    (3) The leak percentage shall be determined by dividing the number 
of valves subject to the requirements in Sec. 265.1057 for which leaks 
are detected by the total number of valves subject to the requirements 
in Sec. 265.1057 within the hazardous waste management unit.
    (d) If an owner or operator decides no longer to comply with this 
section, the owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator in 
writing that the work practice standard described in Sec. 265.1057 (a) 
through (e) will be followed.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1062  Alternative standards for valves in gas/vapor service or in light liquid service: skip period leak detection and repair.

    (a)(1) An owner or operator subject to the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1057 may elect for all valves within a hazardous waste 
management unit to comply with one of the alternative work practices 
specified in paragraphs (b) (2) and (3) of this section.
    (2) An owner or operator must notify the Regional Administrator 
before implementing one of the alternative work practices.
    (b)(1) An owner or operator shall comply with the requirements for 
valves, as described in Sec. 265.1057, except as described in paragraphs 
(b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section.
    (2) After two consecutive quarterly leak detection periods with the 
percentage of valves leaking equal to or less than 2 percent, an owner 
or operator may begin to skip one of the quarterly leak detection 
periods (i.e., monitor for leaks once every six months) for the valves 
subject to the requirements in Sec. 265.1057 of this subpart.
    (3) After five consecutive quarterly leak detection periods with the 
percentage of valves leaking equal to or less than 2 percent, an owner 
or operator may begin to skip three of the quarterly leak detection 
periods (i.e., monitor for leaks once every year) for the valves subject 
to the requirements in Sec. 265.1057 of this subpart.
    (4) If the percentage of valves leaking is greater than 2 percent, 
the owner or operators shall monitor monthly in compliance with the 
requirements in Sec. 265.1057, but may again elect to use this section 
after meeting the requirements of Sec. 265.1057(c)(1).
[55 FR 25512, June 21, 1990, as amended at 62 FR 64662, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1063  Test methods and procedures.

    (a) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this subpart 
shall comply with the test methods and procedures requirements provided 
in this section.
    (b) Leak detection monitoring, as required in Secs. 265.1052 through 
265.1062, shall comply with the following requirements:
    (1) Monitoring shall comply with Reference Method 21 in 40 CFR part 
60.
    (2) The detection instrument shall meet the performance criteria of 
Reference Method 21.
    (3) The instrument shall be calibrated before use on each day of its 
use by the procedures specified in Reference Method 21.
    (4) Calibration gases shall be:
    (i) Zero air (less than 10 ppm of hydrocarbon in air).
    (ii) A mixture of methane or n-hexane and air at a concentration of 
approximately, but less than, 10.000 ppm methane or n-hexane.
    (5) The instrument probe shall be traversed around all potential 
leak interfaces as close to the interface as possible as described in 
Reference Method 21.
    (c) When equipment is tested for compliance with no detectable 
emissions, as required in Secs. 265.1052(e), 265.1053(i), 265.1054, and 
265.1057(f), the test shall comply with the following requirements:

[[Page 497]]

    (1) The requirements of paragraphs (b) (1) through (4) of this 
section shall apply.
    (2) The background level shall be determined, as set forth in 
Reference Method 21.
    (3) The instrument probe shall be traversed around all potential 
leak interfaces as close to the interface as possible as described in 
Reference Method 21.
    (4) The arithmetic difference between the maximum concentration 
indicated by the instrument and the background level is compared with 
500 ppm for determining compliance.
    (d) In accordance with the waste analysis plan required by 
Sec. 265.13(b), an owner or operator of a facility must determine, for 
each piece of equipment, whether the equipment contains or contacts a 
hazardous waste with organic concentration that equals or exceeds 10 
percent by weight using the following:
    (1) Methods described in ASTM Methods D 2267-88, E 169-87, E 168-88, 
E 260-85 (incorporated by reference under Sec. 260.11);
    (2) Method 9060 or 8260 of SW-846 (incorporated by reference under 
Sec. 260.11); or
    (3) Application of the knowledge of the nature of the hazardous 
waste stream or the process by which it was produced. Documentation of a 
waste determination by knowledge is required. Examples of documentation 
that shall be used to support a determination under this provision 
include production process information documenting that no organic 
compounds are used, information that the waste is generated by a process 
that is identical to a process at the same or another facility that has 
previously been demonstrated by direct measurement to have a total 
organic content less than 10 percent, or prior speciation analysis 
results on the same waste stream where it can also be documented that no 
process changes have occurred since that analysis that could affect the 
waste total organic concentration.
    (e) If an owner or operator determines that a piece of equipment 
contains or contacts a hazardous waste with organic concentrations at 
least 10 percent by weight, the determination can be revised only after 
following the procedures in paragraph (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section.
    (f) When an owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree on whether a piece of equipment contains or contacts a hazardous 
waste with organic concentrations at least 10 percent by weight, the 
procedures in paragraph (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section can be used to 
resolve the dispute.
    (g) Samples used in determining the percent organic content shall be 
representative of the highest total organic content hazardous waste that 
is expected to be contained in or contact the equipment.
    (h) To determine if pumps or valves are in light liquid service, the 
vapor pressures of constituents may be obtained from standard reference 
texts or may be determined by ASTM D-2879-86 (incorporated by reference 
under Sec. 260.11).
    (i) Performance tests to determine if a control device achieves 95 
weight percent organic emission reduction shall comply with the 
procedures of Sec. 265.1034 (c)(1) through (c)(4).
[55 FR 25512, June 21, 1990, as amended at 62 FR 32463, June 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1064  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a)(1) Each owner or operator subject to the provisions of this 
subpart shall comply with the recordkeeping requirements of this 
section.
    (2) An owner or operator of more than one hazardous waste management 
unit subject to the provisions of this subpart may comply with the 
recordkeeping requirements for these hazardous waste management units in 
one recordkeeping system if the system identifies each record by each 
hazardous waste management unit.
    (b) Owners and operators must record the following information in 
the facility operating record:
    (1) For each piece of equipment to which subpart BB of part 265 
applies:
    (i) Equipment identification number and hazardous waste management 
unit identification.
    (ii) Approximate locations within the facility (e.g., identify the 
hazardous waste management unit on a facility plot plan).

[[Page 498]]

    (iii) Type of equipment (e.g., a pump or pipeline valve).
    (iv) Percent-by-weight total organics in the hazardous waste stream 
at the equipment.
    (v) Hazardous waste state at the equipment (e.g., gas/vapor or 
liquid).
    (vi) Method of compliance with the standard (e.g., ``monthly leak 
detection and repair'' or ``equipped with dual mechanical seals'').
    (2) For facilities that comply with the provisions of 
Sec. 265.1033(a)(2), an implementation schedule as specified in 
Sec. 265.1033(a)(2).
    (3) Where an owner or operator chooses to use test data to 
demonstrate the organic removal efficiency or total organic compound 
concentration achieved by the control device, a performance test plan as 
specified in Sec. 265.1035(b)(3).
    (4) Documentation of compliance with Sec. 265.1060, including the 
detailed design documentation or performance test results specified in 
Sec. 265.1035(b)(4).
    (c) When each leak is detected as specified in Secs. 265.1052, 
265.1053, 265.1057, and 265.1058, the following requirements apply:
    (1) A weatherproof and readily visible identification, marked with 
the equipment identification number, the date evidence of a potential 
leak was found in accordance with Sec. 265.1058(a), and the date the 
leak was detected, shall be attached to the leaking equipment.
    (2) The identification on equipment, except on a valve, may be 
removed after it has been repaired.
    (3) The identification on a valve may be removed after it has been 
monitored for 2 successive months as specified in Sec. 265.1057(c) and 
no leak has been detected during those 2 months.
    (d) When each leak is detected as specified in Secs. 265.1052, 
265.1053, 265.1057, and 265.1058, the following information shall be 
recorded in an inspection log and shall be kept in the facility 
operating record:
    (1) The instrument and operator identification numbers and the 
equipment identification number.
    (2) The date evidence of a potential leak was found in accordance 
with Sec. 265.1058(a).
    (3) The date the leak was detected and the dates of each attempt to 
repair the leak.
    (4) Repair methods applied in each attempt to repair the leak.
    (5) ``Above 10,000'' if the maximum instrument reading measured by 
the methods specified in Sec. 265.1063(b) after each repair attempt is 
equal to or greater than 10,000 ppm.
    (6) ``Repair delayed'' and the reason for the delay if a leak is not 
repaired within 15 calendar days after discovery of the leak.
    (7) Documentation supporting the delay of repair of a valve in 
compliance with Sec. 265.1059(c).
    (8) The signature of the owner or operator (or designate) whose 
decision it was that repair could not be effected without a hazardous 
waste management unit shutdown.
    (9) The expected date of successful repair of the leak if a leak is 
not repaired within 15 calendar days.
    (10) The date of successful repair of the leak.
    (e) Design documentation and monitoring, operating, and inspection 
information for each closed-vent system and control device required to 
comply with the provisions of Sec. 265.1060 shall be recorded and kept 
up-to-date in the facility operating record as specified in 
Sec. 265.1035(c). Design documentation is specified in Sec. 265.1035 
(c)(1) and (c)(2) and monitoring, operating, and inspection information 
in Sec. 265.1035 (c)(3)-(c)(8).
    (f) For a control device other than a thermal vapor incinerator, 
catalytic vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, process heater, condenser, 
or carbon adsorption system, monitoring and inspection information 
indicating proper operation and maintenance of the control device must 
be recorded in the facility operating record.
    (g) The following information pertaining to all equipment subject to 
the requirements in Secs. 265.1052 through 265.1060 shall be recorded in 
a log that is kept in the facility operating record:
    (1) A list of identification numbers for equipment (except welded 
fittings) subject to the requirements of this subpart.

[[Page 499]]

    (2)(i) A list of identification numbers for equipment that the owner 
or operator elects to designate for no detectable emissions, as 
indicated by an instrument reading of less than 500 ppm above 
background, under the provisions of Secs. 265.1052(e), 265.1053(i), and 
265.1057(f).
    (ii) The designation of this equipment as subject to the 
requirements of Secs. 265.1052(e), 265.1053(i), or 265.1057(f) shall be 
signed by the owner or operator.
    (3) A list of equipment identification numbers for pressure relief 
devices required to comply with Sec. 265.1054(a).
    (4)(i) The dates of each compliance test required in 
Secs. 265.1052(e), 265.1053(i), 265.1054, and 265.1057(f).
    (ii) The background level measured during each compliance test.
    (iii) The maximum instrument reading measured at the equipment 
during each compliance test.
    (5) A list of identification numbers for equipment in vacuum 
service.
    (6) Identification, either by list or location (area or group) of 
equipment that contains or contacts hazardous waste with an organic 
concentration of at least 10 percent by weight for less than 300 hours 
per calendar year.
    (h) The following information pertaining to all valves subject to 
the requirements of Sec. 265.1057 (g) and (h) shall be recorded in a log 
that is kept in the facility operating record:
    (1) A list of identification numbers for valves that are designated 
as unsafe to monitor, an explanation for each valve stating why the 
valve is unsafe to monitor, and the plan for monitoring each valve.
    (2) A list of identification numbers for valves that are designated 
as difficult to monitor, an explanation for each valve stating why the 
valve is difficult to monitor, and the planned schedule for monitoring 
each valve.
    (i) The following information shall be recorded in the facility 
operating record for valves complying with Sec. 265.1062:
    (1) A schedule of monitoring.
    (2) The percent of valves found leaking during each monitoring 
period.
    (j) The following information shall be recorded in a log that is 
kept in the facility operating record:
    (1) Criteria required in Secs. 265.1052 (d)(5)(ii) and 
265.1053(e)(2) and an explanation of the criteria.
    (2) Any changes to these criteria and the reasons for the changes.
    (k) The following information shall be recorded in a log that is 
kept in the facility operating record for use in determining exemptions 
as provided in the applicability section of this subpart and other 
specific subparts:
    (1) An analysis determining the design capacity of the hazardous 
waste management unit.
    (2) A statement listing the hazardous waste influent to and effluent 
from each hazardous waste management unit subject to the requirements in 
Secs. 265.1052 through 265.1060 and an analysis determining whether 
these hazardous wastes are heavy liquids.
    (3) An up-to-date analysis and the supporting information and data 
used to determine whether or not equipment is subject to the 
requirements in Secs. 265.1052 through 265.1060. The record shall 
include supporting documentation as required by Sec. 265.1063(d)(3) when 
application of the knowledge of the nature of the hazardous waste stream 
or the process by which it was produced is used. If the owner or 
operator takes any action (e.g., changing the process that produced the 
waste) that could result in an increase in the total organic content of 
the waste contained in or contacted by equipment determined not to be 
subject to the requirements in Secs. 265.1052 through 265.1060, then a 
new determination is required.
    (l) Records of the equipment leak information required by paragraph 
(d) of this section and the operating information required by paragraph 
(e) of this section need be kept only 3 years.
    (m) The owner or operator of any facility with equipment that is 
subject to this subpart and to leak detection, monitoring, and repair 
requirements under regulations at 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63 
may elect to determine compliance with this subpart either by 
documentation pursuant to Sec. 265.1064 of this subpart, or by 
documentation of compliance with the regulations at 40 CFR part 60, part 
61, or part 63 pursuant to the relevant provisions of the regulations at 
40 part 60, part 61, or part 63. The documentation

[[Page 500]]

of compliance under regulation at 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63 
shall be kept with or made readily available with the facility operating 
record.
[55 FR 25512, June 21, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19290, Apr. 26, 1991; 
61 FR 59971, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 64662, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Secs. 265.1065--265.1079  [Reserved]


<R04>
Subpart CC--Air Emission Standards for Tanks, Surface Impoundments, and 
                               Containers

    Source: 59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1080  Applicability.

    (a) The requirements of this subpart apply to owners and operators 
of all facilities that treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste in 
tanks, surface impoundments, or containers subject to either subparts I, 
J, or K of this part except as Sec. 265.1 and paragraph (b) of this 
section provide otherwise.
    (b) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to the following 
waste management units at the facility:
    (1) A waste management unit that holds hazardous waste placed in the 
unit before December 6, 1996, and in which no hazardous waste is added 
to the unit on or after December 6, 1996.
    (2) A container that has a design capacity less than or equal to 0.1 
m\3\.
    (3) A tank in which an owner or operator has stopped adding 
hazardous waste and the owner or operator has begun implementing or 
completed closure pursuant to an approved closure plan.
    (4) A surface impoundment in which an owner or operator has stopped 
adding hazardous waste (except to implement an approved closure plan) 
and the owner or operator has begun implementing or completed closure 
pursuant to an approved closure plan.
    (5) A waste management unit that is used solely for on-site 
treatment or storage of hazardous waste that is generated as the result 
of implementing remedial activities required under the RCRA corrective 
action authorities of 3004(u), 3004(v) or 3008(h), CERCLA authorities, 
or similar Federal or State authorities.
    (6) A waste management unit that is used solely for the management 
of radioactive mixed waste in accordance with all applicable regulations 
under the authority of the Atomic Energy Act and the Nuclear Waste 
Policy Act.
    (7) A hazardous waste management unit that the owner or operator 
certifies is equipped with and operating air emission controls in 
accordance with the requirements of an applicable Clean Air Act 
regulation codified under 40 CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63. For the 
purpose of complying with this paragraph, a tank for which the air 
emission control includes an enclosure, as opposed to a cover, must be 
in compliance with the enclosure and control device requirements of 
Sec. 265.1085(i), except as provided in Sec. 265.1083(c)(5).
    (8) A tank that has a process vent as defined in 40 CFR 264.1031.
    (c) For the owner and operator of a facility subject to this subpart 
who has received a final permit under RCRA section 3005 prior to 
December 6, 1996, the following requirements apply:
    (1) The requirements of 40 CFR part 264, subpart CC shall be 
incorporated into the permit when the permit is reissued in accordance 
with the requirements of 40 CFR 124.15 or reviewed in accordance with 
the requirements of 40 CFR 270.50(d).
    (2) Until the date when the permit is reissued in accordance with 
the requirements of 40 CFR 124.15 or reviewed in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR 270.50(d), the owner and operator is subject to 
the requirements of this subpart.
    (d) The requirements of this subpart, except for the recordkeeping 
requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(i) of this subpart, are 
administratively stayed for a tank or a container used for the 
management of hazardous waste generated by organic peroxide 
manufacturing and its associated laboratory operations when the owner or 
operator of the unit meets all of the following conditions:
    (1) The owner or operator identifies that the tank or container 
receives hazardous waste generated by an organic peroxide manufacturing 
process producing more than one functional family of organic peroxides 
or multiple

[[Page 501]]

organic peroxides within one functional family, that one or more of 
these organic peroxides could potentially undergo self-accelerating 
thermal decomposition at or below ambient temperatures, and that organic 
peroxides are the predominant products manufactured by the process. For 
the purpose of meeting the conditions of this paragraph, ``organic 
peroxide'' means an organic compound that contains the bivalent -O-O- 
structure and which may be considered to be a structural derivative of 
hydrogen peroxide where one or both of the hydrogen atoms has been 
replaced by an organic radical.
    (2) The owner or operator prepares documentation, in accordance with 
the requirements of Sec. 265.1090(i) of this subpart, explaining why an 
undue safety hazard would be created if air emission controls specified 
in Secs. 265.1085 through 265.1088 of this subpart are installed and 
operated on the tanks and containers used at the facility to manage the 
hazardous waste generated by the organic peroxide manufacturing process 
or processes meeting the conditions of paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
    (3) The owner or operator notifies the Regional Administrator in 
writing that hazardous waste generated by an organic peroxide 
manufacturing process or processes meeting the conditions of paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section are managed at the facility in tanks or 
containers meeting the conditions of paragraph (d)(2) of this section. 
The notification shall state the name and address of the facility, and 
be signed and dated by an authorized representative of the facility 
owner or operator.
    (e)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, the 
requirements of this subpart do not apply to the pharmaceutical 
manufacturing facility, commonly referred to as the Stonewall Plant, 
located at Route 340 South, Elkton, Virginia, provided that facility is 
operated in compliance with the requirements contained in a Clean Air 
Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454. The requirements of this 
subpart shall apply to the facility upon termination of the Clean Air 
Act permit issued pursuant to 40 CFR 52.2454.
    (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (e)(1) of this section, any hazardous 
waste surface impoundment operated at the Stonewall Plant is subject to 
the standards in Sec. 265.1086 and all requirements related to hazardous 
waste surface impoundments that are referenced in or by Sec. 265.1086, 
including the closed-vent system and control device requirements of 
Sec. 265.1088 and the recordkeeping requirements of Sec. 265.1090(c).
[59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 26829, May 19, 1995; 60 
FR 50429, Sept. 29, 1995; 60 FR 56953, Nov. 13, 1995; 61 FR 28510, June 
5, 1996; 61 FR 59971, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 52642, Oct. 8, 1997; 62 FR 
64662, Dec. 8, 1997; 63 FR 11139, Mar. 6, 1998; 63 FR 19838, Apr. 22, 
1998]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1081  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, all terms not defined herein shall have the 
meaning given to them in the Act and parts 260 through 266 of this 
chapter.
    Average volatile organic concentration or average VO concentration 
means the mass-weighted average volatile organic concentration of a 
hazardous waste as determined in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1084 of this subpart.
    Closure device means a cap, hatch, lid, plug, seal, valve, or other 
type of fitting that blocks an opening in a cover such that when the 
device is secured in the closed position it prevents or reduces air 
pollutant emissions to the atmosphere. Closure devices include devices 
that are detachable from the cover (e.g., a sampling port cap), manually 
operated (e.g., a hinged access lid or hatch), or automatically operated 
(e.g., a spring-loaded pressure relief valve).
    Continuous seal means a seal that forms a continuous closure that 
completely covers the space between the edge of the floating roof and 
the wall of a tank. A continuous seal may be a vapor-mounted seal, 
liquid-mounted seal, or metallic shoe seal. A continuous seal may be 
constructed of fastened segments so as to form a continuous seal.
    Cover means a device that provides a continuous barrier over the 
hazardous waste managed in a unit to prevent or reduce air pollutant 
emissions to the atmosphere. A cover may have openings (such as access 
hatches, sampling ports, gauge wells) that are necessary for operation, 
inspection, maintenance,

[[Page 502]]

and repair of the unit on which the cover is used. A cover may be a 
separate piece of equipment which can be detached and removed from the 
unit or a cover may be formed by structural features permanently 
integrated into the design of the unit.
    Enclosure means a structure that surrounds a tank or container, 
captures organic vapors emitted from the tank or container, and vents 
the captured vapors through a closed-vent system to a control device.
    External floating roof means a pontoon-type or double-deck type 
cover that rests on the surface of the material managed in a tank with 
no fixed roof.
    Fixed roof means a cover that is mounted on a unit in a stationary 
position and does not move with fluctuations in the level of the 
material managed in the unit.
    Floating membrane cover means a cover consisting of a synthetic 
flexible membrane material that rests upon and is supported by the 
hazardous waste being managed in a surface impoundment.
    Floating roof means a cover consisting of a double deck, pontoon 
single deck, or internal floating cover which rests upon and is 
supported by the material being contained, and is equipped with a 
continuous seal.
    Hard-piping means pipe or tubing that is manufactured and properly 
installed in accordance with relevant standards and good engineering 
practices.
    In light material service means the container is used to manage a 
material for which both of the following conditions apply: The vapor 
pressure of one or more of the organic constituents in the material is 
greater than 0.3 kilopascals (kPa) at 20  deg.C; and the total 
concentration of the pure organic constituents having a vapor pressure 
greater than 0.3 kPa at 20  deg.C is equal to or greater than 20 percent 
by weight.
    Internal floating roof means a cover that rests or floats on the 
material surface (but not necessarily in complete contact with it) 
inside a tank that has a fixed roof.
    Liquid-mounted seal means a foam or liquid-filled primary seal 
mounted in contact with the hazardous waste between the tank wall and 
the floating roof continuously around the circumference of the tank.
    Malfunction means any sudden, infrequent, and not reasonably 
preventable failure of air pollution control equipment, process 
equipment, or a process to operate in a normal or usual manner. Failures 
that are caused in part by poor maintenance or careless operation are 
not malfunctions.
    Maximum organic vapor pressure means the sum of the individual 
organic constituent partial pressures exerted by the material contained 
in a tank, at the maximum vapor pressure-causing conditions (i.e., 
temperature, agitation, pH effects of combining wastes, etc.) reasonably 
expected to occur in the tank. For the purpose of this subpart, maximum 
organic vapor pressure is determined using the procedures specified in 
Sec. 265.1084(c) of this subpart.
    Metallic shoe seal means a continuous seal that is constructed of 
metal sheets which are held vertically against the wall of the tank by 
springs, weighted levers, or other mechanisms and is connected to the 
floating roof by braces or other means. A flexible coated fabric 
(envelope) spans the annular space between the metal sheet and the 
floating roof.
    No detectable organic emissions means no escape of organics to the 
atmosphere as determined using the procedure specified in 
Sec. 265.1084(d) of this subpart.
    Point of waste origination means as follows:
    (1) When the facility owner or operator is the generator of the 
hazardous waste, the point of waste origination means the point where a 
solid waste produced by a system, process, or waste management unit is 
determined to be a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR part 261.

    Note: In this case, this term is being used in a manner similar to 
the use of the term ``point of generation'' in air standards established 
for waste management operations under authority of the Clean Air Act in 
40 CFR parts 60, 61, and 63.]

    (2) When the facility owner and operator are not the generator of 
the hazardous waste, point of waste origination means the point where 
the owner

[[Page 503]]

or operator accepts delivery or takes possession of the hazardous waste.
    Point of waste treatment means the point where a hazardous waste to 
be treated in accordance with Sec. 265.1083(c)(2) of this subpart exits 
the treatment process. Any waste determination shall be made before the 
waste is conveyed, handled, or otherwise managed in a manner that allows 
the waste to volatilize to the atmosphere.
    Safety device means a closure device such as a pressure relief 
valve, frangible disc, fusible plug, or any other type of device which 
functions exclusively to prevent physical damage or permanent 
deformation to a unit or its air emission control equipment by venting 
gases or vapors directly to the atmosphere during unsafe conditions 
resulting from an unplanned, accidental, or emergency event. For the 
purpose of this subpart, a safety device is not used for routine venting 
of gases or vapors from the vapor headspace underneath a cover such as 
during filling of the unit or to adjust the pressure in this vapor 
headspace in response to normal daily diurnal ambient temperature 
fluctuations. A safety device is designed to remain in a closed position 
during normal operations and open only when the internal pressure, or 
another relevant parameter, exceeds the device threshold setting 
applicable to the air emission control equipment as determined by the 
owner or operator based on manufacturer recommendations, applicable 
regulations, fire protection and prevention codes, standard engineering 
codes and practices, or other requirements for the safe handling of 
flammable, ignitable, explosive, reactive, or hazardous materials.
    Single-seal system means a floating roof having one continuous seal. 
This seal may be vapor-mounted, liquid-mounted, or a metallic shoe seal.
    Vapor-mounted seal means a continuous seal that is mounted such that 
there is a vapor space between the hazardous waste in the unit and the 
bottom of the seal.
    Volatile organic concentration or VO concentration means the 
fraction by weight of the volatile organic compounds contained in a 
hazardous waste expressed in terms of parts per million (ppmw) as 
determined by direct measurement or by knowledge of the waste in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1084 of this subpart. For 
the purpose of determining the VO concentration of a hazardous waste, 
organic compounds with a Henry's law constant value of at least 0.1 
mole-fraction-in-the-gas-phase/mole-fraction-in the liquid-phase (0.1 Y/
X) (which can also be expressed as 1.8 x 10<SUP>-</SUP>\6\ atmospheres/
gram-mole/m\3\) at 25 degrees Celsius must be included. Appendix VI of 
this subpart presents a list of compounds known to have a Henry's law 
constant value less than the cutoff level.
    Waste determination means performing all applicable procedures in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1084 of this subpart to 
determine whether a hazardous waste meets standards specified in this 
subpart. Examples of a waste determination include performing the 
procedures in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1084 of this 
subpart to determine the average VO concentration of a hazardous waste 
at the point of waste origination; the average VO concentration of a 
hazardous waste at the point of waste treatment and comparing the 
results to the exit concentration limit specified for the process used 
to treat the hazardous waste; the organic reduction efficiency and the 
organic biodegradation efficiency for a biological process used to treat 
a hazardous waste and comparing the results to the applicable standards; 
or the maximum volatile organic vapor pressure for a hazardous waste in 
a tank and comparing the results to the applicable standards.
    Waste stabilization process means any physical or chemical process 
used to either reduce the mobility of hazardous constituents in a 
hazardous waste or eliminate free liquids as determined by Test Method 
9095 (Paint Filter Liquids Test) in ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid 
Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication No. SW-846, Third 
Edition, September 1986, as amended by Update I, November 15, 1992 
(incorporated by reference--refer to Sec. 260.11 of this chapter). A 
waste stabilization process includes mixing the hazardous waste with 
binders or other materials, and curing the resulting hazardous waste and 
binder mixture.

[[Page 504]]

Other synonymous terms used to refer to this process are ``waste 
fixation'' or ``waste solidification.'' This does not include the adding 
of absorbent materials to the surface of a waste, without mixing, 
agitation, or subsequent curing, to absorb free liquid.
[59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 4914, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 
FR 59971, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 64662, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1082  Schedule for implementation of air emission standards.

    (a) Owners or operators of facilities existing on December 6, 1996 
and subject to subparts I, J, and K of this part shall meet the 
following requirements:
    (1) Install and begin operation of all control equipment or waste 
management units required to comply with this subpart and complete 
modifications of production or treatment processes to satisfy exemption 
criteria in accordance with Sec. 265.1083(c) of this subpart by December 
6, 1996, except as provided for in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (2) When control equipment or waste management units required to 
comply with this subpart cannot be installed and in operation or 
modifications of production or treatment processes to satisfy exemption 
criteria in accordance with Sec. 265.1083(c) of this subpart cannot be 
completed by December 6, 1996, the owner or operator shall:
    (i) Install and begin operation of the control equipment and waste 
management units, and complete modifications of production or treatment 
processes as soon as possible but no later than December 8, 1997.
    (ii) Prepare an implementation schedule that includes the following 
information: specific calendar dates for award of contracts or issuance 
of purchase orders for control equipment, waste management units, and 
production or treatment process modifications; initiation of on-site 
installation of control equipment or waste management units, and 
modifications of production or treatment processes; completion of 
control equipment or waste management unit installation, and production 
or treatment process modifications; and performance of testing to 
demonstrate that the installed equipment or waste management units, and 
modified production or treatment processes meet the applicable standards 
of this subpart.
    (iii) For facilities subject to the recordkeeping requirements of 
Sec. 265.73 of this part, the owner or operator shall enter the 
implementation schedule specified in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this 
section in the operating record no later than December 6, 1996.
    (iv) For facilities not subject to Sec. 265.73 of this part, the 
owner or operator shall enter the implementation schedule specified in 
paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section in a permanent, readily available 
file located at the facility no later than December 6, 1996.
    (b) Owners or operators of facilities and units in existence on the 
effective date of a statutory or EPA regulatory amendment that renders 
the facility subject to subparts I, J, or K of this part shall meet the 
following requirements:
    (1) Install and begin operation of control equipment or waste 
management units required to comply with this subpart, and complete 
modifications of production or treatment processes to satisfy exemption 
criteria of Sec. 265.1083(c) of this subpart by the effective date of 
the amendment, except as provided for in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (2) When control equipment or waste management units required to 
comply with this subpart cannot be installed and begin operation, or 
when modifications of production or treatment processes to satisfy 
exemption criteria of Sec. 265.1083(c) of this subpart cannot be 
completed by the effective date of the amendment, the owner or operator 
shall:
    (i) Install and begin operation of the control equipment or waste 
management unit, and complete modification of production or treatment 
processes as soon as possible but no later than 30 months after the 
effective date of the amendment.
    (ii) For facilities subject to the recordkeeping requirements of 
Sec. 265.73 of this part, enter and maintain the implementation schedule 
specified in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section in the operating 
record no later than the effective date of the amendment, or

[[Page 505]]

    (iii) For facilities not subject to Sec. 265.73 of this part, the 
owner or operator shall enter and maintain the implementation schedule 
specified in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section in a permanent, 
readily available file located at the facility site no later than the 
effective date of the amendment.
    (c) Owners and operators of facilities and units that become newly 
subject to the requirements of this subpart after December 8, 1997 due 
to an action other than those described in paragraph (b) of this section 
must comply with all applicable requirements immediately (i.e., must 
have control devices installed and operating on the date the facility or 
unit becomes subject to this subpart; the 30-month implementation 
schedule does not apply).
    (d) The Regional Administrator may elect to extend the 
implementation date for control equipment at a facility, on a case by 
case basis, to a date later than December 8, 1997, when special 
circumstances that are beyond the facility owner's or operator's control 
delay installation or operation of control equipment, and the owner or 
operator has made all reasonable and prudent attempts to comply with the 
requirements of this subpart.
[62 FR 64662, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1083  Standards: General.

    (a) This section applies to the management of hazardous waste in 
tanks, surface impoundments, and containers subject to this subpart.
    (b) The owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions from 
each hazardous waste management unit in accordance with standards 
specified in Secs. 265.1085 through 265.1088 of this subpart, as 
applicable to the hazardous waste management unit, except as provided 
for in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) A tank, surface impoundment, or container is exempt from 
standards specified in Sec. 265.1085 through Sec. 265.1088 of this 
subpart, as applicable, provided that the waste management unit is one 
of the following:
    (1) A tank, surface impoundment, or container for which all 
hazardous waste entering the unit has an average VO concentration at the 
point of waste origination of less than 500 parts per million by weight 
(ppmw). The average VO concentration shall be determined using the 
procedures specified in Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart. The owner or 
operator shall review and update, as necessary, this determination at 
least once every 12 months following the date of the initial 
determination for the hazardous waste streams entering the unit.
    (2) A tank, surface impoundment, or container for which the organic 
content of all the hazardous waste entering the waste management unit 
has been reduced by an organic destruction or removal process that 
achieves any one of the following conditions:
    (i) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in the 
hazardous waste to a level such that the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste at the point of waste treatment is less than the exit 
concentration limit (C<INF>t</INF>) established for the process. The 
average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point of waste 
treatment and the exit concentration limit for the process shall be 
determined using the procedures specified in Sec. 265.1084(b) of this 
subpart.
    (ii) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in 
the hazardous waste to a level such that the organic reduction 
efficiency (R) for the process is equal to or greater than 95 percent, 
and the average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point of 
waste treatment is less than 100 ppmw. The organic reduction efficiency 
for the process and the average VO concentration of the hazardous waste 
at the point of waste treatment shall be determined using the procedures 
specified in Sec. 265.1084(b) of this subpart.
    (iii) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in 
the hazardous waste to a level such that the actual organic mass removal 
rate (MR) for the process is equal to or greater than the required 
organic mass removal rate (RMR) established for the process. The 
required organic mass removal rate and the actual organic mass removal 
rate for the process shall be determined using the procedures specified 
in Sec. 265.1084(b) of this subpart.

[[Page 506]]

    (iv) A biological process that destroys or degrades the organics 
contained in the hazardous waste, such that either of the following 
conditions is met:
    (A) The organic reduction efficiency (R) for the process is equal to 
or greater than 95 percent, and the organic biodegradation efficiency 
(R<INF>bio</INF>) for the process is equal to or greater than 95 
percent. The organic reduction efficiency and the organic biodegradation 
efficiency for the process shall be determined using the procedures 
specified in Sec. 265.1084(b) of this subpart.
    (B) The total actual organic mass biodegradation rate 
(MR<INF>bio</INF>) for all hazardous waste treated by the process is 
equal to or greater than the required organic mass removal rate (RMR). 
The required organic mass removal rate and the actual organic mass 
biodegradation rate for the process shall be determined using the 
procedures specified in Sec. 265.1084(b) of this subpart.
    (v) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in the 
hazardous waste and meets all of the following conditions:
    (A) From the point of waste origination through the point where the 
hazardous waste enters the treatment process, the hazardous waste is 
managed continuously in waste management units which use air emission 
controls in accordance with the standards specified in Sec. 265.1085 
through Sec. 265.1088 of this subpart, as applicable to the waste 
management unit.
    (B) From the point of waste origination through the point where the 
hazardous waste enters the treatment process, any transfer of the 
hazardous waste is accomplished through continuous hard-piping or other 
closed system transfer that does not allow exposure of the waste to the 
atmosphere. The EPA considers a drain system that meets the requirements 
of 40 CFR part 63, subpart RR--National Emission Standards for 
Individual Drain Systems to be a closed system.
    (C) The average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point 
of waste treatment is less than the lowest average VO concentration at 
the point of waste origination determined for each of the individual 
waste streams entering the process or 500 ppmw, whichever value is 
lower. The average VO concentration of each individual waste stream at 
the point of waste origination shall be determined using the procedures 
specified in Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart. The average VO 
concentration of the hazardous waste at the point of waste treatment 
shall be determined using the procedures specified in Sec. 265.1084(b) 
of this subpart.
    (vi) A process that removes or destroys the organics contained in 
the hazardous waste to a level such that the organic reduction 
efficiency (R) for the process is equal to or greater than 95 percent 
and the owner or operator certifies that the average VO concentration at 
the point of waste origination for each of the individual waste streams 
entering the process is less than 10,000 ppmw. The organic reduction 
efficiency for the process and the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste at the point of waste origination shall be determined 
using the procedures specified in Sec. 265.1084(b) and Sec. 265.1084(a) 
of this subpart, respectively.
    (vii) A hazardous waste incinerator for which the owner or operator 
has either:
    (A) Been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of 40 CFR part 264, subpart O; or
    (B) Has designed and operates the incinerator in accordance with the 
interim status requirements of subpart O of this part.
    (viii) A boiler or industrial furnace for which the owner or 
operator has either:
    (A) Been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 270 which 
implements the requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H, or
    (B) Has designed and operates the boiler or industrial furnace in 
accordance with the interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 266, 
subpart H.
    (ix) For the purpose of determining the performance of an organic 
destruction or removal process in accordance with the conditions in each 
of paragraphs (c)(2)(i) through (c)(2)(vi) of this

[[Page 507]]

section, the owner or operator shall account for VO concentrations 
determined to be below the limit of detection of the analytical method 
by using the following VO concentration:
    (A) If Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A is used for the 
analysis, one-half the blank value determined in the method at section 
4.4 of Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, or a value of 25 ppmw, 
whichever is less.
    (B) If any other analytical method is used, one-half the sum of the 
limits of detection established for each organic constituent in the 
waste that has a Henry's law constant value at least 0.1 mole-fraction-
in-the-gas-phase/mole-fraction-in-the-liquid-phase (0.1 Y/X) [which can 
also be expressed as 1.8 x 10<SUP>-6</SUP> atmospheres/gram-mole/
m<SUP>3</SUP>] at 25 degrees Celsius.
    (3) A tank or surface impoundment used for biological treatment of 
hazardous waste in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (4) A tank, surface impoundment, or container for which all 
hazardous waste placed in the unit either:
    (i) Meets the numerical concentration limits for organic hazardous 
constituents, applicable to the hazardous waste, as specified in 40 CFR 
part 268--Land Disposal Restrictions under Table ``Treatment Standards 
for Hazardous Waste'' in 40 CFR 268.40; or
    (ii) The organic hazardous constituents in the waste have been 
treated by the treatment technology established by the EPA for the waste 
in 40 CFR 268.42(a), or have been removed or destroyed by an equivalent 
method of treatment approved by EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 268.42(b).
    (5) A tank used for bulk feed of hazardous waste to a waste 
incinerator and all of the following conditions are met:
    (i) The tank is located inside an enclosure vented to a control 
device that is designed and operated in accordance with all applicable 
requirements specified under 40 CFR part 61, subpart FF--National 
Emission Standards for Benzene Waste Operations for a facility at which 
the total annual benzene quantity from the facility waste is equal to or 
greater than 10 megagrams per year;
    (ii) The enclosure and control device serving the tank were 
installed and began operation prior to November 25, 1996; and
    (iii) The enclosure is designed and operated in accordance with the 
criteria for a permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure T--
Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' under 40 CFR 52.741, Appendix B. The enclosure may have 
permanent or temporary openings to allow worker access; passage of 
material into or out of the enclosure by conveyor, vehicles, or other 
mechanical or electrical equipment; or to direct air flow into the 
enclosure. The owner or operator shall perform the verification 
procedure for the enclosure as specified in Section 5.0 to ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' annually.
    (d) The Regional Administrator may at any time perform or request 
that the owner or operator perform a waste determination for a hazardous 
waste managed in a tank, surface impoundment, or container exempted from 
using air emission controls under the provisions of this section as 
follows:
    (1) The waste determination for average VO concentration of a 
hazardous waste at the point of waste origination shall be performed 
using direct measurement in accordance with the applicable requirements 
of Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart. The waste determination for a 
hazardous waste at the point of waste treatment shall be performed in 
accordance with the applicable requirements of Sec. 265.1084(b) of this 
subpart.
    (2) In performing a waste determination pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section, the sample preparation and analysis shall be conducted 
as follows:
    (i) In accordance with the method used by the owner or operator to 
perform the waste analysis, except in the case specified in paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) If the Regional Administrator determines that the method used 
by the owner or operator was not appropriate for the hazardous waste 
managed in the tank, surface impoundment, or

[[Page 508]]

container, then the Regional Administrator may choose an appropriate 
method.
    (3) In a case when the owner or operator is requested to perform the 
waste determination, the Regional Administrator may elect to have an 
authorized representative observe the collection of the hazardous waste 
samples used for the analysis.
    (4) In a case when the results of the waste determination performed 
or requested by the Regional Administrator do not agree with the results 
of a waste determination performed by the owner or operator using 
knowledge of the waste, then the results of the waste determination 
performed in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section shall be used to establish compliance with the requirements 
of this subpart.
    (5) In a case when the owner or operator has used an averaging 
period greater than 1 hour for determining the average VO concentration 
of a hazardous waste at the point of waste origination, the Regional 
Administrator may elect to establish compliance with this subpart by 
performing or requesting that the owner or operator perform a waste 
determination using direct measurement based on waste samples collected 
within a 1-hour period as follows:
    (i) The average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point 
of waste origination shall be determined by direct measurement in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart.
    (ii) Results of the waste determination performed or requested by 
the Regional Administrator showing that the average VO concentration of 
the hazardous waste at the point of waste origination is equal to or 
greater than 500 ppmw shall constitute noncompliance with this subpart 
except in a case as provided for in paragraph (d)(5)(iii) of this 
section.
    (iii) For the case when the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste at the point of waste origination previously has been 
determined by the owner or operator using an averaging period greater 
than 1 hour to be less than 500 ppmw but because of normal operating 
process variations the VO concentration of the hazardous waste 
determined by direct measurement for any given 1-hour period may be 
equal to or greater than 500 ppmw, information that was used by the 
owner or operator to determine the average VO concentration of the 
hazardous waste (e.g., test results, measurements, calculations, and 
other documentation) and recorded in the facility records in accordance 
with the requirements of Sec. 265.1084(a) and Sec. 265.1090 of this 
subpart shall be considered by the Regional Administrator together with 
the results of the waste determination performed or requested by the 
Regional Administrator in establishing compliance with this subpart.
[61 FR 59972, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64663, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1084  Waste determination procedures.

    (a) Waste determination procedure to determine average volatile 
organic (VO) concentration of a hazardous waste at the point of waste 
origination.
    (1) An owner or operator shall determine the average VO 
concentration at the point of waste origination for each hazardous waste 
placed in a waste management unit exempted under the provisions of 
Sec. 265.1083(c)(1) of this subpart from using air emission controls in 
accordance with standards specified in Sec. 265.1085 through 
Sec. 265.1088 of this subpart, as applicable to the waste management 
unit.
    (2) For a waste determination that is required by paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section, the average VO concentration of a hazardous waste at 
the point of waste origination shall be determined using either direct 
measurement as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section or by 
knowledge as specified in paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (3) Direct measurement to determine average VO concentration of a 
hazardous waste at the point of waste origination.
    (i) Identification. The owner or operator shall identify and record 
the point of waste origination for the hazardous waste.
    (ii) Sampling. Samples of the hazardous waste stream shall be 
collected at the point of waste origination in a manner such that 
volatilization of organics contained in the waste and in

[[Page 509]]

the subsequent sample is minimized and an adequately representative 
sample is collected and maintained for analysis by the selected method.
    (A) The averaging period to be used for determining the average VO 
concentration for the hazardous waste stream on a mass-weighted average 
basis shall be designated and recorded. The averaging period can 
represent any time interval that the owner or operator determines is 
appropriate for the hazardous waste stream but shall not exceed 1 year.
    (B) A sufficient number of samples, but no less than four samples, 
shall be collected and analyzed for a hazardous waste determination. The 
average of the four or more sample results constitutes a waste 
determination for the waste stream. One or more waste determinations may 
be required to represent the complete range of waste compositions and 
quantities that occur during the entire averaging period due to normal 
variations in the operating conditions for the source or process 
generating the hazardous waste stream. Examples of such normal 
variations are seasonal variations in waste quantity or fluctuations in 
ambient temperature.
    (C) All samples shall be collected and handled in accordance with 
written procedures prepared by the owner or operator and documented in a 
site sampling plan. This plan shall describe the procedure by which 
representative samples of the hazardous waste stream are collected such 
that a minimum loss of organics occurs throughout the sample collection 
and handling process, and by which sample integrity is maintained. A 
copy of the written sampling plan shall be maintained on-site in the 
facility operating records. An example of an acceptable sampling plan 
includes a plan incorporating sample collection and handling procedures 
in accordance with the requirements specified in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-
846, (incorporated by reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this 
chapter), or in Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A.
    (iii) Analysis. Each collected sample shall be prepared and analyzed 
in accordance with one or more of the methods listed in paragraphs 
(a)(3)(iii)(A) through (a)(3)(iii)(I) of this section, including 
appropriate quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) checks and use 
of target compounds for calibration. If Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, 
appendix A is not used, then one or more methods should be chosen that 
are appropriate to ensure that the waste determination accounts for and 
reflects all organic compounds in the waste with Henry's law constant 
values at least 0.1 mole-fraction-in-the-gas-phase/mole-fraction-in-the-
liquid-phase (0.1 Y/X) [which can also be expressed as 1.8 x 
10<SUP>-6</SUP> atmospheres/gram-mole/m\3\] at 25 degrees Celsius. Each 
of the analytical methods listed in paragraphs (a)(3)(iii)(B) through 
(a)(3)(iii)(G) of this section has an associated list of approved 
chemical compounds, for which EPA considers the method appropriate for 
measurement. If an owner or operator uses Method 624, 625, 1624, or 1625 
in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A to analyze one or more compounds that are 
not on that method's published list, the Alternative Test Procedure 
contained in 40 CFR 136.4 and 136.5 must be followed. If an owner or 
operator uses EPA Method 8260 or 8270 in ``Test Methods for Evaluating 
Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846, 
(incorporated by reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this chapter) to 
analyze one or more compounds that are not on that method's published 
list, the procedures in paragraph (a)(3)(iii)(H) of this section must be 
followed. At the owner or operator's discretion, the concentration of 
each individual chemical constituent measured in the waste by a method 
other than Method 25D may be corrected to the concentration had it been 
measured using Method 25D by multiplying the measured concentration by 
the constituent-specific adjustment factor (f<INF>m25D</INF>) as 
specified in paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this section. Constituent-specific 
adjustment factors (f<INF>m25D</INF>) can be obtained by contacting the 
Waste and Chemical Processes Group, Office of Air Quality Planning and 
Standards, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711.
    (A) Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A.
    (B) Method 624 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A.

[[Page 510]]

    (C) Method 625 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A. Perform corrections 
to the compounds for which the analysis is being conducted based on the 
``accuracy as recovery'' using the factors in Table 7 of the method.
    (D) Method 1624 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A.
    (E) Method 1625 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A.
    (F) Method 8260 in ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, 
Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846 (incorporated by 
reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this chapter). Maintain a formal 
quality assurance program consistent with the requirements of Method 
8260. The quality assurance program shall include the following 
elements:
    (1) Documentation of site-specific procedures to minimize the loss 
of compounds due to volatilization, biodegradation, reaction, or 
sorption during the sample collection, storage, preparation, 
introduction, and analysis steps.
    (2) Measurement of the overall accuracy and precision of the 
specific procedures.
    (G) Method 8270 in ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, 
Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846 (incorporated by 
reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this chapter). Maintain a formal 
quality assurance program consistent with the requirements of Method 
8270. The quality assurance program shall include the following 
elements:
    (1) Documentation of site-specific procedures to minimize the loss 
of compounds due to volatilization, biodegradation, reaction, or 
sorption during the sample collection, storage, preparation, 
introduction, and analysis steps.
    (2) Measurement of the overall accuracy and precision of the 
specific procedures.
    (H) Any other EPA standard method that has been validated in 
accordance with ``Alternative Validation Procedure for EPA Waste and 
Wastewater Methods'', 40 CFR part 63, appendix D. As an alternative, 
other EPA standard methods may be validated by the procedure specified 
in paragraph (a)(3)(iii)(I) of this section.
    (I) Any other analysis method that has been validated in accordance 
with the procedures specified in Section 5.1 or Section 5.3, and the 
corresponding calculations in Section 6.1 or Section 6.3, of Method 301 
in 40 CFR part 63, appendix A. The data are acceptable if they meet the 
criteria specified in Section 6.1.5 or Section 6.3.3 of Method 301. If 
correction is required under section 6.3.3 of Method 301, the data are 
acceptable if the correction factor is within the range 0.7 to 1.30. 
Other sections of Method 301 are not required.
    (iv) Calculations.
    (A) The average VO concentration (C) on a mass-weighted basis shall 
be calculated by using the results for all waste determinations 
conducted in accordance with paragraphs (a)(3) (ii) and (iii) of this 
section and the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08DE97.000

where:

C = Average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point of 
waste origination on a mass-weighted basis, ppmw.
i = Individual waste determination ``i'' of the hazardous waste.
n = Total number of waste determinations of the hazardous waste 
conducted for the averaging period (not to exceed 1 year).
Q<INF>i</INF> = Mass quantity of hazardous waste stream represented by 
C<INF>i</INF>, kg/hr.
Q<INF>T</INF> = Total mass quantity of hazardous waste during the 
averaging period, kg/hr.
C<INF>i</INF> = Measured VO concentration of waste determination ``i'' 
as determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(a)(3)(iii) of this section (i.e. the average of the four or more 
samples specified in paragraph (a)(3)(ii)(B) of this section), ppmw.
    (B) For the purpose of determining C<INF>i</INF>, for individual 
waste samples analyzed in accordance with paragraph (a)(3)(iii) of this 
section, the owner or operator shall account for VO concentrations 
determined to be below the limit of detection of the analytical method 
by using the following VO concentration:

[[Page 511]]

    (1) If Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, Appendix A is used for the 
analysis, one-half the blank value determined in the method at section 
4.4 of Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A.
    (2) If any other analytical method is used, one-half the sum of the 
limits of detection established for each organic constituent in the 
waste that has a Henry's law constant values at least 0.1 mole-fraction-
in-the-gas-phase/mole-fraction-in-the-liquid-phase (0.1 Y/X) [which can 
also be expressed as 1.8 x 10<SUP>-6</SUP> atmospheres/gram-mole/
m<SUP>3</SUP>] at 25 degrees Celsius.
    (v) Provided that the test method is appropriate for the waste as 
required under paragraph (a)(3)(iii) of this section, the EPA will 
determine compliance based on the test method used by the owner or 
operator as recorded pursuant to Sec. 265.1090(f)(1) of this subpart.
    (4) Use of owner or operator knowledge to determine average VO 
concentration of a hazardous waste at the point of waste origination.
    (i) Documentation shall be prepared that presents the information 
used as the basis for the owner's or operator's knowledge of the 
hazardous waste stream's average VO concentration. Examples of 
information that may be used as the basis for knowledge include: 
Material balances for the source or process generating the hazardous 
waste stream; constituent-specific chemical test data for the hazardous 
waste stream from previous testing that are still applicable to the 
current waste stream; previous test data for other locations managing 
the same type of waste stream; or other knowledge based on information 
included in manifests, shipping papers, or waste certification notices.
    (ii) If test data are used as the basis for knowledge, then the 
owner or operator shall document the test method, sampling protocol, and 
the means by which sampling variability and analytical variability are 
accounted for in the determination of the average VO concentration. For 
example, an owner or operator may use organic concentration test data 
for the hazardous waste stream that are validated in accordance with 
Method 301 in 40 CFR part 63, appendix A as the basis for knowledge of 
the waste.
    (iii) An owner or operator using chemical constituent-specific 
concentration test data as the basis for knowledge of the hazardous 
waste may adjust the test data to the corresponding average VO 
concentration value which would have been obtained had the waste samples 
been analyzed using Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A. To adjust 
these data, the measured concentration for each individual chemical 
constituent contained in the waste is multiplied by the appropriate 
constituent-specific adjustment factor (f<INF>m25D</INF>).
    (iv) In the event that the Regional Administrator and the owner or 
operator disagree on a determination of the average VO concentration for 
a hazardous waste stream using knowledge, then the results from a 
determination of average VO concentration using direct measurement as 
specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section shall be used to establish 
compliance with the applicable requirements of this subpart. The 
Regional Administrator may perform or request that the owner or operator 
perform this determination using direct measurement. The owner or 
operator may choose one or more appropriate methods to analyze each 
collected sample in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(a)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (b) Waste determination procedures for treated hazardous waste.
    (1) An owner or operator shall perform the applicable waste 
determination for each treated hazardous waste placed in a waste 
management unit exempted under the provisions of Sec. 265.1083 (c)(2)(i) 
through (c)(2)(vi) of this subpart from using air emission controls in 
accordance with standards specified in Secs. 265.1085 through 265.1088 
of this subpart, as applicable to the waste management unit.
    (2) The owner or operator shall designate and record the specific 
provision in Sec. 265.1083(c)(2) of this subpart under which the waste 
determination is being performed. The waste determination for the 
treated hazardous waste shall be performed using the applicable 
procedures specified in paragraphs (b)(3) through (b)(9) of this 
section.

[[Page 512]]

    (3) Procedure to determine the average VO concentration of a 
hazardous waste at the point of waste treatment.
    (i) Identification. The owner or operator shall identify and record 
the point of waste treatment for the hazardous waste.
    (ii) Sampling. Samples of the hazardous waste stream shall be 
collected at the point of waste treatment in a manner such that 
volatilization of organics contained in the waste and in the subsequent 
sample is minimized and an adequately representative sample is collected 
and maintained for analysis by the selected method.
    (A) The averaging period to be used for determining the average VO 
concentration for the hazardous waste stream on a mass-weighted average 
basis shall be designated and recorded. The averaging period can 
represent any time interval that the owner or operator determines is 
appropriate for the hazardous waste stream but shall not exceed 1 year.
    (B) A sufficient number of samples, but no less than four samples, 
shall be collected and analyzed for a hazardous waste determination. The 
average of the four or more sample results constitutes a waste 
determination for the waste stream. One or more waste determinations may 
be required to represent the complete range of waste compositions and 
quantities that occur during the entire averaging period due to normal 
variations in the operating conditions for the source or process 
generating the hazardous waste stream. Examples of such normal 
variations are seasonal variations in waste quantity or fluctuations in 
ambient temperature.
    (C) All samples shall be collected and handled in accordance with 
written procedures prepared by the owner or operator and documented in a 
site sampling plan. This plan shall describe the procedure by which 
representative samples of the hazardous waste stream are collected such 
that a minimum loss of organics occurs throughout the sample collection 
and handling process, and by which sample integrity is maintained. A 
copy of the written sampling plan shall be maintained on-site in the 
facility operating records. An example of an acceptable sampling plan 
includes a plan incorporating sample collection and handling procedures 
in accordance with the requirements specified in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication No. 
SW-846 (incorporated by reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this 
chapter), or in Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A.
    (iii) Analysis. Each collected sample shall be prepared and analyzed 
in accordance with one or more of the methods listed in paragraphs 
(b)(3)(iii)(A) through (b)(3)(iii)(I) of this section, including 
appropriate quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) checks and use 
of target compounds for calibration. When the owner or operator is 
making a waste determination for a treated hazardous waste that is to be 
compared to an average VO concentration at the point of waste 
origination or the point of waste entry to the treatment system, to 
determine if the conditions of Sec. 264.1082(c)(2)(i) through (c)(2)(vi) 
of this part, or Sec. 265.1083(c)(2)(i) through (c)(2)(vi) of this 
subpart are met, then the waste samples shall be prepared and analyzed 
using the same method or methods as were used in making the initial 
waste determinations at the point of waste origination or at the point 
of entry to the treatment system. If Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, 
appendix A is not used, then one or more methods should be chosen that 
are appropriate to ensure that the waste determination accounts for and 
reflects all organic compounds in the waste with Henry's law constant 
values at least 0.1 mole-fraction-in-the-gas-phase/mole-fraction-in-the-
liquid-phase (0.1 Y/X) [which can also be expressed as 1.8 x 10-
<SUP>6</SUP> atmospheres/gram-mole/m<SUP>3</SUP>] at 25 degrees Celsius. 
Each of the analytical methods listed in paragraphs (b)(3)(iii)(B) 
through (b)(3)(iii)(G) of this section has an associated list of 
approved chemical compounds, for which EPA considers the method 
appropriate for measurement. If an owner or operator uses Method 624, 
625, 1624, or 1625 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A to analyze one or more 
compounds that are not on that method's published list, the Alternative 
Test Procedure contained in 40 CFR 136.4 and 136.5 must be followed. If 
an owner or operator uses Method 8260 or 8270 in ``Test Methods for 
Evaluating

[[Page 513]]

Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846, 
(incorporated by reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this chapter) to 
analyze one or more compounds that are not on that method's published 
list, the procedures in paragraph (b)(3)(iii)(H) of this section must be 
followed. At the owner or operator's discretion, the concentration of 
each individual chemical constituent measured in the waste by a method 
other than Method 25D may be corrected to the concentration had it been 
measured using Method 25D by multiplying the measured concentration by 
the constituent-specific adjustment factor (f<INF>m25D</INF>) as 
specified in paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this section. Constituent-specific 
adjustment factors (f<INF>m25D</INF>) can be obtained by contacting the 
Waste and Chemical Processes Group, Office of Air Quality Planning and 
Standards, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711.
    (A) Method 25D in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A.
    (B) Method 624 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A.
    (C) Method 625 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A. Perform corrections 
to the compounds for which the analysis is being conducted based on the 
``accuracy as recovery'' using the factors in Table 7 of the method.
    (D) Method 1624 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A.
    (E) Method 1625 in 40 CFR part 136, appendix A.
    (F) Method 8260 in ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, 
Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846 (incorporated by 
reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this chapter). Maintain a formal 
quality assurance program consistent with the requirements of Method 
8260. The quality assurance program shall include the following 
elements:
    (1) Documentation of site-specific procedures to minimize the loss 
of compounds due to volatilization, biodegradation, reaction, or 
sorption during the sample collection, storage, preparation, 
introduction, and analysis steps.
    (2) Measurement of the overall accuracy and precision of the 
specific procedures.
    (G) Method 8270 in ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, 
Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication SW-846 (incorporated by 
reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this chapter). Maintain a formal 
quality assurance program consistent with the requirements of Method 
8270. The quality assurance program shall include the following 
elements:
    (1) Documentation of site-specific procedures to minimize the loss 
of compounds due to volatilization, biodegradation, reaction, or 
sorption during the sample collection, storage, preparation, 
introduction, and analysis steps.
    (2) Measurement of the overall accuracy and precision of the 
specific procedures.
    (H) Any other EPA standard method that has been validated in 
accordance with ``Alternative Validation Procedure for EPA Waste and 
Wastewater Methods'', 40 CFR part 63, appendix D. As an alternative, 
other EPA standard methods may be validated by the procedure specified 
in paragraph (b)(3)(iii)(I) of this section.
    (I) Any other analysis method that has been validated in accordance 
with the procedures specified in Section 5.1 or Section 5.3, and the 
corresponding calculations in Section 6.1 or Section 6.3, of Method 301 
in 40 CFR part 63, appendix A. The data are acceptable if they meet the 
criteria specified in Section 6.1.5 or Section 6.3.3 of Method 301. If 
correction is required under section 6.3.3 of Method 301, the data are 
acceptable if the correction factor is within the range 0.7 to 1.30. 
Other sections of Method 301 are not required.
    (iv) Calculations. The average VO concentration (C) on a mass-
weighted basis shall be calculated by using the results for all waste 
determinations conducted in accordance with paragraphs (b)(3)(ii) and 
(iii) of this section and the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08DE97.001

where:
C=Average VO concentration of the hazardous waste at the point of waste 
treatment on a mass-weighted basis, ppmw.
i=Individual waste determination ``i'' of the hazardous waste.

[[Page 514]]

n=Total number of waste determinations of the hazardous waste conducted 
for the averaging period (not to exceed 1 year).
Q<INF>i</INF>=Mass quantity of hazardous waste stream represented by 
C<INF>i</INF>, kg/hr.
Q<INF>T</INF>=Total mass quantity of hazardous waste during the 
averaging period, kg/hr.
C<INF>i</INF>=Measured VO concentration of waste determination ``i'' as 
determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(3)(iii) 
of this section (i.e. the average of the four or more samples specified 
in paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(B) of this section), ppmw.
    (v) Provided that the test method is appropriate for the waste as 
required under paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section, compliance shall 
be determined based on the test method used by the owner or operator as 
recorded pursuant to Sec. 265.1090(f)(1) of this subpart.
    (4) Procedure to determine the exit concentration limit 
(C<INF>t</INF>) for a treated hazardous waste.
    (i) The point of waste origination for each hazardous waste treated 
by the process at the same time shall be identified.
    (ii) If a single hazardous waste stream is identified in paragraph 
(b)(4)(i) of this section, then the exit concentration limit 
(C<INF>t</INF>) shall be 500 ppmw.
    (iii) If more than one hazardous waste stream is identified in 
paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section, then the average VO concentration 
of each hazardous waste stream at the point of waste origination shall 
be determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (a) of 
this section. The exit concentration limit (C<INF>t</INF>) shall be 
calculated by using the results determined for each individual hazardous 
waste stream and the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25NO96.002

Where:

C<INF>t</INF> = Exit concentration limit for treated hazardous waste, 
          ppmw.
x = Individual hazardous waste stream ``x'' that has an average VO 
          concentration less than 500 ppmw at the point of waste 
          origination as determined in accordance with the requirements 
          of Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart.
y = Individual hazardous waste stream ``y'' that has an average VO 
          concentration equal to or greater than 500 ppmw at the point 
          of waste origination as determined in accordance with the 
          requirements of Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart.
m = Total number of ``x'' hazardous waste streams treated by process.
n = Total number of ``y'' hazardous waste streams treated by process.
Q<INF>x</INF> = Annual mass quantity of hazardous waste stream ``x,'' 
          kg/yr.
Q<INF>y</INF> = Annual mass quantity of hazardous waste stream ``y,'' 
          kg/yr.
C<INF>x</INF> = Average VO concentration of hazardous waste stream ``x'' 
          at the point of waste origination as determined in accordance 
          with the requirements of Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart, 
          ppmw.

    (5) Procedure to determine the organic reduction efficiency (R) for 
a treated hazardous waste.
    (i) The organic reduction efficiency (R) for a treatment process 
shall be determined based on results for a minimum of three consecutive 
runs.
    (ii) All hazardous waste streams entering the treatment process and 
all hazardous waste streams exiting the treatment process shall be 
identified. The owner or operator shall prepare a sampling plan for 
measuring these streams that accurately reflects the retention time of 
the hazardous waste in the process.
    (iii) For each run, information shall be determined for each 
hazardous waste stream identified in paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this 
section using the following procedures:
    (A) The mass quantity of each hazardous waste stream entering the 
process (Q<INF>b</INF>) and the mass quantity of each hazardous waste 
stream exiting the process (Q<INF>a</INF>) shall be determined.
    (B) The average VO concentration at the point of waste origination 
of each hazardous waste stream entering the process (C<INF>b</INF>) 
during the run shall be determined in accordance with the requirements 
of paragraph (a)(3) of this section. The average VO concentration at the 
point of waste treatment of each waste stream exiting the process 
(C<INF>a</INF>)

[[Page 515]]

during the run shall be determined in accordance with the requirements 
of paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (iv) The waste volatile organic mass flow entering the process 
(E<INF>b</INF>) and the waste volatile organic mass flow exiting the 
process (E<INF>a</INF>) shall be calculated by using the results 
determined in accordance with paragraph (b)(5)(iii) of this section and 
the following equations:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25NO96.003

Where:

E<INF>a</INF> = Waste volatile organic mass flow exiting process, kg/hr.
E<INF>b</INF> = Waste volatile organic mass flow entering process, kg/
          hr.
m = Total number of runs (at least 3)
j = Individual run ``j''
Q<INF>b</INF> = Mass quantity of hazardous waste entering process during 
          run ``j,'' kg/hr.
Q<INF>a</INF> = Average mass quantity of hazardous waste exiting process 
          during run ``j,'' kg/hr.
C<INF>a</INF> = Average VO concentration of hazardous waste exiting 
          process during run ``j'' as determined in accordance with the 
          requirements of Sec. 265.1084(b)(3) of this subpart, ppmw.
C<INF>b</INF> = Average VO concentration of hazardous waste entering 
          process during run ``j'' as determined in accordance with the 
          requirements of Sec. 265.1084(a)(3) of this subpart, ppmw.

    (v) The organic reduction efficiency of the process shall be 
calculated by using the results determined in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(5)(iv) of this section and the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25NO96.004

Where:

R = Organic reduction efficiency, percent.
E<INF>b</INF> = Waste volatile organic mass flow entering process as 
          determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
          (b)(5)(iv) of this section, kg/hr.
E<INF>a</INF> = Waste volatile organic mass flow exiting process as 
          determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
          (b)(5)(iv) of this section, kg/hr.

    (6) Procedure to determine the organic biodegradation efficiency 
(R<INF>bio</INF>) for a treated hazardous waste.
    (i) The fraction of organics biodegraded (F<INF>bio</INF>) shall be 
determined using the procedure specified in 40 CFR part 63, appendix C 
of this chapter.
    (ii) The R<INF>bio</INF> shall be calculated by using the following 
equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25NO96.005

Where:

R<INF>bio</INF> = Organic biodegradation efficiency, percent.
F<INF>bio</INF> = Fraction of organic biodegraded as determined in 
          accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(6)(i) of 
          this section.

    (7) Procedure to determine the required organic mass removal rate 
(RMR) for a treated hazardous waste.
    (i) All of the hazardous waste streams entering the treatment 
process shall be identified.
    (ii) The average VO concentration of each hazardous waste stream at 
the point of waste origination shall be determined in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section.
    (iii) For each individual hazardous waste stream that has an average 
VO concentration equal to or greater than 500 ppmw at the point of waste 
origination, the average volumetric flow rate and the density of the 
hazardous waste stream at the point of waste origination shall be 
determined.
    (iv) The RMR shall be calculated by using the average VO 
concentration, average volumetric flow rate, and density determined for 
each individual hazardous waste stream, and the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25NO96.006


[[Page 516]]


Where:

RMR = Required organic mass removal rate, kg/hr.
y = Individual hazardous waste stream ``y'' that has an average VO 
          concentration equal to or greater than 500 ppmw at the point 
          of waste origination as determined in accordance with the 
          requirements of Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart.
n = Total number of ``y'' hazardous waste streams treated by process.
V<INF>y</INF> = Average volumetric flow rate of hazardous waste stream 
          ``y'' at the point of waste origination, m\3\/hr.
k<INF>y</INF> = Density of hazardous waste stream ``y,'' kg/m\3\
C<INF>y</INF> = Average VO concentration of hazardous waste stream ``y'' 
          at the point of waste origination as determined in accordance 
          with the requirements of Sec. 265.1084(a) of this subpart, 
          ppmw.

    (8) Procedure to determine the actual organic mass removal rate (MR) 
for a treated hazardous waste.
    (i) The MR shall be determined based on results for a minimum of 
three consecutive runs. The sampling time for each run shall be 1 hour.
    (ii) The waste volatile organic mass flow entering the process 
(E<INF>b</INF>) and the waste volatile organic mass flow exiting the 
process (E<INF>a</INF>) shall be determined in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(5)(iv) of this section.
    (iii) The MR shall be calculated by using the mass flow rate 
determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(8)(ii) 
of this section and the following equation:

MR=E<INF>b</INF>-E<INF>a</INF>

Where:
MR=Actual organic mass removal rate, kg/hr.
E<INF>b</INF>=Waste volatile organic mass flow entering process as 
determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(5)(iv) 
of this section, kg/hr.
E<INF>a</INF>=Waste volatile organic mass flow exiting process as 
determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(5)(iv) 
of this section, kg/hr.

    (9) Procedure to determine the actual organic mass biodegradation 
rate (MR<INF>bio</INF>) for a treated hazardous waste.
    (i) The MR<INF>bio</INF> shall be determined based on results for a 
minimum of three consecutive runs. The sampling time for each run shall 
be 1 hour.
    (ii) The waste organic mass flow entering the process 
(E<INF>b</INF>) shall be determined in accordance with the requirements 
of paragraph (b)(5)(iv) of this section.
    (iii) The fraction of organic biodegraded (F<INF>bio</INF>) shall be 
determined using the procedure specified in 40 CFR part 63, appendix C 
of this chapter.
    (iv) The MR<INF>bio</INF> shall be calculated by using the mass flow 
rates and fraction of organic biodegraded determined in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraphs (b)(9)(ii) and (b)(9)(iii) of this 
section, respectively, and the following equation:

MR<INF>bio</INF>=E<INF>b</INF> x F<INF>bio</INF>

Where:

MR<INF>bio</INF>=Actual organic mass biodegradation rate, kg/hr.
E<INF>b</INF>=Waste organic mass flow entering process as determined in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(5)(iv) of this 
section, kg/hr.
F<INF>bio</INF>=Fraction of organic biodegraded as determined in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraph (b)(9)(iii) of this 
section.

    (c) Procedure to determine the maximum organic vapor pressure of a 
hazardous waste in a tank.
    (1) An owner or operator shall determine the maximum organic vapor 
pressure for each hazardous waste placed in a tank using Tank Level 1 
controls in accordance with the standards specified in Sec. 265.1085(c) 
of this subpart.
    (2) An owner or operator shall use either direct measurement as 
specified in paragraph (c)(3) of this section or knowledge of the waste 
as specified by paragraph (c)(4) of this section to determine the 
maximum organic vapor pressure which is representative of the hazardous 
waste composition stored or treated in the tank.
    (3) Direct measurement to determine the maximum organic vapor 
pressure of a hazardous waste.
    (i) Sampling. A sufficient number of samples shall be collected to 
be representative of the waste contained in the tank. All samples shall 
be collected and handled in accordance with written procedures prepared 
by the owner or

[[Page 517]]

operator and documented in a site sampling plan. This plan shall 
describe the procedure by which representative samples of the hazardous 
waste are collected such that a minimum loss of organics occurs 
throughout the sample collection and handling process and by which 
sample integrity is maintained. A copy of the written sampling plan 
shall be maintained on-site in the facility operating records. An 
example of an acceptable sampling plan includes a plan incorporating 
sample collection and handling procedures in accordance with the 
requirements specified in ``Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, 
Physical/Chemical Methods,'' EPA Publication No. SW-846, (incorporated 
by reference--refer to Sec. 260.11(a) of this chapter), or in Method 25D 
in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A.
    (ii) Analysis. Any appropriate one of the following methods may be 
used to analyze the samples and compute the maximum organic vapor 
pressure of the hazardous waste:
    (A) Method 25E in 40 CFR part 60 appendix A;
    (B) Methods described in American Petroleum Institute Publication 
2517, Third Edition, February 1989, ``Evaporative Loss from External 
Floating-Roof Tanks,'' (incorporated by reference--refer to Sec. 260.11 
of this chapter);
    (C) Methods obtained from standard reference texts;
    (D) ASTM Method 2879-92 (incorporated by reference--refer to 
Sec. 260.11 of this chapter); and
    (E) Any other method approved by the Regional Administrator.
    (4) Use of knowledge to determine the maximum organic vapor pressure 
of the hazardous waste. Documentation shall be prepared and recorded 
that presents the information used as the basis for the owner's or 
operator's knowledge that the maximum organic vapor pressure of the 
hazardous waste is less than the maximum vapor pressure limit listed in 
Sec. 265.1085(b)(1)(i) of this subpart for the applicable tank design 
capacity category. An example of information that may be used is 
documentation that the hazardous waste is generated by a process for 
which at other locations it previously has been determined by direct 
measurement that the waste maximum organic vapor pressure is less than 
the maximum vapor pressure limit for the appropriate tank design 
capacity category.
    (d) Procedure for determining no detectable organic emissions for 
the purpose of complying with this subpart:
    (1) The test shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures 
specified in Method 21 of 40 CFR part 60, appendix A. Each potential 
leak interface (i.e., a location where organic vapor leakage could 
occur) on the cover and associated closure devices shall be checked. 
Potential leak interfaces that are associated with covers and closure 
devices include, but are not limited to: The interface of the cover and 
its foundation mounting; the periphery of any opening on the cover and 
its associated closure device; and the sealing seat interface on a 
spring-loaded pressure relief valve.
    (2) The test shall be performed when the unit contains a hazardous 
waste having an organic concentration representative of the range of 
concentrations for the hazardous waste expected to be managed in the 
unit. During the test, the cover and closure devices shall be secured in 
the closed position.
    (3) The detection instrument shall meet the performance criteria of 
Method 21 of 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, except the instrument response 
factor criteria in section 3.1.2(a) of Method 21 shall be for the 
average composition of the organic constituents in the hazardous waste 
placed in the waste management unit, not for each individual organic 
constituent.
    (4) The detection instrument shall be calibrated before use on each 
day of its use by the procedures specified in Method 21 of 40 CFR part 
60, appendix A.
    (5) Calibration gases shall be as follows:
    (i) Zero air (less than 10 ppmv hydrocarbon in air), and
    (ii) A mixture of methane or n-hexane and air at a concentration of 
approximately, but less than, 10,000 ppmv methane or n-hexane.
    (6) The background level shall be determined according to the 
procedures in Method 21 of 40 CFR part 60, appendix A.

[[Page 518]]

    (7) Each potential leak interface shall be checked by traversing the 
instrument probe around the potential leak interface as close to the 
interface as possible, as described in Method 21 of 40 CFR part 60, 
appendix A. In the case when the configuration of the cover or closure 
device prevents a complete traverse of the interface, all accessible 
portions of the interface shall be sampled. In the case when the 
configuration of the closure device prevents any sampling at the 
interface and the device is equipped with an enclosed extension or horn 
(e.g., some pressure relief devices), the instrument probe inlet shall 
be placed at approximately the center of the exhaust area to the 
atmosphere.
    (8) The arithmetic difference between the maximum organic 
concentration indicated by the instrument and the background level shall 
be compared with the value of 500 ppmv except when monitoring a seal 
around a rotating shaft that passes through a cover opening, in which 
case the comparison shall be as specified in paragraph (d)(9) of this 
section. If the difference is less than 500 ppmv, then the potential 
leak interface is determined to operate with no detectable organic 
emissions.
    (9) For the seals around a rotating shaft that passes through a 
cover opening, the arithmetic difference between the maximum organic 
concentration indicated by the instrument and the background level shall 
be compared with the value of 10,000 ppmw. If the difference is less 
than 10,000 ppmw, then the potential leak interface is determined to 
operate with no detectable organic emissions.
[61 FR 59974, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64664, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1085  Standards: Tanks.

    (a) The provisions of this section apply to the control of air 
pollutant emissions from tanks for which Sec. 265.1083(b) of this 
subpart references the use of this section for such air emission 
control.
    (b) The owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions from 
each tank subject to this section in accordance with the following 
requirements, as applicable:
    (1) For a tank that manages hazardous waste that meets all of the 
conditions specified in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) through (b)(1)(iii) of this 
section, the owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions 
from the tank in accordance with the Tank Level 1 controls specified in 
paragraph (c) of this section or the Tank Level 2 controls specified in 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (i) The hazardous waste in the tank has a maximum organic vapor 
pressure which is less than the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for 
the tank's design capacity category as follows:
    (A) For a tank design capacity equal to or greater than 151 m\3\, 
the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for the tank is 5.2 kPa.
    (B) For a tank design capacity equal to or greater than 75 m\3\ but 
less than 151 m\3\, the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for the 
tank is 27.6 kPa.
    (C) For a tank design capacity less than 75 m\3\, the maximum 
organic vapor pressure limit for the tank is 76.6 kPa.
    (ii) The hazardous waste in the tank is not heated by the owner or 
operator to a temperature that is greater than the temperature at which 
the maximum organic vapor pressure of the hazardous waste is determined 
for the purpose of complying with paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.
    (iii) The hazardous waste in the tank is not treated by the owner or 
operator using a waste stabilization process, as defined in 
Sec. 265.1081 of this subpart.
    (2) For a tank that manages hazardous waste that does not meet all 
of the conditions specified in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) through (b)(1)(iii) 
of this section, the owner or operator shall control air pollutant 
emissions from the tank by using Tank Level 2 controls in accordance 
with the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section. Examples of 
tanks required to use Tank Level 2 controls include: A tank used for a 
waste stabilization process; and a tank for which the hazardous waste in 
the tank has a maximum organic vapor pressure that is equal to or 
greater

[[Page 519]]

than the maximum organic vapor pressure limit for the tank's design 
capacity category as specified in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.
    (c) Owners and operators controlling air pollutant emissions from a 
tank using Tank Level 1 controls shall meet the requirements specified 
in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(4) of this section:
    (1) The owner or operator shall determine the maximum organic vapor 
pressure for a hazardous waste to be managed in the tank using Tank 
Level 1 controls before the first time the hazardous waste is placed in 
the tank. The maximum organic vapor pressure shall be determined using 
the procedures specified in Sec. 265.1084(c) of this subpart. 
Thereafter, the owner or operator shall perform a new determination 
whenever changes to the hazardous waste managed in the tank could 
potentially cause the maximum organic vapor pressure to increase to a 
level that is equal to or greater than the maximum organic vapor 
pressure limit for the tank design capacity category specified in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, as applicable to the tank.
    (2) The tank shall be equipped with a fixed roof designed to meet 
the following specifications:
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be designed to form 
a continuous barrier over the entire surface area of the hazardous waste 
in the tank. The fixed roof may be a separate cover installed on the 
tank (e.g., a removable cover mounted on an open-top tank) or may be an 
integral part of the tank structural design (e.g., a horizontal 
cylindrical tank equipped with a hatch).
    (ii) The fixed roof shall be installed in a manner such that there 
are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces between roof 
section joints or between the interface of the roof edge and the tank 
wall.
    (iii) Each opening in the fixed roof, and any manifold system 
associated with the fixed roof, shall be either:
    (A) Equipped with a closure device designed to operate such that 
when the closure device is secured in the closed position there are no 
visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces in the closure device 
or between the perimeter of the opening and the closure device; or
    (B) Connected by a closed-vent system that is vented to a control 
device. The control device shall remove or destroy organics in the vent 
stream, and shall be operating whenever hazardous waste is managed in 
the tank, except as provided for in paragraphs (c)(2)(iii)(B)(1) and (2) 
of this section.
    (1) During periods it is necessary to provide access to the tank for 
performing the activities of paragraph (c)(2)(iii)(B)(2) of this 
section, venting of the vapor headspace underneath the fixed roof to the 
control device is not required, opening of closure devices is allowed, 
and removal of the fixed roof is allowed. Following completion of the 
activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure device 
in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as applicable, and resume 
operation of the control device.
    (2) During periods of routine inspection, maintenance, or other 
activities needed for normal operations, and for the removal of 
accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom of the tank.
    (iv) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be made of 
suitable materials that will minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to 
the atmosphere, to the extent practical, and will maintain the integrity 
of the fixed roof and closure devices throughout their intended service 
life. Factors to be considered when selecting the materials for and 
designing the fixed roof and closure devices shall include: Organic 
vapor permeability, the effects of any contact with the hazardous waste 
or its vapors managed in the tank; the effects of outdoor exposure to 
wind, moisture, and sunlight; and the operating practices used for the 
tank on which the fixed roof is installed.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the tank, the fixed roof shall 
be installed with each closure device secured in the closed position 
except as follows:
    (i) Opening of closure devices or removal of the fixed roof is 
allowed at the following times:
    (A) To provide access to the tank for performing routine inspection, 
maintenance, or other activities needed for

[[Page 520]]

normal operations. Examples of such activities include those times when 
a worker needs to open a port to sample the liquid in the tank, or when 
a worker needs to open a hatch to maintain or repair equipment. 
Following completion of the activity, the owner or operator shall 
promptly secure the closure device in the closed position or reinstall 
the cover, as applicable, to the tank.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of tank.
    (ii) Opening of a spring-loaded pressure-vacuum relief valve, 
conservation vent, or similar type of pressure relief device which vents 
to the atmosphere is allowed during normal operations for the purpose of 
maintaining the tank internal pressure in accordance with the tank 
design specifications. The device shall be designed to operate with no 
detectable organic emissions when the device is secured in the closed 
position. The settings at which the device opens shall be established 
such that the device remains in the closed position whenever the tank 
internal pressure is within the internal pressure operating range 
determined by the owner or operator based on the tank manufacturer 
recommendations, applicable regulations, fire protection and prevention 
codes, standard engineering codes and practices, or other requirements 
for the safe handling of flammable, ignitable, explosive, reactive, or 
hazardous materials. Examples of normal operating conditions that may 
require these devices to open are during those times when the tank 
internal pressure exceeds the internal pressure operating range for the 
tank as a result of loading operations or diurnal ambient temperature 
fluctuations.
    (iii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of 
this subpart, is allowed at any time conditions require doing so to 
avoid an unsafe condition.
    (4) The owner or operator shall inspect the air emission control 
equipment in accordance with the following requirements.
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the roof sections or between the 
roof and the tank wall; broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or 
gaskets on closure devices; and broken or missing hatches, access 
covers, caps, or other closure devices.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the fixed roof and its closure devices on or before the date that the 
tank becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or operator 
shall perform the inspections at least once every year except under the 
special conditions provided for in paragraph (l) of this section.
    (iii) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(b) of 
this subpart.
    (d) Owners and operators controlling air pollutant emissions from a 
tank using Tank Level 2 controls shall use one of the following tanks:
    (1) A fixed-roof tank equipped with an internal floating roof in 
accordance with the requirements specified in paragraph (e) of this 
section;
    (2) A tank equipped with an external floating roof in accordance 
with the requirements specified in paragraph (f) of this section;
    (3) A tank vented through a closed-vent system to a control device 
in accordance with the requirements specified in paragraph (g) of this 
section;
    (4) A pressure tank designed and operated in accordance with the 
requirements specified in paragraph (h) of this section; or
    (5) A tank located inside an enclosure that is vented through a 
closed-vent system to an enclosed combustion control device in 
accordance with the requirements specified in paragraph (i) of this 
section.
    (e) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a tank using a fixed-roof with an internal floating roof shall meet the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (e)(1) through (e)(3) of this 
section.
    (1) The tank shall be equipped with a fixed roof and an internal 
floating roof

[[Page 521]]

in accordance with the following requirements:
    (i) The internal floating roof shall be designed to float on the 
liquid surface except when the floating roof must be supported by the 
leg supports.
    (ii) The internal floating roof shall be equipped with a continuous 
seal between the wall of the tank and the floating roof edge that meets 
either of the following requirements:
    (A) A single continuous seal that is either a liquid-mounted seal or 
a metallic shoe seal, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this subpart; or
    (B) Two continuous seals mounted one above the other. The lower seal 
may be a vapor-mounted seal.
    (iii) The internal floating roof shall meet the following 
specifications:
    (A) Each opening in a noncontact internal floating roof except for 
automatic bleeder vents (vacuum breaker vents) and the rim space vents 
is to provide a projection below the liquid surface.
    (B) Each opening in the internal floating roof shall be equipped 
with a gasketed cover or a gasketed lid except for leg sleeves, 
automatic bleeder vents, rim space vents, column wells, ladder wells, 
sample wells, and stub drains.
    (C) Each penetration of the internal floating roof for the purpose 
of sampling shall have a slit fabric cover that covers at least 90 
percent of the opening.
    (D) Each automatic bleeder vent and rim space vent shall be 
gasketed.
    (E) Each penetration of the internal floating roof that allows for 
passage of a ladder shall have a gasketed sliding cover.
    (F) Each penetration of the internal floating roof that allows for 
passage of a column supporting the fixed roof shall have a flexible 
fabric sleeve seal or a gasketed sliding cover.
    (2) The owner or operator shall operate the tank in accordance with 
the following requirements:
    (i) When the floating roof is resting on the leg supports, the 
process of filling, emptying, or refilling shall be continuous and shall 
be completed as soon as practical.
    (ii) Automatic bleeder vents are to be set closed at all times when 
the roof is floating, except when the roof is being floated off or is 
being landed on the leg supports.
    (iii) Prior to filling the tank, each cover, access hatch, gauge 
float well or lid on any opening in the internal floating roof shall be 
bolted or fastened closed (i.e., no visible gaps). Rim space vents are 
to be set to open only when the internal floating roof is not floating 
or when the pressure beneath the rim exceeds the manufacturer's 
recommended setting.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect the internal floating roof 
in accordance with the procedures specified as follows:
    (i) The floating roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to: The internal floating roof is not floating on the surface of the 
liquid inside the tank; liquid has accumulated on top of the internal 
floating roof; any portion of the roof seals have detached from the roof 
rim; holes, tears, or other openings are visible in the seal fabric; the 
gaskets no longer close off the hazardous waste surface from the 
atmosphere; or the slotted membrane has more than 10 percent open area.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall inspect the internal floating roof 
components as follows except as provided in paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of 
this section:
    (A) Visually inspect the internal floating roof components through 
openings on the fixed-roof (e.g., manholes and roof hatches) at least 
once every 12 months after initial fill, and
    (B) Visually inspect the internal floating roof, primary seal, 
secondary seal (if one is in service), gaskets, slotted membranes, and 
sleeve seals (if any) each time the tank is emptied and degassed and at 
least every 10 years.
    (iii) As an alternative to performing the inspections specified in 
paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section for an internal floating roof 
equipped with two continuous seals mounted one above the other, the 
owner or operator may visually inspect the internal floating roof, 
primary and secondary seals, gaskets, slotted membranes, and sleeve 
seals (if any) each time the tank is emptied and degassed and at least 
every 5 years.

[[Page 522]]

    (iv) Prior to each inspection required by paragraph (e)(3)(ii) or 
(e)(3)(iii) of this section, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator in advance of each inspection to provide the 
Regional Administrator with the opportunity to have an observer present 
during the inspection. The owner or operator shall notify the Regional 
Administrator of the date and location of the inspection as follows:
    (A) Prior to each visual inspection of an internal floating roof in 
a tank that has been emptied and degassed, written notification shall be 
prepared and sent by the owner or operator so that it is received by the 
Regional Administrator at least 30 calendar days before refilling the 
tank except when an inspection is not planned as provided for in 
paragraph (e)(3)(iv)(B) of this section.
    (B) When a visual inspection is not planned and the owner or 
operator could not have known about the inspection 30 calendar days 
before refilling the tank, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator as soon as possible, but no later than 7 calendar 
days before refilling of the tank. This notification may be made by 
telephone and immediately followed by a written explanation for why the 
inspection is unplanned. Alternatively, written notification, including 
the explanation for the unplanned inspection, may be sent so that it is 
received by the Regional Administrator at least 7 calendar days before 
refilling the tank.
    (v) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (vi) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(b) of 
this subpart.
    (4) Safety devices, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this subpart, may 
be installed and operated as necessary on any tank complying with the 
requirements of paragraph (e) of this section.
    (f) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a tank using an external floating roof shall meet the requirements 
specified in paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(3) of this section.
    (1) The owner or operator shall design the external floating roof in 
accordance with the following requirements:
    (i) The external floating roof shall be designed to float on the 
liquid surface except when the floating roof must be supported by the 
leg supports.
    (ii) The floating roof shall be equipped with two continuous seals, 
one above the other, between the wall of the tank and the roof edge. The 
lower seal is referred to as the primary seal, and the upper seal is 
referred to as the secondary seal.
    (A) The primary seal shall be a liquid-mounted seal or a metallic 
shoe seal, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this subpart. The total area 
of the gaps between the tank wall and the primary seal shall not exceed 
212 square centimeters (cm<SUP>2</SUP>) per meter of tank diameter, and 
the width of any portion of these gaps shall not exceed 3.8 centimeters 
(cm). If a metallic shoe seal is used for the primary seal, the metallic 
shoe seal shall be designed so that one end extends into the liquid in 
the tank and the other end extends a vertical distance of at least 61 
centimeters above the liquid surface.
    (B) The secondary seal shall be mounted above the primary seal and 
cover the annular space between the floating roof and the wall of the 
tank. The total area of the gaps between the tank wall and the secondary 
seal shall not exceed 21.2 square centimeters (cm<SUP>2</SUP>) per meter 
of tank diameter, and the width of any portion of these gaps shall not 
exceed 1.3 centimeters (cm).
    (iii) The external floating roof shall meet the following 
specifications:
    (A) Except for automatic bleeder vents (vacuum breaker vents) and 
rim space vents, each opening in a noncontact external floating roof 
shall provide a projection below the liquid surface.
    (B) Except for automatic bleeder vents, rim space vents, roof 
drains, and leg sleeves, each opening in the roof shall be equipped with 
a gasketed cover, seal, or lid.
    (C) Each access hatch and each gauge float well shall be equipped 
with a cover designed to be bolted or fastened

[[Page 523]]

when the cover is secured in the closed position.
    (D) Each automatic bleeder vent and each rim space vent shall be 
equipped with a gasket.
    (E) Each roof drain that empties into the liquid managed in the tank 
shall be equipped with a slotted membrane fabric cover that covers at 
least 90 percent of the area of the opening.
    (F) Each unslotted and slotted guide pole well shall be equipped 
with a gasketed sliding cover or a flexible fabric sleeve seal.
    (G) Each unslotted guide pole shall be equipped with a gasketed cap 
on the end of the pole.
    (H) Each slotted guide pole shall be equipped with a gasketed float 
or other device which closes off the liquid surface from the atmosphere.
    (I) Each gauge hatch and each sample well shall be equipped with a 
gasketed cover.
    (2) The owner or operator shall operate the tank in accordance with 
the following requirements:
    (i) When the floating roof is resting on the leg supports, the 
process of filling, emptying, or refilling shall be continuous and shall 
be completed as soon as practical.
    (ii) Except for automatic bleeder vents, rim space vents, roof 
drains, and leg sleeves, each opening in the roof shall be secured and 
maintained in a closed position at all times except when the closure 
device must be open for access.
    (iii) Covers on each access hatch and each gauge float well shall be 
bolted or fastened when secured in the closed position.
    (iv) Automatic bleeder vents shall be set closed at all times when 
the roof is floating, except when the roof is being floated off or is 
being landed on the leg supports.
    (v) Rim space vents shall be set to open only at those times that 
the roof is being floated off the roof leg supports or when the pressure 
beneath the rim seal exceeds the manufacturer's recommended setting.
    (vi) The cap on the end of each unslotted guide pole shall be 
secured in the closed position at all times except when measuring the 
level or collecting samples of the liquid in the tank.
    (vii) The cover on each gauge hatch or sample well shall be secured 
in the closed position at all times except when the hatch or well must 
be opened for access.
    (viii) Both the primary seal and the secondary seal shall completely 
cover the annular space between the external floating roof and the wall 
of the tank in a continuous fashion except during inspections.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect the external floating roof 
in accordance with the procedures specified as follows:
    (i) The owner or operator shall measure the external floating roof 
seal gaps in accordance with the following requirements:
    (A) The owner or operator shall perform measurements of gaps between 
the tank wall and the primary seal within 60 calendar days after initial 
operation of the tank following installation of the floating roof and, 
thereafter, at least once every 5 years.
    (B) The owner or operator shall perform measurements of gaps between 
the tank wall and the secondary seal within 60 calendar days after 
initial operation of the tank following installation of the floating 
roof and, thereafter, at least once every year.
    (C) If a tank ceases to hold hazardous waste for a period of 1 year 
or more, subsequent introduction of hazardous waste into the tank shall 
be considered an initial operation for the purposes of paragraphs 
(f)(3)(i)(A) and (f)(3)(i)(B) of this section.
    (D) The owner or operator shall determine the total surface area of 
gaps in the primary seal and in the secondary seal individually using 
the following procedure:
    (1) The seal gap measurements shall be performed at one or more 
floating roof levels when the roof is floating off the roof supports.
    (2) Seal gaps, if any, shall be measured around the entire perimeter 
of the floating roof in each place where a 0.32-centimeter (cm) diameter 
uniform probe passes freely (without forcing or binding against the 
seal) between the seal and the wall of the tank and measure the 
circumferential distance of each such location.

[[Page 524]]

    (3) For a seal gap measured under paragraph (f)(3) of this section, 
the gap surface area shall be determined by using probes of various 
widths to measure accurately the actual distance from the tank wall to 
the seal and multiplying each such width by its respective 
circumferential distance.
    (4) The total gap area shall be calculated by adding the gap surface 
areas determined for each identified gap location for the primary seal 
and the secondary seal individually, and then dividing the sum for each 
seal type by the nominal diameter of the tank. These total gap areas for 
the primary seal and secondary seal are then compared to the respective 
standards for the seal type as specified in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this 
section.
    (E) In the event that the seal gap measurements do not conform to 
the specifications in paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this section, the owner or 
operator shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (k) of this section.
    (F) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(b) of 
this subpart.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall visually inspect the external 
floating roof in accordance with the following requirements:
    (A) The floating roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to: Holes, tears, or other openings in the rim seal or seal fabric of 
the floating roof; a rim seal detached from the floating roof; all or a 
portion of the floating roof deck being submerged below the surface of 
the liquid in the tank; broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or 
gaskets on closure devices; and broken or missing hatches, access 
covers, caps, or other closure devices.
    (B) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of the 
external floating roof and its closure devices on or before the date 
that the tank becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or 
operator shall perform the inspections at least once every year except 
for the special conditions provided for in paragraph (l) of this 
section.
    (C) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (D) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(b) of 
this subpart.
    (iii) Prior to each inspection required by paragraph (f)(3)(i) or 
(f)(3)(ii) of this section, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator in advance of each inspection to provide the 
Regional Administrator with the opportunity to have an observer present 
during the inspection. The owner or operator shall notify the Regional 
Administrator of the date and location of the inspection as follows:
    (A) Prior to each inspection to measure external floating roof seal 
gaps as required under paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section, written 
notification shall be prepared and sent by the owner or operator so that 
it is received by the Regional Administrator at least 30 calendar days 
before the date the measurements are scheduled to be performed.
    (B) Prior to each visual inspection of an external floating roof in 
a tank that has been emptied and degassed, written notification shall be 
prepared and sent by the owner or operator so that it is received by the 
Regional Administrator at least 30 calendar days before refilling the 
tank except when an inspection is not planned as provided for in 
paragraph (f)(3)(iii)(C) of this section.
    (C) When a visual inspection is not planned and the owner or 
operator could not have known about the inspection 30 calendar days 
before refilling the tank, the owner or operator shall notify the 
Regional Administrator as soon as possible, but no later than 7 calendar 
days before refilling of the tank. This notification may be made by 
telephone and immediately followed by a written explanation for why the 
inspection is unplanned. Alternatively, written notification, including 
the explanation for the unplanned inspection, may be sent so that it is 
received by the Regional Administrator

[[Page 525]]

at least 7 calendar days before refilling the tank.
    (4) Safety devices, as defined in 40 CFR 265.1081, may be installed 
and operated as necessary on any tank complying with the requirements of 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (g) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a tank by venting the tank to a control device shall meet the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (g)(1) through (g)(3) of this 
section.
    (1) The tank shall be covered by a fixed roof and vented directly 
through a closed-vent system to a control device in accordance with the 
following requirements:
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be designed to form 
a continuous barrier over the entire surface area of the liquid in the 
tank.
    (ii) Each opening in the fixed roof not vented to the control device 
shall be equipped with a closure device. If the pressure in the vapor 
headspace underneath the fixed roof is less than atmospheric pressure 
when the control device is operating, the closure devices shall be 
designed to operate such that when the closure device is secured in the 
closed position there are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open 
spaces in the closure device or between the perimeter of the cover 
opening and the closure device. If the pressure in the vapor headspace 
underneath the fixed roof is equal to or greater than atmospheric 
pressure when the control device is operating, the closure device shall 
be designed to operate with no detectable organic emissions.
    (iii) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be made of 
suitable materials that will minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to 
the atmosphere, to the extent practical, and will maintain the integrity 
of the fixed roof and closure devices throughout their intended service 
life. Factors to be considered when selecting the materials for and 
designing the fixed roof and closure devices shall include: Organic 
vapor permeability, the effects of any contact with the liquid and its 
vapor managed in the tank; the effects of outdoor exposure to wind, 
moisture, and sunlight; and the operating practices used for the tank on 
which the fixed roof is installed.
    (iv) The closed-vent system and control device shall be designed and 
operated in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1088 of this 
subpart.
    (2) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the tank, the fixed roof shall 
be installed with each closure device secured in the closed position and 
the vapor headspace underneath the fixed roof vented to the control 
device except as follows:
    (i) Venting to the control device is not required, and opening of 
closure devices or removal of the fixed roof is allowed at the following 
times:
    (A) To provide access to the tank for performing routine inspection, 
maintenance, or other activities needed for normal operations. Examples 
of such activities include those times when a worker needs to open a 
port to sample liquid in the tank, or when a worker needs to open a 
hatch to maintain or repair equipment. Following completion of the 
activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure device 
in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as applicable, to the 
tank.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of a tank.
    (ii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this 
subpart, is allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an 
unsafe condition.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor the air emission 
control equipment in accordance with the following procedures:
    (i) The fixed roof and its closure devices shall be visually 
inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that could 
result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not limited 
to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the roof sections or between the 
roof and the tank wall; broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or 
gaskets on closure devices; and broken or missing hatches, access 
covers, caps, or other closure devices.
    (ii) The closed-vent system and control device shall be inspected 
and monitored by the owner or operator in accordance with the procedures 
specified in Sec. 265.1088 of this subpart.

[[Page 526]]

    (iii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the air emission control equipment on or before the date that the tank 
becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the owner or operator shall 
perform the inspections at least once every year except for the special 
conditions provided for in paragraph (l) of this section.
    (iv) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (v) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(b) of 
this subpart.
    (h) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions by 
using a pressure tank shall meet the following requirements.
    (1) The tank shall be designed not to vent to the atmosphere as a 
result of compression of the vapor headspace in the tank during filling 
of the tank to its design capacity.
    (2) All tank openings shall be equipped with closure devices 
designed to operate with no detectable organic emissions as determined 
using the procedure specified in Sec. 265.1084(d) of this subpart.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the tank, the tank shall be 
operated as a closed system that does not vent to the atmosphere except 
in the event that a safety device, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this 
subpart, is required to open to avoid an unsafe condition.
    (i) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions by 
using an enclosure vented through a closed-vent system to an enclosed 
combustion control device shall meet the requirements specified in 
paragraphs (i)(1) through (i)(4) of this section.
    (1) The tank shall be located inside an enclosure. The enclosure 
shall be designed and operated in accordance with the criteria for a 
permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure T--Criteria for 
and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total Enclosure'' under 40 
CFR 52.741, appendix B. The enclosure may have permanent or temporary 
openings to allow worker access; passage of material into or out of the 
enclosure by conveyor, vehicles, or other mechanical means; entry of 
permanent mechanical or electrical equipment; or direct airflow into the 
enclosure. The owner or operator shall perform the verification 
procedure for the enclosure as specified in Section 5.0 to ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' initially when the enclosure is first installed and, 
thereafter, annually.
    (2) The enclosure shall be vented through a closed-vent system to an 
enclosed combustion control device that is designed and operated in 
accordance with the standards for either a vapor incinerator, boiler, or 
process heater specified in Sec. 265.1088 of this subpart.
    (3) Safety devices, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this subpart, may 
be installed and operated as necessary on any enclosure, closed-vent 
system, or control device used to comply with the requirements of 
paragraphs (i)(1) and (i)(2) of this section.
    (4) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor the closed-vent 
system and control device as specified in Sec. 265.1088 of this subpart.
    (j) The owner or operator shall transfer hazardous waste to a tank 
subject to this section in accordance with the following requirements:
    (1) Transfer of hazardous waste, except as provided in paragraph 
(j)(2) of this section, to the tank from another tank subject to this 
section or from a surface impoundment subject to Sec. 265.1086 of this 
subpart shall be conducted using continuous hard-piping or another 
closed system that does not allow exposure of the hazardous waste to the 
atmosphere. For the purpose of complying with this provision, an 
individual drain system is considered to be a closed system when it 
meets the requirements of 40 CFR part 63, subpart RR--National Emission 
Standards for Individual Drain Systems.
    (2) The requirements of paragraph (j)(1) of this section do not 
apply when transferring a hazardous waste to the tank under any of the 
following conditions:
    (i) The hazardous waste meets the average VO concentration 
conditions specified in Sec. 265.1083(c)(1) of this subpart at the point 
of waste origination.

[[Page 527]]

    (ii) The hazardous waste has been treated by an organic destruction 
or removal process to meet the requirements in Sec. 265.1083(c)(2) of 
this subpart.
    (iii) The hazardous waste meets the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1083(c)(4) of this subpart.
    (k) The owner or operator shall repair each defect detected during 
an inspection performed in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraphs (c)(4), (e)(3), (f)(3), or (g)(3) of this section as follows:
    (1) The owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 5 calendar days after detection, and repair shall 
be completed as soon as possible but no later than 45 calendar days 
after detection except as provided in paragraph (k)(2) of this section.
    (2) Repair of a defect may be delayed beyond 45 calendar days if the 
owner or operator determines that repair of the defect requires emptying 
or temporary removal from service of the tank and no alternative tank 
capacity is available at the site to accept the hazardous waste normally 
managed in the tank. In this case, the owner or operator shall repair 
the defect the next time the process or unit that is generating the 
hazardous waste managed in the tank stops operation. Repair of the 
defect shall be completed before the process or unit resumes operation.
    (l) Following the initial inspection and monitoring of the cover as 
required by the applicable provisions of this subpart, subsequent 
inspection and monitoring may be performed at intervals longer than 1 
year under the following special conditions:
    (1) In the case when inspecting or monitoring the cover would expose 
a worker to dangerous, hazardous, or other unsafe conditions, then the 
owner or operator may designate a cover as an ``unsafe to inspect and 
monitor cover'' and comply with all of the following requirements:
    (i) Prepare a written explanation for the cover stating the reasons 
why the cover is unsafe to visually inspect or to monitor, if required.
    (ii) Develop and implement a written plan and schedule to inspect 
and monitor the cover, using the procedures specified in the applicable 
section of this subpart, as frequently as practicable during those times 
when a worker can safely access the cover.
    (2) In the case when a tank is buried partially or entirely 
underground, an owner or operator is required to inspect and monitor, as 
required by the applicable provisions of this section, only those 
portions of the tank cover and those connections to the tank (e.g., fill 
ports, access hatches, gauge wells, etc.) that are located on or above 
the ground surface.
[61 FR 59979, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64666, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1086  Standards: Surface impoundments.

    (a) The provisions of this section apply to the control of air 
pollutant emissions from surface impoundments for which Sec. 265.1083(b) 
of this subpart references the use of this section for such air emission 
control.
    (b) The owner or operator shall control air pollutant emissions from 
the surface impoundment by installing and operating either of the 
following:
    (1) A floating membrane cover in accordance with the provisions 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section; or
    (2) A cover that is vented through a closed-vent system to a control 
device in accordance with the requirements specified in paragraph (d) of 
this section.
    (c) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a surface impoundment using a floating membrane cover shall meet the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this 
section.
    (1) The surface impoundment shall be equipped with a floating 
membrane cover designed to meet the following specifications:
    (i) The floating membrane cover shall be designed to float on the 
liquid surface during normal operations and form a continuous barrier 
over the entire surface area of the liquid.
    (ii) The cover shall be fabricated from a synthetic membrane 
material that is either:
    (A) High density polyethylene (HDPE) with a thickness no less than 
2.5 millimeters (mm); or
    (B) A material or a composite of different materials determined to 
have

[[Page 528]]

both organic permeability properties that are equivalent to those of the 
material listed in paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A) of this section and chemical 
and physical properties that maintain the material integrity for the 
intended service life of the material.
    (iii) The cover shall be installed in a manner such that there are 
no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces between cover 
section seams or between the interface of the cover edge and its 
foundation mountings.
    (iv) Except as provided for in paragraph (c)(1)(v) of this section, 
each opening in the floating membrane cover shall be equipped with a 
closure device designed to operate such that when the closure device is 
secured in the closed position there are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, 
or other open spaces in the closure device or between the perimeter of 
the cover opening and the closure device.
    (v) The floating membrane cover may be equipped with one or more 
emergency cover drains for removal of stormwater. Each emergency cover 
drain shall be equipped with a slotted membrane fabric cover that covers 
at least 90 percent of the area of the opening or a flexible fabric 
sleeve seal.
    (vi) The closure devices shall be made of suitable materials that 
will minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the atmosphere, to the 
extent practical, and will maintain the integrity of the closure devices 
throughout their intended service life. Factors to be considered when 
selecting the materials of construction and designing the cover and 
closure devices shall include: Organic vapor permeability; the effects 
of any contact with the liquid and its vapor managed in the surface 
impoundment; the effects of outdoor exposure to wind, moisture, and 
sunlight; and the operating practices used for the surface impoundment 
on which the floating membrane cover is installed.
    (2) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the surface impoundment, the 
floating membrane cover shall float on the liquid and each closure 
device shall be secured in the closed position except as follows:
    (i) Opening of closure devices or removal of the cover is allowed at 
the following times:
    (A) To provide access to the surface impoundment for performing 
routine inspection, maintenance, or other activities needed for normal 
operations. Examples of such activities include those times when a 
worker needs to open a port to sample the liquid in the surface 
impoundment, or when a worker needs to open a hatch to maintain or 
repair equipment. Following completion of the activity, the owner or 
operator shall promptly replace the cover and secure the closure device 
in the closed position, as applicable.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of surface impoundment.
    (ii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this 
subpart, is allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an 
unsafe condition.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect the floating membrane cover 
in accordance with the following procedures:
    (i) The floating membrane cover and its closure devices shall be 
visually inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that 
could result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not 
limited to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the cover section seams or 
between the interface of the cover edge and its foundation mountings; 
broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or gaskets on closure 
devices; and broken or missing hatches, access covers, caps, or other 
closure devices.
    (ii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the floating membrane cover and its closure devices on or before the 
date that the surface impoundment becomes subject to this section. 
Thereafter, the owner or operator shall perform the inspections at least 
once every year except for the special conditions provided for in 
paragraph (g) of this section.
    (iii) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(f) of this section.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(c) of 
this subpart.

[[Page 529]]

    (d) The owner or operator who controls air pollutant emissions from 
a surface impoundment using a cover vented to a control device shall 
meet the requirements specified in paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(3) of 
this section.
    (1) The surface impoundment shall be covered by a cover and vented 
directly through a closed-vent system to a control device in accordance 
with the following requirements:
    (i) The cover and its closure devices shall be designed to form a 
continuous barrier over the entire surface area of the liquid in the 
surface impoundment.
    (ii) Each opening in the cover not vented to the control device 
shall be equipped with a closure device. If the pressure in the vapor 
headspace underneath the cover is less than atmospheric pressure when 
the control device is operating, the closure devices shall be designed 
to operate such that when the closure device is secured in the closed 
position there are no visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces 
in the closure device or between the perimeter of the cover opening and 
the closure device. If the pressure in the vapor headspace underneath 
the cover is equal to or greater than atmospheric pressure when the 
control device is operating, the closure device shall be designed to 
operate with no detectable organic emissions using the procedure 
specified in Sec. 265.1084(d) of this subpart.
    (iii) The cover and its closure devices shall be made of suitable 
materials that will minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the 
atmosphere, to the extent practical, and will maintain the integrity of 
the cover and closure devices throughout their intended service life. 
Factors to be considered when selecting the materials of construction 
and designing the cover and closure devices shall include: Organic vapor 
permeability; the effects of any contact with the liquid or its vapors 
managed in the surface impoundment; the effects of outdoor exposure to 
wind, moisture, and sunlight; and the operating practices used for the 
surface impoundment on which the cover is installed.
    (iv) The closed-vent system and control device shall be designed and 
operated in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1088 of this 
subpart.
    (2) Whenever a hazardous waste is in the surface impoundment, the 
cover shall be installed with each closure device secured in the closed 
position and the vapor headspace underneath the cover vented to the 
control device except as follows:
    (i) Venting to the control device is not required, and opening of 
closure devices or removal of the cover is allowed at the following 
times:
    (A) To provide access to the surface impoundment for performing 
routine inspection, maintenance, or other activities needed for normal 
operations. Examples of such activities include those times when a 
worker needs to open a port to sample liquid in the surface impoundment, 
or when a worker needs to open a hatch to maintain or repair equipment. 
Following completion of the activity, the owner or operator shall 
promptly secure the closure device in the closed position or reinstall 
the cover, as applicable, to the surface impoundment.
    (B) To remove accumulated sludge or other residues from the bottom 
of the surface impoundment.
    (ii) Opening of a safety device, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this 
subpart, is allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an 
unsafe condition.
    (3) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor the air emission 
control equipment in accordance with the following procedures:
    (i) The surface impoundment cover and its closure devices shall be 
visually inspected by the owner or operator to check for defects that 
could result in air pollutant emissions. Defects include, but are not 
limited to, visible cracks, holes, or gaps in the cover section seams or 
between the interface of the cover edge and its foundation mountings; 
broken, cracked, or otherwise damaged seals or gaskets on closure 
devices; and broken or missing hatches, access covers, caps, or other 
closure devices.
    (ii) The closed-vent system and control device shall be inspected 
and monitored by the owner or operator in accordance with the procedures 
specified in Sec. 265.1088 of this subpart.

[[Page 530]]

    (iii) The owner or operator shall perform an initial inspection of 
the air emission control equipment on or before the date that the 
surface impoundment becomes subject to this section. Thereafter, the 
owner or operator shall perform the inspections at least once every year 
except for the special conditions provided for in paragraph (g) of this 
section.
    (iv) In the event that a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(f) of this section.
    (v) The owner or operator shall maintain a record of the inspection 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1090(c) of 
this subpart.
    (e) The owner or operator shall transfer hazardous waste to a 
surface impoundment subject to this section in accordance with the 
following requirements:
    (1) Transfer of hazardous waste, except as provided in paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section, to the surface impoundment from another surface 
impoundment subject to this section or from a tank subject to 
Sec. 265.1085 of this subpart shall be conducted using continuous hard-
piping or another closed system that does not allow exposure of the 
waste to the atmosphere. For the purpose of complying with this 
provision, an individual drain system is considered to be a closed 
system when it meets the requirements of 40 CFR part 63, subpart RR--
National Emission Standards for Individual Drain Systems.
    (2) The requirements of paragraph (e)(1) of this section do not 
apply when transferring a hazardous waste to the surface impoundment 
under either of the following conditions:
    (i) The hazardous waste meets the average VO concentration 
conditions specified in Sec. 265.1083(c)(1) of this subpart at the point 
of waste origination.
    (ii) The hazardous waste has been treated by an organic destruction 
or removal process to meet the requirements in Sec. 265.1083(c)(2) of 
this subpart.
    (iii) The hazardous waste meets the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1083(c)(4) of this subpart.
    (f) The owner or operator shall repair each defect detected during 
an inspection performed in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(3) or (d)(3) of this section as follows:
    (1) The owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 5 calendar days after detection, and repair shall 
be completed as soon as possible but no later than 45 calendar days 
after detection except as provided in paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
    (2) Repair of a defect may be delayed beyond 45 calendar days if the 
owner or operator determines that repair of the defect requires emptying 
or temporary removal from service of the surface impoundment and no 
alternative capacity is available at the site to accept the hazardous 
waste normally managed in the surface impoundment. In this case, the 
owner or operator shall repair the defect the next time the process or 
unit that is generating the hazardous waste managed in the tank stops 
operation. Repair of the defect shall be completed before the process or 
unit resumes operation.
    (g) Following the initial inspection and monitoring of the cover as 
required by the applicable provisions of this subpart, subsequent 
inspection and monitoring may be performed at intervals longer than 1 
year in the case when inspecting or monitoring the cover would expose a 
worker to dangerous, hazardous, or other unsafe conditions. In this 
case, the owner or operator may designate the cover as an ``unsafe to 
inspect and monitor cover'' and comply with all of the following 
requirements:
    (1) Prepare a written explanation for the cover stating the reasons 
why the cover is unsafe to visually inspect or to monitor, if required.
    (2) Develop and implement a written plan and schedule to inspect and 
monitor the cover using the procedures specified in the applicable 
section of this subpart as frequently as practicable during those times 
when a worker can safely access the cover.
[61 FR 59984, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64666, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1087  Standards: Containers.

    (a) The provisions of this section apply to the control of air 
pollutant emissions from containers for which

[[Page 531]]

Sec. 265.1083(b) of this subpart references the use of this section for 
such air emission control.
    (b) General requirements. The owner or operator shall control air 
pollutant emissions from each container subject to this section in 
accordance with the following requirements, as applicable to the 
container, except when the special provisions for waste stabilization 
processes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section apply to the 
container.
    (i) For a container having a design capacity greater than 0.1 
m<SUP>3</SUP> and less than or equal to 0.46 m<SUP>3</SUP>, the owner or 
operator shall control air pollutant emissions from the container in 
accordance with the Container Level 1 standards specified in paragraph 
(c) of this section.
    (ii) For a container having a design capacity greater than 0.46 
m<SUP>3</SUP> that is not in light material service, the owner or 
operator shall control air pollutant emissions from the container in 
accordance with the Container Level 1 standards specified in paragraph 
(c) of this section.
    (iii) For a container having a design capacity greater than 0.46 
m<SUP>3</SUP> that is in light material service, the owner or operator 
shall control air pollutant emissions from the container in accordance 
with the Container Level 2 standards specified in paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (2) When a container having a design capacity greater than 0.1 
m<SUP>3</SUP> is used for treatment of a hazardous waste by a waste 
stabilization process, the owner or operator shall control air pollutant 
emissions from the container in accordance with the Container Level 3 
standards specified in paragraph (e) of this section at those times 
during the waste stabilization process when the hazardous waste in the 
container is exposed to the atmosphere.
    (c) Container Level 1 standards. (1) A container using Container 
Level 1 controls is one of the following:
    (i) A container that meets the applicable U.S. Department of 
Transportation (DOT) regulations on packaging hazardous materials for 
transportation as specified in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (ii) A container equipped with a cover and closure devices that form 
a continuous barrier over the container openings such that when the 
cover and closure devices are secured in the closed position there are 
no visible holes, gaps, or other open spaces into the interior of the 
container. The cover may be a separate cover installed on the container 
(e.g., a lid on a drum or a suitably secured tarp on a roll-off box) or 
may be an integral part of the container structural design (e.g., a 
``portable tank'' or bulk cargo container equipped with a screw-type 
cap).
    (iii) An open-top container in which an organic-vapor suppressing 
barrier is placed on or over the hazardous waste in the container such 
that no hazardous waste is exposed to the atmosphere. One example of 
such a barrier is application of a suitable organic-vapor suppressing 
foam.
    (2) A container used to meet the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(1)(ii) or (c)(1)(iii) of this section shall be equipped with covers 
and closure devices, as applicable to the container, that are composed 
of suitable materials to minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the 
atmosphere and to maintain the equipment integrity for as long as it is 
in service. Factors to be considered in selecting the materials of 
construction and designing the cover and closure devices shall include: 
Organic vapor permeability, the effects of contact with the hazardous 
waste or its vapor managed in the container; the effects of outdoor 
exposure of the closure device or cover material to wind, moisture, and 
sunlight; and the operating practices for which the container is 
intended to be used.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in a container using Container 
Level 1 controls, the owner or operator shall install all covers and 
closure devices for the container, as applicable to the container, and 
secure and maintain each closure device in the closed position except as 
follows:
    (i) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of adding hazardous waste or other material to the container as follows:
    (A) In the case when the container is filled to the intended final 
level in one continuous operation, the owner or operator shall promptly 
secure the closure devices in the closed position and

[[Page 532]]

install the covers, as applicable to the container, upon conclusion of 
the filling operation.
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material 
intermittently are added to the container over a period of time, the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
either the container being filled to the intended final level; the 
completion of a batch loading after which no additional material will be 
added to the container within 15 minutes; the person performing the 
loading operation leaving the immediate vicinity of the container; or 
the shutdown of the process generating the material being added to the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (ii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of removing hazardous waste from the container as follows:
    (A) For the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section, an 
empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b) may be open to the 
atmosphere at any time (i.e., covers and closure devices are not 
required to be secured in the closed position on an empty container).
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material are 
removed from the container but the container does not meet the 
conditions to be an empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b), the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
the completion of a batch removal after which no additional material 
will be removed from the container within 15 minutes or the person 
performing the unloading operation leaves the immediate vicinity of the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (iii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed when access 
inside the container is needed to perform routine activities other than 
transfer of hazardous waste. Examples of such activities include those 
times when a worker needs to open a port to measure the depth of or 
sample the material in the container, or when a worker needs to open a 
manhole hatch to access equipment inside the container. Following 
completion of the activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure 
the closure device in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as 
applicable to the container.
    (iv) Opening of a spring-loaded, pressure-vacuum relief valve, 
conservation vent, or similar type of pressure relief device which vents 
to the atmosphere is allowed during normal operations for the purpose of 
maintaining the container internal pressure in accordance with the 
design specifications of the container. The device shall be designed to 
operate with no detectable organic emissions when the device is secured 
in the closed position. The settings at which the device opens shall be 
established such that the device remains in the closed position whenever 
the internal pressure of the container is within the internal pressure 
operating range determined by the owner or operator based on container 
manufacturer recommendations, applicable regulations, fire protection 
and prevention codes, standard engineering codes and practices, or other 
requirements for the safe handling of flammable, ignitable, explosive, 
reactive, or hazardous materials. Examples of normal operating 
conditions that may require these devices to open are during those times 
when the internal pressure of the container exceeds the internal 
pressure operating range for the container as a result of loading 
operations or diurnal ambient temperature fluctuations.
    (v) Opening of a safety device, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this 
subpart, is allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an 
unsafe condition.
    (4) The owner or operator of containers using Container Level 1 
controls shall inspect the containers and their covers and closure 
devices as follows:
    (i) In the case when a hazardous waste already is in the container 
at the time the owner or operator first accepts possession of the 
container at the facility and the container is not emptied within 24 
hours after the container is accepted at the facility (i.e., does not 
meet the conditions for an empty container as specified in 40 CFR 
261.7(b)), the owner or operator shall visually inspect the container 
and its cover and closure devices to check for

[[Page 533]]

visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces into the interior of 
the container when the cover and closure devices are secured in the 
closed position. The container visual inspection shall be conducted on 
or before the date that the container is accepted at the facility (i.e., 
the date the container becomes subject to the subpart CC container 
standards). For purposes of this requirement, the date of acceptance is 
the date of signature that the facility owner or operator enters on Item 
20 of the Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest in the appendix to 40 CFR 
part 262 (EPA Forms 8700-22 and 8700-22A), as required under subpart E 
of this part, at 40 CFR 265.71. If a defect is detected, the owner or 
operator shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) In the case when a container used for managing hazardous waste 
remains at the facility for a period of 1 year or more, the owner or 
operator shall visually inspect the container and its cover and closure 
devices initially and thereafter, at least once every 12 months, to 
check for visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces into the 
interior of the container when the cover and closure devices are secured 
in the closed position. If a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (iii) When a defect is detected for the container, cover, or closure 
devices, the owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 24 hours after detection, and repair shall be 
completed as soon as possible but no later than 5 calendar days after 
detection. If repair of a defect cannot be completed within 5 calendar 
days, then the hazardous waste shall be removed from the container and 
the container shall not be used to manage hazardous waste until the 
defect is repaired.
    (5) The owner or operator shall maintain at the facility a copy of 
the procedure used to determine that containers with capacity of 0.46 
m<SUP>3</SUP> or greater, which do not meet applicable DOT regulations 
as specified in paragraph (f) of this section, are not managing 
hazardous waste in light material service.
    (d) Container Level 2 standards. (1) A container using Container 
Level 2 controls is one of the following:
    (i) A container that meets the applicable U.S. Department of 
Transportation (DOT) regulations on packaging hazardous materials for 
transportation as specified in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (ii) A container that operates with no detectable organic emissions 
as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this subpart and determined in accordance 
with the procedure specified in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (iii) A container that has been demonstrated within the preceding 12 
months to be vapor-tight by using 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 27 
in accordance with the procedure specified in paragraph (h) of this 
section.
    (2) Transfer of hazardous waste in or out of a container using 
Container Level 2 controls shall be conducted in such a manner as to 
minimize exposure of the hazardous waste to the atmosphere, to the 
extent practical, considering the physical properties of the hazardous 
waste and good engineering and safety practices for handling flammable, 
ignitable, explosive, reactive or other hazardous materials. Examples of 
container loading procedures that the EPA considers to meet the 
requirements of this paragraph include using any one of the following: A 
submerged-fill pipe or other submerged-fill method to load liquids into 
the container; a vapor-balancing system or a vapor-recovery system to 
collect and control the vapors displaced from the container during 
filling operations; or a fitted opening in the top of a container 
through which the hazardous waste is filled and subsequently purging the 
transfer line before removing it from the container opening.
    (3) Whenever a hazardous waste is in a container using Container 
Level 2 controls, the owner or operator shall install all covers and 
closure devices for the container, and secure and maintain each closure 
device in the closed position except as follows:

[[Page 534]]

    (i) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of adding hazardous waste or other material to the container as follows:
    (A) In the case when the container is filled to the intended final 
level in one continuous operation, the owner or operator shall promptly 
secure the closure devices in the closed position and install the 
covers, as applicable to the container, upon conclusion of the filling 
operation.
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material 
intermittently are added to the container over a period of time, the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
either the container being filled to the intended final level; the 
completion of a batch loading after which no additional material will be 
added to the container within 15 minutes; the person performing the 
loading operation leaving the immediate vicinity of the container; or 
the shutdown of the process generating the material being added to the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (ii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed for the purpose 
of removing hazardous waste from the container as follows:
    (A) For the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section, an 
empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b) may be open to the 
atmosphere at any time (i.e., covers and closure devices are not 
required to be secured in the closed position on an empty container).
    (B) In the case when discrete quantities or batches of material are 
removed from the container but the container does not meet the 
conditions to be an empty container as defined in 40 CFR 261.7(b), the 
owner or operator shall promptly secure the closure devices in the 
closed position and install covers, as applicable to the container, upon 
the completion of a batch removal after which no additional material 
will be removed from the container within 15 minutes or the person 
performing the unloading operation leaves the immediate vicinity of the 
container, whichever condition occurs first.
    (iii) Opening of a closure device or cover is allowed when access 
inside the container is needed to perform routine activities other than 
transfer of hazardous waste. Examples of such activities include those 
times when a worker needs to open a port to measure the depth of or 
sample the material in the container, or when a worker needs to open a 
manhole hatch to access equipment inside the container. Following 
completion of the activity, the owner or operator shall promptly secure 
the closure device in the closed position or reinstall the cover, as 
applicable to the container.
    (iv) Opening of a spring-loaded, pressure-vacuum relief valve, 
conservation vent, or similar type of pressure relief device which vents 
to the atmosphere is allowed during normal operations for the purpose of 
maintaining the internal pressure of the container in accordance with 
the container design specifications. The device shall be designed to 
operate with no detectable organic emission when the device is secured 
in the closed position. The settings at which the device opens shall be 
established such that the device remains in the closed position whenever 
the internal pressure of the container is within the internal pressure 
operating range determined by the owner or operator based on container 
manufacturer recommendations, applicable regulations, fire protection 
and prevention codes, standard engineering codes and practices, or other 
requirements for the safe handling of flammable, ignitable, explosive, 
reactive, or hazardous materials. Examples of normal operating 
conditions that may require these devices to open are during those times 
when the internal pressure of the container exceeds the internal 
pressure operating range for the container as a result of loading 
operations or diurnal ambient temperature fluctuations.
    (v) Opening of a safety device, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this 
subpart, is allowed at any time conditions require doing so to avoid an 
unsafe condition.
    (4) The owner or operator of containers using Container Level 2 
controls shall inspect the containers and their covers and closure 
devices as follows:
    (i) In the case when a hazardous waste already is in the container 
at the

[[Page 535]]

time the owner or operator first accepts possession of the container at 
the facility and the container is not emptied within 24 hours after the 
container is accepted at the facility (i.e., does not meet the 
conditions for an empty container as specified in 40 CFR 261.7(b)), the 
owner or operator shall visually inspect the container and its cover and 
closure devices to check for visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open 
spaces into the interior of the container when the cover and closure 
devices are secured in the closed position. The container visual 
inspection shall be conducted on or before the date that the container 
is accepted at the facility (i.e., the date the container becomes 
subject to the subpart CC container standards). For purposes of this 
requirement, the date of acceptance is the date of signature that the 
facility owner or operator enters on Item 20 of the Uniform Hazardous 
Waste Manifest in the appendix to 40 CFR part 262 (EPA Forms 8700-22 and 
8700-22A), as required under subpart E of this part, at Sec. 265.71. If 
a defect is detected, the owner or operator shall repair the defect in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraph (d)(4)(iii) of this 
section.
    (ii) In the case when a container used for managing hazardous waste 
remains at the facility for a period of 1 year or more, the owner or 
operator shall visually inspect the container and its cover and closure 
devices initially and thereafter, at least once every 12 months, to 
check for visible cracks, holes, gaps, or other open spaces into the 
interior of the container when the cover and closure devices are secured 
in the closed position. If a defect is detected, the owner or operator 
shall repair the defect in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(d)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (iii) When a defect is detected for the container, cover, or closure 
devices, the owner or operator shall make first efforts at repair of the 
defect no later than 24 hours after detection, and repair shall be 
completed as soon as possible but no later than 5 calendar days after 
detection. If repair of a defect cannot be completed within 5 calendar 
days, then the hazardous waste shall be removed from the container and 
the container shall not be used to manage hazardous waste until the 
defect is repaired.
    (e) Container Level 3 standards. (1) A container using Container 
Level 3 controls is one of the following:
    (i) A container that is vented directly through a closed-vent system 
to a control device in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(e)(2)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) A container that is vented inside an enclosure which is 
exhausted through a closed-vent system to a control device in accordance 
with the requirements of paragraphs (e)(2)(i) and (e)(2)(ii) of this 
section.
    (2) The owner or operator shall meet the following requirements, as 
applicable to the type of air emission control equipment selected by the 
owner or operator:
    (i) The container enclosure shall be designed and operated in 
accordance with the criteria for a permanent total enclosure as 
specified in ``Procedure T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent 
or Temporary Total Enclosure'' under 40 CFR 52.741, appendix B. The 
enclosure may have permanent or temporary openings to allow worker 
access; passage of containers through the enclosure by conveyor or other 
mechanical means; entry of permanent mechanical or electrical equipment; 
or direct airflow into the enclosure. The owner or operator shall 
perform the verification procedure for the enclosure as specified in 
Section 5.0 to ``Procedure T--Criteria for and Verification of a 
Permanent or Temporary Total Enclosure'' initially when the enclosure is 
first installed and, thereafter, annually.
    (ii) The closed-vent system and control device shall be designed and 
operated in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1088 of this 
subpart.
    (3) Safety devices, as defined in Sec. 265.1081 of this subpart, may 
be installed and operated as necessary on any container, enclosure, 
closed-vent system, or control device used to comply with the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(1) of this section.
    (4) Owners and operators using Container Level 3 controls in 
accordance with the provisions of this subpart shall inspect and monitor 
the closed-

[[Page 536]]

vent systems and control devices as specified in Sec. 265.1088 of this 
subpart.
    (5) Owners and operators that use Container Level 3 controls in 
accordance with the provisions of this subpart shall prepare and 
maintain the records specified in Sec. 265.1090(d) of this subpart.
    (f) For the purpose of compliance with paragraph (c)(1)(i) or 
(d)(1)(i) of this section, containers shall be used that meet the 
applicable U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) regulations on 
packaging hazardous materials for transportation as follows:
    (1) The container meets the applicable requirements specified in 49 
CFR part 178--Specifications for Packaging or 49 CFR part 179--
Specifications for Tank Cars.
    (2) Hazardous waste is managed in the container in accordance with 
the applicable requirements specified in 49 CFR part 107, subpart B--
Exemptions; 49 CFR part 172--Hazardous Materials Table, Special 
Provisions, Hazardous Materials Communications, Emergency Response 
Information, and Training Requirements; 49 CFR part 173--Shippers--
General Requirements for Shipments and Packages; and 49 CFR part 180--
Continuing Qualification and Maintenance of Packagings.
    (3) For the purpose of complying with this subpart, no exceptions to 
the 49 CFR part 178 or part 179 regulations are allowed except as 
provided for in paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
    (4) For a lab pack that is managed in accordance with the 
requirements of 49 CFR part 178 for the purpose of complying with this 
subpart, an owner or operator may comply with the exceptions for 
combination packagings specified in 49 CFR 173.12(b).
    (g) To determine compliance with the no detectable organic emissions 
requirements of paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section, the procedure 
specified in Sec. 265.1084(d) of this subpart shall be used.
    (1) Each potential leak interface (i.e., a location where organic 
vapor leakage could occur) on the container, its cover, and associated 
closure devices, as applicable to the container, shall be checked. 
Potential leak interfaces that are associated with containers include, 
but are not limited to: The interface of the cover rim and the container 
wall; the periphery of any opening on the container or container cover 
and its associated closure device; and the sealing seat interface on a 
spring-loaded pressure-relief valve.
    (2) The test shall be performed when the container is filled with a 
material having a volatile organic concentration representative of the 
range of volatile organic concentrations for the hazardous wastes 
expected to be managed in this type of container. During the test, the 
container cover and closure devices shall be secured in the closed 
position.
    (h) Procedure for determining a container to be vapor-tight using 
Method 27 of 40 CFR part 60, appendix A for the purpose of complying 
with paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section.
    (1) The test shall be performed in accordance with Method 27 of 40 
CFR part 60, appendix A of this chapter.
    (2) A pressure measurement device shall be used that has a precision 
of <plus-minus>2.5 mm water and that is capable of measuring above the 
pressure at which the container is to be tested for vapor tightness.
    (3) If the test results determined by Method 27 indicate that the 
container sustains a pressure change less than or equal to 750 Pascals 
within 5 minutes after it is pressurized to a minimum of 4,500 Pascals, 
then the container is determined to be vapor-tight.
[61 FR 59986, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64666, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1088  Standards: Closed-vent systems and control devices.

    (a) This section applies to each closed-vent system and control 
device installed and operated by the owner or operator to control air 
emissions in accordance with standards of this subpart.
    (b) The closed-vent system shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) The closed-vent system shall route the gases, vapors, and fumes 
emitted from the hazardous waste in the waste management unit to a 
control device that meets the requirements specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section.
    (2) The closed-vent system shall be designed and operated in 
accordance

[[Page 537]]

with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1033(j) of this part.
    (3) In the case when the closed-vent system includes bypass devices 
that could be used to divert the gas or vapor stream to the atmosphere 
before entering the control device, each bypass device shall be equipped 
with either a flow indicator as specified in paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this 
section or a seal or locking device as specified in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) 
of this section. For the purpose of complying with this paragraph, low 
leg drains, high point bleeds, analyzer vents, open-ended valves or 
lines, spring-loaded pressure relief valves, and other fittings used for 
safety purposes are not considered to be bypass devices.
    (i) If a flow indicator is used to comply with paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section, the indicator shall be installed at the inlet to the 
bypass line used to divert gases and vapors from the closed-vent system 
to the atmosphere at a point upstream of the control device inlet. For 
this paragraph, a flow indicator means a device which indicates the 
presence of either gas or vapor flow in the bypass line.
    (ii) If a seal or locking device is used to comply with paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section, the device shall be placed on the mechanism by 
which the bypass device position is controlled (e.g., valve handle, 
damper lever) when the bypass device is in the closed position such that 
the bypass device cannot be opened without breaking the seal or removing 
the lock. Examples of such devices include, but are not limited to, a 
car-seal or a lock-and-key configuration valve. The owner or operator 
shall visually inspect the seal or closure mechanism at least once every 
month to verify that the bypass mechanism is maintained in the closed 
position.
    (4) The closed-vent system shall be inspected and monitored by the 
owner or operator in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 
265.1033(k).
    (c) The control device shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) The control device shall be one of the following devices:
    (i) A control device designed and operated to reduce the total 
organic content of the inlet vapor stream vented to the control device 
by at least 95 percent by weight;
    (ii) An enclosed combustion device designed and operated in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1033(c); or
    (iii) A flare designed and operated in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 265.1033(d).
    (2) The owner or operator who elects to use a closed-vent system and 
control device to comply with the requirements of this section shall 
comply with the requirements specified in paragraphs (c)(2)(i) through 
(c)(2)(vi) of this section.
    (i) Periods of planned routine maintenance of the control device, 
during which the control device does not meet the specifications of 
paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or (c)(1)(iii) of this section, as 
applicable, shall not exceed 240 hours per year.
    (ii) The specifications and requirements in paragraphs (c)(1)(i), 
(c)(1)(ii), and (c)(1)(iii) of this section for control devices do not 
apply during periods of planned routine maintenance.
    (iii) The specifications and requirements in paragraphs (c)(1)(i), 
(c)(1)(ii), and (c)(1)(iii) of this section for control devices do not 
apply during a control device system malfunction.
    (iv) The owner or operator shall demonstrate compliance with the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section (i.e., planned 
routine maintenance of a control device, during which the control device 
does not meet the specifications of paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or 
(c)(1)(iii) of this section, as applicable, shall not exceed 240 hours 
per year) by recording the information specified in 
Sec. 265.1090(e)(1)(v) of this subpart.
    (v) The owner or operator shall correct control device system 
malfunctions as soon as practicable after their occurrence in order to 
minimize excess emissions of air pollutants.
    (vi) The owner or operator shall operate the closed-vent system such 
that gases, vapors, and/or fumes are not actively vented to the control 
device during periods of planned maintenance or control device system 
malfunction (i.e., periods when the control device is

[[Page 538]]

not operating or not operating normally) except in cases when it is 
necessary to vent the gases, vapors, or fumes to avoid an unsafe 
condition or to implement malfunction corrective actions or planned 
maintenance actions.
    (3) The owner or operator using a carbon adsorption system to comply 
with paragraph (c)(1) of this section shall operate and maintain the 
control device in accordance with the following requirements:
    (i) Following the initial startup of the control device, all 
activated carbon in the control device shall be replaced with fresh 
carbon on a regular basis in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 265.1033(g) or Sec. 265.1033(h).
    (ii) All carbon that is a hazardous waste and that is removed from 
the control device shall be managed in accordance with the requirements 
of 40 CFR 265.1033(m), regardless of the average volatile organic 
concentration of the carbon.
    (4) An owner or operator using a control device other than a thermal 
vapor incinerator, flare, boiler, process heater, condenser, or carbon 
adsorption system to comply with paragraph (c)(1) of this section shall 
operate and maintain the control device in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 265.1033(i).
    (5) The owner or operator shall demonstrate that a control device 
achieves the performance requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section as follows:
    (i) An owner or operator shall demonstrate using either a 
performance test as specified in paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section 
or a design analysis as specified in paragraph (c)(5)(iv) of this 
section the performance of each control device except for the following:
    (A) A flare;
    (B) A boiler or process heater with a design heat input capacity of 
44 megawatts or greater;
    (C) A boiler or process heater into which the vent stream is 
introduced with the primary fuel;
    (D) A boiler or industrial furnace burning hazardous waste for which 
the owner or operator has been issued a final permit under 40 CFR part 
270 and has designed and operates the unit in accordance with the 
requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H; or
    (E) A boiler or industrial furnace burning hazardous waste for which 
the owner or operator has designed and operates in accordance with the 
interim status requirements of 40 CFR part 266, subpart H.
    (ii) An owner or operator shall demonstrate the performance of each 
flare in accordance with the requirements specified in Sec. 265.1033(e).
    (iii) For a performance test conducted to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section, the owner or operator shall use the 
test methods and procedures specified in Sec. 265.1034(c)(1) through 
(c)(4).
    (iv) For a design analysis conducted to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section, the design analysis shall meet the 
requirements specified in Sec. 265.1035(b)(4)(iii).
    (v) The owner or operator shall demonstrate that a carbon adsorption 
system achieves the performance requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section based on the total quantity of organics vented to the atmosphere 
from all carbon adsorption system equipment that is used for organic 
adsorption, organic desorption or carbon regeneration, organic recovery, 
and carbon disposal.
    (6) If the owner or operator and the Regional Administrator do not 
agree on a demonstration of control device performance using a design 
analysis then the disagreement shall be resolved using the results of a 
performance test performed by the owner or operator in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section. The Regional 
Administrator may choose to have an authorized representative observe 
the performance test.
    (7) The closed-vent system and control device shall be inspected and 
monitored by the owner or operator in accordance with the procedures 
specified in 40 CFR 265.1033(f)(2) and 40 CFR 265.1033(k). The readings 
from each monitoring device required by 40 CFR 265.1033(f)(2) shall be 
inspected at least once each operating day to check control device 
operation. Any necessary

[[Page 539]]

corrective measures shall be immediately implemented to ensure the 
control device is operated in compliance with the requirements of this 
section.
[59 FR 62935, Dec. 6, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 4915, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 
FR 59989, Nov. 25, 1996; 62 FR 64667, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1089  Inspection and monitoring requirements.

    (a) The owner or operator shall inspect and monitor air emission 
control equipment used to comply with this subpart in accordance with 
the applicable requirements specified in Sec. 265.1085 through 
Sec. 265.1088 of this subpart.
    (b) The owner or operator shall develop and implement a written plan 
and schedule to perform the inspections and monitoring required by 
paragraph (a) of this section. The owner or operator shall incorporate 
this plan and schedule into the facility inspection plan required under 
40 CFR 265.15.
[61 FR 59990, Nov. 25, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1090  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a) Each owner or operator of a facility subject to requirements in 
this subpart shall record and maintain the information specified in 
paragraphs (b) through (j) of this section, as applicable to the 
facility. Except for air emission control equipment design documentation 
and information required by paragraphs (i) and (j) of this section, 
records required by this section shall be maintained in the operating 
record for a minimum of 3 years. Air emission control equipment design 
documentation shall be maintained in the operating record until the air 
emission control equipment is replaced or otherwise no longer in 
service. Information required by paragraphs (i) and (j) of this section 
shall be maintained in the operating record for as long as the waste 
management unit is not using air emission controls specified in 
Secs. 265.1085 through 265.1088 of this subpart in accordance with the 
conditions specified in Sec. 265.1080(d) or Sec. 265.1080(b)(7) of this 
subpart, respectively.
    (b) The owner or operator of a tank using air emission controls in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1085 of this subpart shall 
prepare and maintain records for the tank that include the following 
information:
    (1) For each tank using air emission controls in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 265.1085 of this subpart, the owner or operator 
shall record:
    (i) A tank identification number (or other unique identification 
description as selected by the owner or operator).
    (ii) A record for each inspection required by Sec. 265.1085 of this 
subpart that includes the following information:
    (A) Date inspection was conducted.
    (B) For each defect detected during the inspection: The location of 
the defect, a description of the defect, the date of detection, and 
corrective action taken to repair the defect. In the event that repair 
of the defect is delayed in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 265.1085 of this subpart, the owner or operator shall also record 
the reason for the delay and the date that completion of repair of the 
defect is expected.
    (2) In addition to the information required by paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, the owner or operator shall record the following 
information, as applicable to the tank:
    (i) The owner or operator using a fixed roof to comply with the Tank 
Level 1 control requirements specified in Sec. 265.1085(c) of this 
subpart shall prepare and maintain records for each determination for 
the maximum organic vapor pressure of the hazardous waste in the tank 
performed in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1085(c) of 
this subpart. The records shall include the date and time the samples 
were collected, the analysis method used, and the analysis results.
    (ii) The owner or operator using an internal floating roof to comply 
with the Tank Level 2 control requirements specified in Sec. 265.1085(e) 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain documentation describing the 
floating roof design.
    (iii) Owners and operators using an external floating roof to comply 
with the Tank Level 2 control requirements specified in Sec. 265.1085(f) 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain the following records:
    (A) Documentation describing the floating roof design and the 
dimensions of the tank.
    (B) Records for each seal gap inspection required by 
Sec. 265.1085(f)(3) of this

[[Page 540]]

subpart describing the results of the seal gap measurements. The records 
shall include the date that the measurements were performed, the raw 
data obtained for the measurements, and the calculations of the total 
gap surface area. In the event that the seal gap measurements do not 
conform to the specifications in Sec. 265.1085(f)(1) of this subpart, 
the records shall include a description of the repairs that were made, 
the date the repairs were made, and the date the tank was emptied, if 
necessary.
    (iv) Each owner or operator using an enclosure to comply with the 
Tank Level 2 control requirements specified in Sec. 265.1085(i) of this 
subpart shall prepare and maintain the following records:
    (A) Records for the most recent set of calculations and measurements 
performed by the owner or operator to verify that the enclosure meets 
the criteria of a permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' under 40 CFR 52.741, appendix B.
    (B) Records required for the closed-vent system and control device 
in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (e) of this section.
    (c) The owner or operator of a surface impoundment using air 
emission controls in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1086 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain records for the surface 
impoundment that include the following information:
    (1) A surface impoundment identification number (or other unique 
identification description as selected by the owner or operator).
    (2) Documentation describing the floating membrane cover or cover 
design, as applicable to the surface impoundment, that includes 
information prepared by the owner or operator or provided by the cover 
manufacturer or vendor describing the cover design, and certification by 
the owner or operator that the cover meets the specifications listed in 
Sec. 265.1086(c) of this subpart.
    (3) A record for each inspection required by Sec. 265.1086 of this 
subpart that includes the following information:
    (i) Date inspection was conducted.
    (ii) For each defect detected during the inspection the following 
information: The location of the defect, a description of the defect, 
the date of detection, and corrective action taken to repair the defect. 
In the event that repair of the defect is delayed in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 265.1086(f) of this subpart, the owner or operator 
shall also record the reason for the delay and the date that completion 
of repair of the defect is expected.
    (4) For a surface impoundment equipped with a cover and vented 
through a closed-vent system to a control device, the owner or operator 
shall prepare and maintain the records specified in paragraph (e) of 
this section.
    (d) The owner or operator of containers using Container Level 3 air 
emission controls in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1087 
of this subpart shall prepare and maintain records that include the 
following information:
    (1) Records for the most recent set of calculations and measurements 
performed by the owner or operator to verify that the enclosure meets 
the criteria of a permanent total enclosure as specified in ``Procedure 
T--Criteria for and Verification of a Permanent or Temporary Total 
Enclosure'' under 40 CFR 52.741, appendix B.
    (2) Records required for the closed-vent system and control device 
in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (e) of this section.
    (e) The owner or operator using a closed-vent system and control 
device in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 265.1088 of this 
subpart shall prepare and maintain records that include the following 
information:
    (1) Documentation for the closed-vent system and control device that 
includes:
    (i) Certification that is signed and dated by the owner or operator 
stating that the control device is designed to operate at the 
performance level documented by a design analysis as specified in 
paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section or by performance tests as 
specified in paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this section when the tank, 
surface impoundment, or container is or would be operating at capacity 
or the highest level reasonably expected to occur.

[[Page 541]]

    (ii) If a design analysis is used, then design documentation as 
specified in 40 CFR 265.1035(b)(4). The documentation shall include 
information prepared by the owner or operator or provided by the control 
device manufacturer or vendor that describes the control device design 
in accordance with 40 CFR 265.1035(b)(4)(iii) and certification by the 
owner or operator that the control equipment meets the applicable 
specifications.
    (iii) If performance tests are used, then a performance test plan as 
specified in 40 CFR 265.1035(b)(3) and all test results.
    (iv) Information as required by 40 CFR 265.1035(c)(1) and 40 CFR 
265.1035(c)(2), as applicable.
    (v) An owner or operator shall record, on a semiannual basis, the 
information specified in paragraphs (e)(1)(v)(A) and (e)(1)(v)(B) of 
this section for those planned routine maintenance operations that would 
require the control device not to meet the requirements of Sec. 265.1088 
(c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or (c)(1)(iii) of this subpart, as applicable.
    (A) A description of the planned routine maintenance that is 
anticipated to be performed for the control device during the next 6-
month period. This description shall include the type of maintenance 
necessary, planned frequency of maintenance, and lengths of maintenance 
periods.
    (B) A description of the planned routine maintenance that was 
performed for the control device during the previous 6-month period. 
This description shall include the type of maintenance performed and the 
total number of hours during those 6 months that the control device did 
not meet the requirements of Sec. 265.1088 (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or 
(c)(1)(iii) of this subpart, as applicable, due to planned routine 
maintenance.
    (vi) An owner or operator shall record the information specified in 
paragraphs (e)(1)(vi)(A) through (e)(1)(vi)(C) of this section for those 
unexpected control device system malfunctions that would require the 
control device not to meet the requirements of Sec. 265.1088 (c)(1)(i), 
(c)(1)(ii), or (c)(1)(iii) of this subpart, as applicable.
    (A) The occurrence and duration of each malfunction of the control 
device system.
    (B) The duration of each period during a malfunction when gases, 
vapors, or fumes are vented from the waste management unit through the 
closed-vent system to the control device while the control device is not 
properly functioning.
    (C) Actions taken during periods of malfunction to restore a 
malfunctioning control device to its normal or usual manner of 
operation.
    (vii) Records of the management of carbon removed from a carbon 
adsorption system conducted in accordance with Sec. 265.1088(c)(3)(ii) 
of this subpart.
    (f) The owner or operator of a tank, surface impoundment, or 
container exempted from standards in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 265.1083(c) of this subpart shall prepare and maintain the 
following records, as applicable:
    (1) For tanks, surface impoundments, or containers exempted under 
the hazardous waste organic concentration conditions specified in 
Sec. 265.1083(c)(1) or Sec. 265.1084(c)(2)(i) through (c)(2)(vi) of this 
subpart, the owner or operator shall record the information used for 
each waste determination (e.g., test results, measurements, 
calculations, and other documentation) in the facility operating log. If 
analysis results for waste samples are used for the waste determination, 
then the owner or operator shall record the date, time, and location 
that each waste sample is collected in accordance with applicable 
requirements of Sec. 265.1084 of this subpart.
    (2) For tanks, surface impoundments, or containers exempted under 
the provisions of Sec. 265.1083(c)(2)(vii) or Sec. 265.1083(c)(2)(viii) 
of this subpart, the owner or operator shall record the identification 
number for the incinerator, boiler, or industrial furnace in which the 
hazardous waste is treated.
    (g) An owner or operator designating a cover as ``unsafe to inspect 
and monitor'' pursuant to Sec. 265.1085(l) or Sec. 265.1086(g) of this 
subpart shall record in a log that is kept in the facility operating 
record the following information: The identification numbers for waste 
management units with covers

[[Page 542]]

that are designated as ``unsafe to inspect and monitor,'' the 
explanation for each cover stating why the cover is unsafe to inspect 
and monitor, and the plan and schedule for inspecting and monitoring 
each cover.
    (h) The owner or operator of a facility that is subject to this 
subpart and to the control device standards in 40 CFR part 60, subpart 
VV, or 40 CFR part 61, subpart V, may elect to demonstrate compliance 
with the applicable sections of this subpart by documentation either 
pursuant to this subpart, or pursuant to the provisions of 40 CFR part 
60, subpart VV or 40 CFR part 61, subpart V, to the extent that the 
documentation required by 40 CFR parts 60 or 61 duplicates the 
documentation required by this section.
    (i) For each tank or container not using air emission controls 
specified in Secs. 265.1085 through 265.1088 of this subpart in 
accordance with the conditions specified in Sec. 265.1080(d) of this 
subpart, the owner or operator shall record and maintain the following 
information:
    (1) A list of the individual organic peroxide compounds manufactured 
at the facility that meet the conditions specified in 
Sec. 265.1080(d)(1).
    (2) A description of how the hazardous waste containing the organic 
peroxide compounds identified in paragraph (i)(1) of this section are 
managed at the facility in tanks and containers. This description shall 
include the following information:
    (i) For the tanks used at the facility to manage this hazardous 
waste, sufficient information shall be provided to describe for each 
tank: A facility identification number for the tank; the purpose and 
placement of this tank in the management train of this hazardous waste; 
and the procedures used to ultimately dispose of the hazardous waste 
managed in the tanks.
    (ii) For containers used at the facility to manage these hazardous 
wastes, sufficient information shall be provided to describe: A facility 
identification number for the container or group of containers; the 
purpose and placement of this container, or group of containers, in the 
management train of this hazardous waste; and the procedures used to 
ultimately dispose of the hazardous waste handled in the containers.
    (3) An explanation of why managing the hazardous waste containing 
the organic peroxide compounds identified in paragraph (i)(1) of this 
section in the tanks and containers as described in paragraph (i)(2) of 
this section would create an undue safety hazard if the air emission 
controls, as required under Secs. 265.1085 through 265.1088 of this 
subpart, are installed and operated on these waste management units. 
This explanation shall include the following information:
    (i) For tanks used at the facility to manage these hazardous wastes, 
sufficient information shall be provided to explain: How use of the 
required air emission controls on the tanks would affect the tank design 
features and facility operating procedures currently used to prevent an 
undue safety hazard during the management of this hazardous waste in the 
tanks; and why installation of safety devices on the required air 
emission controls, as allowed under this subpart, will not address those 
situations in which evacuation of tanks equipped with these air emission 
controls is necessary and consistent with good engineering and safety 
practices for handling organic peroxides.
    (ii) For containers used at the facility to manage these hazardous 
wastes, sufficient information shall be provided to explain: How use of 
the required air emission controls on the containers would affect the 
container design features and handling procedures currently used to 
prevent an undue safety hazard during the management of this hazardous 
waste in the containers; and why installation of safety devices on the 
required air emission controls, as allowed under this subpart, will not 
address those situations in which evacuation of containers equipped with 
these air emission controls is necessary and consistent with good 
engineering and safety practices for handling organic peroxides.
    (j) For each hazardous waste management unit not using air emission 
controls specified in Secs. 265.1085 through 265.1088 of this subpart in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 265.1080(b)(7) of this subpart, 
the owner and operator

[[Page 543]]

shall record and maintain the following information:
    (1) Certification that the waste management unit is equipped with 
and operating air emission controls in accordance with the requirements 
of an applicable Clean Air Act regulation codified under 40 CFR part 60, 
part 61, or part 63.
    (2) Identification of the specific requirements codified under 40 
CFR part 60, part 61, or part 63 with which the waste management unit is 
in compliance.
[61 FR 59990, Nov. 25, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 64667, Dec. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1091  [Reserved]


<R04>
                    Subpart DD--Containment Buildings

    Source: 57 FR 37268, Aug. 18, 1992, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1100  Applicability.

    The requirements of this subpart apply to owners or operators who 
store or treat hazardous waste in units designed and operated under 
Sec. 265.1101 of this subpart. These provisions will become effective on 
February 18, 1993, although the owner or operator may notify the 
Regional Administrator of his intent to be bound by this subpart at an 
earlier time. The owner or operator is not subject to the definition of 
land disposal in RCRA section 3004(k) provided that the unit:
    (a) Is a completely enclosed, self-supporting structure that is 
designed and constructed of manmade materials of sufficient strength and 
thickness to support themselves, the waste contents, and any personnel 
and heavy equipment that operate within the units, and to prevent 
failure due to pressure gradients, settlement, compression, or uplift, 
physical contact with the hazardous wastes to which they are exposed; 
climatic conditions; and the stresses of daily operation, including the 
movement of heavy equipment within the unit and contact of such 
equipment with containment walls;
    (b) Has a primary barrier that is designed to be sufficiently 
durable to withstand the movement of personnel and handling equipment 
within the unit;
    (c) If the unit is used to manage liquids, has:
    (1) A primary barrier designed and constructed of materials to 
prevent migration of hazardous constituents into the barrier;
    (2) A liquid collection system designed and constructed of materials 
to minimize the accumulation of liquid on the primary barrier; and
    (3) A secondary containment system designed and constructed of 
materials to prevent migration of hazardous constituents into the 
barrier, with a leak detection and liquid collection system capable of 
detecting, collecting, and removing leaks of hazardous constituents at 
the earliest possible time, unless the unit has been granted a variance 
from the secondary containment system requirements under 
Sec. 265.1101(b)(4);
    (d) Has controls as needed to permit fugitive dust emissions; and
    (e) Is designed and operated to ensure containment and prevent the 
tracking of materials from the unit by personnel or equipment.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1101  Design and operating standards.

    (a) All containment buildings must comply with the following design 
standards:
    (1) The containment building must be completely enclosed with a 
floor, walls, and a roof to prevent exposure to the elements, (e.g., 
precipitation, wind, run-on), and to assure containment of managed 
wastes.
    (2) The floor and containment walls of the unit, including the 
secondary containment system if required under paragraph (b) of this 
section, must be designed and constructed of materials of sufficient 
strength and thickness to support themselves, the waste contents, and 
any personnel and heavy equipment that operate within the unit, and to 
prevent failure due to pressure gradients, settlement, compression, or 
uplift, physical contact with the hazardous wastes to which they are 
exposed; climatic conditions; and the stresses of daily operation, 
including the movement of heavy equipment within the unit and contact of 
such equipment with containment walls.

[[Page 544]]

The unit must be designed so that it has sufficient structural strength 
to prevent collapse or other failure. All surfaces to be in contact with 
hazardous wastes must be chemically compatible with those wastes. EPA 
will consider standards established by professional organizations 
generally recognized by the industry such as the American Concrete 
Institute (ACI) and the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM) in 
judging the structural integrity requirements of this paragraph. If 
appropriate to the nature of the waste management operation to take 
place in the unit, an exception to the structural strength requirement 
may be made for light-weight doors and windows that meet these criteria:
    (i) They provide an effective barrier against fugitive dust 
emissions under paragraph (c)(1)(iv); and
    (ii) The unit is designed and operated in a fashion that assures 
that wastes will not actually come in contact with these openings.
    (3) Incompatible hazardous wastes or treatment reagents must not be 
placed in the unit or its secondary containment system if they could 
cause the unit or secondary containment system to leak, corrode, or 
otherwise fail.
    (4) A containment building must have a primary barrier designed to 
withstand the movement of personnel, waste, and handling equipment in 
the unit during the operating life of the unit and appropriate for the 
physical and chemical characteristics of the waste to be managed.
    (b) For a containment building used to manage hazardous wastes 
containing free liquids or treated with free liquids (the presence of 
which is determined by the paint filter test, a visual examination, or 
other appropriate means), the owner or operator must include:
    (1) A primary barrier designed and constructed of materials to 
prevent the migration of hazardous constituents into the barrier (e.g. a 
geomembrane covered by a concrete wear surface).
    (2) A liquid collection and removal system to prevent the 
accumulation of liquid on the primary barrier of the containment 
building:
    (i) The primary barrier must be sloped to drain liquids to the 
associated collection system; and
    (ii) Liquids and waste must be collected and removed to minimize 
hydraulic head on the containment system at the earliest practicable 
time that protects human health and the environment.
    (3) A secondary containment system including a secondary barrier 
designed and constructed to prevent migration of hazardous constituents 
into the barrier, and a leak detection system that is capable of 
detecting failure of the primary barrier and collecting accumulated 
hazardous wastes and liquids at the earliest practicable time.
    (i) The requirements of the leak detection component of the 
secondary containment system are satisfied by installation of a system 
that is, at a minimum:
    (A) Constructed with a bottom slope of 1 percent or more; and
    (B) Constructed of a granular drainage material with a hydraulic 
conductivity of 1  x  10<SUP>-</SUP>\2\ cm/sec or more and a thickness 
of 12 inches (30.5 cm) or more, or constructed of synthetic or geonet 
drainage materials with a trasmissivity of 3  x  10<SUP>-</SUP>\5\ m 
\2\/sec or more.
    (ii) If treatment is to be conducted in the building, an area in 
which such treatment will be conducted must be designed to prevent the 
release of liquids, wet materials, or liquid aerosols to other portions 
of the building.
    (iii) The secondary containment system must be constructed of 
materials that are chemically resistant to the waste and liquids managed 
in the containment building and of sufficient strength and thickness to 
prevent collapse under the pressure exerted by overlaying materials and 
by any equipment used in the containment building. (Containment 
buildings can serve as secondary containment systems for tanks placed 
within the building under certain conditions. A containment building can 
serve as an external liner system for a tank, provided it meets the 
requirements of Sec. 265.193(d)(1). In addition, the containment 
building must meet the requirements of Sec. 265.193

[[Page 545]]

(b) and (c) to be considered an acceptable secondary containment system 
for a tank.)
    (4) For existing units other than 90-day generator units, the 
Regional Administrator may delay the secondary containment requirement 
for up to two years, based on a demonstration by the owner or operator 
that the unit substantially meets the standards of this Subpart. In 
making this demonstration, the owner or operator must:
    (i) Provide written notice to the Regional Administrator of their 
request by February 18, 1993. This notification must describe the unit 
and its operating practices with specific reference to the performance 
of existing containment systems, and specific plans for retrofitting the 
unit with secondary containment;
    (ii) Respond to any comments from the Regional Administrator on 
these plans within 30 days; and
    (iii) Fulfill the terms of the revised plans, if such plans are 
approved by the Regional Administrator.
    (c) Owners or operators of all containment buildings must:
    (1) Use controls and practices to ensure containment of the 
hazardous waste within the unit; and, at a minimum:
    (i) Maintain the primary barrier to be free of significant cracks, 
gaps, corrosion, or other deterioration that could cause hazardous waste 
to be released from the primary barrier;
    (ii) Maintain the level of the stored/treated hazardous waste within 
the containment walls of the unit so that the height of any containment 
wall is not exceeded;
    (iii) Take measures to prevent the tracking of hazardous waste out 
of the unit by personnel or by equipment used in handling the waste. An 
area must be designated to decontaminate equipment and any rinsate must 
be collected and properly managed; and
    (iv) Take measures to control fugitive dust emissions such that any 
openings (doors, windows, vents, cracks, etc.) exhibit no visible 
emissions. In addition, all associated particulate collection devices 
(e.g., fabric filter, electrostatic precipitator) must be operated and 
maintained with sound air pollution control practices. This state of no 
visible emissions must be maintained effectively at all times during 
normal operating conditions, including when vehicles and personnel are 
entering and exiting the unit.
    (2) Obtain certification by a qualified registered professional 
engineer that the containment building design meets the requirements of 
paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section. For units placed into 
operation prior to February 18, 1993, this certification must be placed 
in the facility's operating record (on-site files for generators who are 
not formally required to have operating records) no later than 60 days 
after the date of initial operation of the unit. After February 18, 
1993, PE certification will be required prior to operation of the unit.
    (3) Throughout the active life of the containment building, if the 
owner or operator detects a condition that could lead to or has caused a 
release of hazardous waste, must repair the condition promptly, in 
accordance with the following procedures.
    (i) Upon detection of a condition that has led to a release of 
hazardous waste (e.g., upon detection of leakage from the primary 
barrier) the owner or operator must:
    (A) Enter a record of the discovery in the facility operating 
record;
    (B) Immediately remove the portion of the containment building 
affected by the condition from service;
    (C) Determine what steps must be taken to repair the containment 
building, remove any leakage from the secondary collection system, and 
establish a schedule for accomplishing the cleanup and repairs; and
    (D) Within 7 days after the discovery of the condition, notify the 
Regional Administrator of the condition, and within 14 working days, 
provide a written notice to the Regional Administrator with a 
description of the steps taken to repair the containment building, and 
the schedule for accomplishing the work.
    (ii) The Regional Administrator will review the information 
submitted, make a determination regarding whether the containment 
building must be removed from service completely or partially until 
repairs and cleanup are complete, and notify the

[[Page 546]]

owner or operator of the determination and the underlying rationale in 
writing.
    (iii) Upon completing all repairs and cleanup the owner or operator 
must notify the Regional Administrator in writing and provide a 
verification, signed by a qualified, registered professional engineer, 
that the repairs and cleanup have been completed according to the 
written plan submitted in accordance with paragraph (c)(3)(i)(D) of this 
section.
    (4) Inspect and record in the facility's operating record, at least 
once every seven days, data gathered from monitoring equipment and leak 
detection equipment as well as the containment building and the area 
immediately surrounding the containment building to detect signs of 
releases of hazardous waste.
    (d) For containment building that contains both areas with and 
without secondary containment, the owner or operator must:
    (1) Design and operate each area in accordance with the requirements 
enumerated in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section;
    (2) Take measures to prevent the release of liquids or wet materials 
into areas without secondary containment; and
    (3) Maintain in the facility's operating log a written description 
of the operating procedures used to maintain the integrity of areas 
without secondary containment.
    (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subpart, the 
Regional Administrator may waive requirements for secondary containment 
for a permitted containment building where the owner or operator 
demonstrates that the only free liquids in the unit are limited amounts 
of dust suppression liquids required to meet occupational health and 
safety requirements, and where containment of managed wastes and liquids 
can be assured without a secondary containment system.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1102  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure of a containment building, the owner or operator must 
remove or decontaminate all waste residues, contaminated containment 
system components (liners, etc.), contaminated subsoils, and structures 
and equipment contaminated with waste and leachate, and manage them as 
hazardous waste unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this chapter applies. The 
closure plan, closure activities, cost estimates for closure, and 
financial responsibility for containment buildings must meet all of the 
requirements specified in subparts G and H of this part.
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed or decontaminated, 
he must close the facility and perform post-closure care in accordance 
with the closure and post-closure requirements that apply to landfills 
(Sec. 265.310). In addition, for the purposes of closure, post-closure, 
and financial responsibility, such a containment building is then 
considered to be a landfill, and the owner or operator must meet all of 
the requirements for landfills specified in subparts G and H of this 
part.


<R05>
Secs. 265.1103--265.1110  [Reserved]


<R04>
      Subpart EE--Hazardous Waste Munitions and Explosives Storage

    Source: 62 FR 6653, Feb. 12, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1200  Applicability.

    The requirements of this subpart apply to owners or operators who 
store munitions and explosive hazardous wastes, except as Sec. 265.1 
provides otherwise. (NOTE: Depending on explosive hazards, hazardous 
waste munitions and explosives may also be managed in other types of 
storage units, including containment buildings (40 CFR part 265, subpart 
DD), tanks (40 CFR part 265, subpart J), or containers (40 CFR part 265, 
subpart I); See 40 CFR 266.205 for storage of waste military munitions).

[[Page 547]]


<R05>
Sec. 265.1201  Design and operating standards.

    (a) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives storage units must be 
designed and operated with containment systems, controls, and 
monitoring, that:
    (1) Minimize the potential for detonation or other means of release 
of hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, hazardous decomposition 
products, or contaminated run-off, to the soil, ground water, surface 
water, and atmosphere;
    (2) Provide a primary barrier, which may be a container (including a 
shell) or tank, designed to contain the hazardous waste;
    (3) For wastes stored outdoors, provide that the waste and 
containers will not be in standing precipitation;
    (4) For liquid wastes, provide a secondary containment system that 
assures that any released liquids are contained and promptly detected 
and removed from the waste area, or vapor detection system that assures 
that any released liquids or vapors are promptly detected and an 
appropriate response taken (e.g., additional containment, such as 
overpacking, or removal from the waste area); and
    (5) Provide monitoring and inspection procedures that assure the 
controls and containment systems are working as designed and that 
releases that may adversely impact human health or the environment are 
not escaping from the unit.
    (b) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives stored under this 
subpart may be stored in one of the following:
    (1) Earth-covered magazines. Earth-covered magazines must be:
    (i) Constructed of waterproofed, reinforced concrete or structural 
steel arches, with steel doors that are kept closed when not being 
accessed;
    (ii) Designed and constructed:
    (A) To be of sufficient strength and thickness to support the weight 
of any explosives or munitions stored and any equipment used in the 
unit;
    (B) To provide working space for personnel and equipment in the 
unit; and
    (C) To withstand movement activities that occur in the unit; and
    (iii) Located and designed, with walls and earthen covers that 
direct an explosion in the unit in a safe direction, so as to minimize 
the propagation of an explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other 
effects of any explosion.
    (2) Above-ground magazines. Above-ground magazines must be located 
and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an explosion to 
adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any explosion.
    (3) Outdoor or open storage areas. Outdoor or open storage areas 
must be located and designed so as to minimize the propagation of an 
explosion to adjacent units and to minimize other effects of any 
explosion.
    (c) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives must be stored in 
accordance with a Standard Operating Procedure specifying procedures to 
ensure safety, security, and environmental protection. If these 
procedures serve the same purpose as the security and inspection 
requirements of 40 CFR 265.14, the preparedness and prevention 
procedures of 40 CFR part 265, subpart C, and the contingency plan and 
emergency procedures requirements of 40 CFR part 265, subpart D, then 
these procedures will be used to fulfill those requirements.
    (d) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives must be packaged to 
ensure safety in handling and storage.
    (e) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives must be inventoried at 
least annually.
    (f) Hazardous waste munitions and explosives and their storage units 
must be inspected and monitored as necessary to ensure explosives safety 
and to ensure that there is no migration of contaminants out of the 
unit.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1202  Closure and post-closure care.

    (a) At closure of a magazine or unit which stored hazardous waste 
under this subpart, the owner or operator must remove or decontaminate 
all waste residues, contaminated containment system components, 
contaminated subsoils, and structures and equipment contaminated with 
waste, and manage them as hazardous waste unless Sec. 261.3(d) of this 
chapter applies. The closure plan, closure activities, cost estimates 
for closure, and financial responsibility for magazines or

[[Page 548]]

units must meet all of the requirements specified in subparts G and H of 
this part, except that the owner or operator may defer closure of the 
unit as long as it remains in service as a munitions or explosives 
magazine or storage unit.
    (b) If, after removing or decontaminating all residues and making 
all reasonable efforts to effect removal or decontamination of 
contaminated components, subsoils, structures, and equipment as required 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the owner or operator finds that not 
all contaminated subsoils can be practicably removed or decontaminated, 
he or she must close the facility and perform post-closure care in 
accordance with the closure and post-closure requirements that apply to 
landfills (40 CFR 264.310).

                         Appendices to Part 265

           Appendix I to Part 265--Recordkeeping Instructions

    The recordkeeping provisions of Sec. 265.73 specify that an owner or 
operator must keep a written operating record at his facility. This 
appendix provides additional instructions for keeping portions of the 
operating record. See Sec. 265.73(b) for additional recordkeeping 
requirements.
    The following information must be recorded, as it becomes available, 
and maintained in the operating record until closure of the facility in 
the following manner:
    Records of each hazardous waste received, treated, stored, or 
disposed of at the facility which include the following:
    (1) A description by its common name and the EPA Hazardous Waste 
Number(s) from part 261 of this chapter which apply to the waste. The 
waste description also must include the waste's physical form, i.e., 
liquid, sludge, solid, or contained gas. If the waste is not listed in 
part 261, subpart D, of this chapter, the description also must include 
the process that produced it (for example, solid filter cake from 
production of ______, EPA Hazardous Waste Number W051).
    Each hazardous waste listed in part 261, subpart D, of this chapter, 
and each hazardous waste characteristic defined in part 261, subpart C, 
of this chapter, has a four-digit EPA Hazardous Waste Number assigned to 
it. This number must be used for recordkeeping and reporting purposes. 
Where a hazardous waste contains more than one listed hazardous waste, 
or where more than one hazardous waste characteristic applies to the 
waste, the waste description must include all applicable EPA Hazardous 
Waste Numbers.
    (2) The estimated or manifest-reported weight, or volume and 
density, where applicable, in one of the units of measure specified in 
Table 1; and

                                 Table 1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Unit of measure                          Code \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gallons....................................  G
Gallons per Hour...........................  E
Gallons per Day............................  U
Liters.....................................  L
Liters Per Hour............................  H
Liters Per Day.............................  V
Short Tons Per Hour........................  D
Metric Tons Per Hour.......................  W
Short Tons Per Day.........................  N
Metric Tons Per Day........................  S
Pounds Per Hour............................  J
Kilograms Per Hour.........................  R
Cubic Yards................................  Y
Cubic Meters...............................  C
Acres......................................  B
Acre-feet..................................  A
Hectares...................................  Q
Hectare-meter..............................  F
Btu's per Hour.............................  I
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Single digit symbols are used here for data processing purposes.

    (3) The method(s) (by handling code(s) as specified in Table 2) and 
date(s) of treatment, storage, or disposal.

  Table 2.--Handling Codes for Treatment, Storage and Disposal Methods

    Enter the handling code(s) listed below that most closely represents 
the technique(s) used at the facility to treat, store or dispose of each 
quantity of hazardous waste received.

                               1. Storage

S01  Container (barrel, drum, etc.)
S02  Tank
S03  Waste Pile
S04  Surface Impoundment
S05  Drip Pad
S06  Containment Building (Storage)
S99  Other Storage (specify)

                              2. Treatment

(a)  Thermal Treatment--

T06  Liquid injection incinerator
T07  Rotary kiln incinerator
T08  Fluidized bed incinerator
T09  Multiple hearth incinerator
T10  Infrared furnace incinerator
T11  Molten salt destructor
T12  Pyrolysis
T13  Wet Air oxidation
T14  Calcination
T15  Microwave discharge
T18  Other (specify)

(b)  Chemical Treatment--

T19  Absorption mound
T20  Absorption field
T21  Chemical fixation

[[Page 549]]

T22  Chemical oxidation
T23  Chemical precipitation
T24  Chemical reduction
T25  Chlorination
T26  Chlorinolysis
T27  Cyanide destruction
T28  Degradation
T29  Detoxification
T30  Ion exchange
T31  Neutralization
T32  Ozonation
T33  Photolysis
T34  Other (specify)

(c)  Physical Treatment--
    (1) Separation of components

T35  Centrifugation
T36  Clarification
T37  Coagulation
T38  Decanting
T39  Encapsulation
T40  Filtration
T41  Flocculation
T42  Flotation
T43  Foaming
T44  Sedimentation
T45  Thickening
T46  Ultrafiltration
T47  Other (specify)

    (2) Removal of Specific Components

T48  Absorption-molecular sieve
T49  Activated carbon
T50  Blending
T51  Catalysis
T52  Crystallization
T53  Dialysis
T54  Distillation
T55  Electrodialysis
T56  Electrolysis
T57  Evaporation
T58  High gradient magnetic separation
T59  Leaching
T60  Liquid ion exchange
T61  Liquid-liquid extraction
T62  Reverse osmosis
T63  Solvent recovery
T64  Stripping
T65  Sand filter
T66  Other (specify)

    (d)  Biological Treatment

T67  Activated sludge
T68  Aerobic lagoon
T69  Aerobic tank
T70  Anaerobic tank
T71  Composting
T72  Septic tank
T73  Spray irrigation
T74  Thickening filter
T75  Tricking filter
T76  Waste stabilization pond
T77  Other (specify)
T78  [Reserved]
T79  [Reserved]

    (e)  Boilers and Industrial Furnaces

T80  Boiler
T81  Cement Kiln
T82  Lime Kiln
T83  Aggregate Kiln
T84  Phosphate Kiln
T85  Coke Oven
T86  Blast Furnace
T87  Smelting, Melting, or Refining Furnace
T88  Titanium Dioxide Chloride Process Oxidation Reactor
T89  Methane Reforming Furnace
T90  Pulping Liquor Recovery Furnace
T91  Combustion Device Used in the Recovery of Sulfur Values From Spent 
          Sulfuric Acid
T92  Halogen Acid Furnaces
T93  Other Industrial Furnaces Listed in 40 CFR 260.10 (specify)

(f)  Other Treatment

T94  Containment Building (Treatment)

                               3. Disposal

D79  Underground Injection
D80  Landfill
D81  Land Treatment
D82  Ocean Disposal
D83  Surface Impoundment (to be closed as a landfill)
D99  Other Disposal (specify)

                      4. Miscellaneous (Subpart X)

X01  Open Burning/Open Detonation
X02  Mechanical Processing
X03  Thermal Unit
X04  Geologic Repository
X99  Other Subpart X (specify)
[45 FR 33232, May 19, 1980, as amended at 59 FR 13892, Mar. 24, 1994]

                   Appendix II to Part 265 [Reserved]

      

 Appendix III to Part 265--EPA Interim Primary Drinking Water Standards

      

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Parameter                       Maximum level (mg/l)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arsenic..................................  0.05
Barium...................................  1.0
Cadmium..................................  0.01
Chromium.................................  0.05
Fluoride.................................  1.4-2.4
Lead.....................................  0.05
Mercury..................................  0.002
Nitrate (as N)...........................  10
Selenium.................................  0.01
Silver...................................  0.05
Endrin...................................  0.0002
Lindane..................................  0.004
Methoxychlor.............................  0.1
Toxaphene................................  0.005
2,4-D....................................  0.1
2,4,5-TP Silver..........................  0.01
Radium...................................  5 pCi/1
Gross Alpha..............................  15 pCi/1
Gross Beta...............................  4 millirem/yr
Turbidity................................  1/TU
Coliform Bacteria........................  1/100 ml
------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Comment: Turbidity is applicable only to surface water supplies.]


[[Page 550]]

             Appendix IV to Part 265--Tests for Significance

    As required in Sec. 265.93(b) the owner or operator must use the 
Student's t-test to determine statistically significant changes in the 
concentration or value of an indicator parameter in periodic ground-
water samples when compared to the initial background concentration or 
value of that indicator parameter. The comparison must consider 
individually each of the wells in the monitoring system. For three of 
the indicator parameters (specific conductance, total organic carbon, 
and total organic halogen) a single-tailed Student's t-test must be used 
to test at the 0.01 level of significance for significant increases over 
background. The difference test for pH must be a two-tailed Student's t-
test at the overall 0.01 level of significance.
    The student's t-test involves calculation of the value of a t-
statistic for each comparison of the mean (average) concentration or 
value (based on a minimum of four replicate measurements) of an 
indicator parameter with its initial background concentration or value. 
The calculated value of the t-statistic must then be compared to the 
value of the t-statistic found in a table for t-test of significance at 
the specified level of significance. A calculated value of t which 
exceeds the value of t found in the table indicates a statistically 
significant change in the concentration or value of the indicator 
parameter.
    Formulae for calculation of the t-statistic and tables for t-test of 
significance can be found in most introductory statistics texts.

   Appendix V to Part 265--Examples of Potentially Incompatible Waste

    Many hazardous wastes, when mixed with other waste or materials at a 
hazardous waste facility, can produce effects which are harmful to human 
health and the environment, such as (1) heat or pressure, (2) fire or 
explosion, (3) violent reaction, (4) toxic dusts, mists, fumes, or 
gases, or (5) flammable fumes or gases.
    Below are examples of potentially incompatible wastes, waste 
components, and materials, along with the harmful consequences which 
result from mixing materials in one group with materials in another 
group. The list is intended as a guide to owners or operators of 
treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, and to enforcement and 
permit granting officials, to indicate the need for special precautions 
when managing these potentially incompatible waste materials or 
components.
    This list is not intended to be exhaustive. An owner or operator 
must, as the regulations require, adequately analyze his wastes so that 
he can avoid creating uncontrolled substances or reactions of the type 
listed below, whether they are listed below or not.
    It is possible for potentially incompatible wastes to be mixed in a 
way that precludes a reaction (e.g., adding acid to water rather than 
water to acid) or that neutralizes them (e.g., a strong acid mixed with 
a strong base), or that controls substances produced (e.g., by 
generating flammable gases in a closed tank equipped so that ignition 
cannot occur, and burning the gases in an incinerator).
    In the lists below, the mixing of a Group A material with a Group B 
material may have the potential consequence as noted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Group 1-A                            Group 1-B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acetylene sludge                         Acid sludge
Akaline caustic liquids                  Acid and water
Alkaline cleaner                         Battery acid
Alkaline corrosive liquids               Chemical cleaners
Alkaline corrosive battery fluid         Electrolyte, acid
Caustic wastewater                       Etching acid liquid or solvent
Lime sludge and other corrosive
 alkalines
Lime wastewater                          Pickling liquor and other
                                          corrosive acids
Lime and water                           Spent acid
Spent caustic                            Spent mixed acid
                                         Spent sulfuric acid
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Potential consequences: Heat generation; violent reaction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Group 2-A                            Group 2-B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aluminum                                 Any waste in Group 1-A or 1-B
Beryllium
Calcium
Lithium
Magnesium
Potassium
Sodium
Zinc powder
Other reactive metals and metal
 hydrides
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Potential consequences: Fire or explosion; generation of flammable 
hydrogen gas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Group 3-A                            Group 3-B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alcohols                                 Any concentrated waste in
                                          Groups 1-A or 1-B
Water                                    Calcium
                                         Lithium
                                         Metal hydrides
                                         Potassium
                                         SO<INF>2Cl<INF>2, SOCl<INF>2, PCl<INF>3, CH<INF>3SiCl<INF>3
                                         Other water-reactive waste
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Potential consequences: Fire, explosion, or heat generation; 
generation of flammable or toxic gases.

[[Page 551]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Group 4-A                            Group 4-B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alcohols                                 Concentrated Group 1-A or 1-B
                                          wastes
Aldehydes                                Group 2-A wastes
Halogenated hydrocarbons
Nitrated hydrocarbons
Unsaturated hydrocarbons
Other reactive organic compounds and
 solvents
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Potential consequences: Fire, explosion, or violent reaction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Group 5-A                            Group 5-B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spent cyanide and sulfide solutions      Group 1-B wastes
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Potential consequences: Generation of toxic hydrogen cyanide or 
hydrogen sulfide gas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Group 6-A                            Group 6-B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chlorates                                Acetic acid and other organic
                                          acids
Chlorine                                 Concentrated mineral acids
Chlorites                                Group 2-A wastes
Chromic acid                             Group 4-A wastes
Hyphochlorites                           Other flammable and combustible
                                          wastes
Nitrates
Nitric acid, fuming
Perchlorates
Permanganates
Peroxides
Other strong oxidizers
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Potential consequences: Fire, explosion, or violent reaction.

    Source: ``Law, Regulations, and Guidelines for Handling of Hazardous 
Waste.'' California Department of Health, February 1975.

 Appendix VI to Part 265--Compounds With Henry's Law Constant Less Than 
                                 0.1 Y/X

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Compound name                           CAS No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acetaldol..................................................     107-89-1
Acetamide..................................................      60-35-5
2-Acetylaminofluorene......................................      53-96-3
3-Acetyl-5-hydroxypiperidine...............................
3-Acetylpiperidine.........................................     618-42-8
1-Acetyl-2-thiourea........................................     591-08-2
Acrylamide.................................................      79-06-1
Acrylic acid...............................................      79-10-7
Adenine....................................................      73-24-5
Adipic acid................................................     124-04-9
Adiponitrile...............................................     111-69-3
Alachlor...................................................   15972-60-8
Aldicarb...................................................     116-06-3
Ametryn....................................................     834-12-8
4-Aminobiphenyl............................................      92-67-1
4-Aminopyridine............................................     504-24-5
Aniline....................................................      62-53-3
o-Anisidine................................................      90-04-0
Anthraquinone..............................................      84-65-1
Atrazine...................................................    1912-24-9
Benzenearsonic acid........................................      98-05-5
Benzenesulfonic acid.......................................      98-11-3
Benzidine..................................................      92-87-5
Benzo(a)anthracene.........................................      56-55-3
Benzo(k)fluoranthene.......................................     207-08-9
Benzoic acid...............................................      65-85-0
Benzo(g,h,i)perylene.......................................     191-24-2
Benzo(a)pyrene.............................................      50-32-8
Benzyl alcohol.............................................     100-51-6
gamma-BHC..................................................      58-89-9
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate.................................     117-81-7
Bromochloromethyl acetate..................................
Bromoxynil.................................................    1689-84-5
Butyric acid...............................................     107-92-6
Caprolactam (hexahydro-2H-azepin-2-one)....................     105-60-2
Catechol (o-dihydroxybenzene)..............................     120-80-9
Cellulose..................................................    9004-34-6
Cell wall..................................................
Chlorhydrin (3-Chloro-1,2-propanediol).....................      96-24-2
Chloroacetic acid..........................................      79-11-8
2-Chloroacetophenone.......................................      93-76-5
p-Chloroaniline............................................     106-47-8
p-Chlorobenzophenone.......................................     134-85-0

[[Page 552]]

Chlorobenzilate............................................     510-15-6
p-Chloro-m-cresol (6-chloro-m-cresol)......................      59-50-7
3-Chloro-2,5-diketopyrrolidine.............................
Chloro-1,2-ethane diol.....................................
4-Chlorophenol.............................................     106-48-9
Chlorophenol polymers (2-chlorophenol & 4-chlorophenol)....    95-57-8 &
                                                                106-48-9
1-(o-Chlorophenyl)thiourea.................................    5344-82-1
Chrysene...................................................     218-01-9
Citric acid................................................      77-92-9
Creosote...................................................    8001-58-9
m-Cresol...................................................     108-39-4
o-Cresol...................................................      95-48-7
p-Cresol...................................................     106-44-5
Cresol (mixed isomers).....................................    1319-77-3
4-Cumylphenol..............................................     27576-86
Cyanide....................................................      57-12-5
4-Cyanomethyl benzoate.....................................
Diazinon...................................................     333-41-5
Dibenzo(a,h)anthracene.....................................      53-70-3
Dibutylphthalate...........................................      84-74-2
2,5-Dichloroaniline (N,N'-dichloroaniline).................      95-82-9
2,6-Dichlorobenzonitrile11.................................    1194-65-6
2,6-Dichloro-4-nitroaniline................................      99-30-9
2,5-Dichlorophenol.........................................     333-41-5
3,4-Dichlorotetrahydrofuran................................      3511-19
Dichlorvos (DDVP)..........................................        62737
Diethanolamine.............................................     111-42-2
N,N-Diethylaniline.........................................      91-66-7
Diethylene glycol..........................................     111-46-6
Diethylene glycol dimethyl ether (dimethyl Carbitol).......     111-96-6
Diethylene glycol monobutyl ether (butyl Carbitol).........     112-34-5
Diethylene glycol monoethyl ether acetate (Carbitol
 acetate)..................................................     112-15-2
Diethylene glycol monoethyl ether (Carbitol Cellosolve)....     111-90-0
Diethylene glycol monomethyl ether (methyl Carbitol).......     111-77-3
N,N'-Diethylhydrazine......................................    1615-80-1
Diethyl (4-methylumbelliferyl) thionophosphate.............     299-45-6
Diethyl phosphorothioate...................................     126-75-0
N,N'-Diethylpropionamide...................................   15299-99-7
Dimethoate.................................................      60-51-5
2,3-Dimethoxystrychnidin-10-one............................     357-57-3
4-Dimethylaminoazobenzene..................................      60-11-7
7,12-Dimethylbenz(a)anthracene.............................      57-97-6
3,3-Dimethylbenzidine......................................     119-93-7
Dimethylcarbamoyl chloride.................................      79-44-7
Dimethyldisulfide..........................................     624-92-0
Dimethylformamide..........................................      68-12-2
1,1-Dimethylhydrazine......................................      57-14-7
Dimethylphthalate..........................................     131-11-3
Dimethylsulfone............................................      67-71-0
Dimethylsulfoxide..........................................      67-68-5
4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol.......................................     534-52-1
1,2-Diphenylhydrazine......................................     122-66-7
Dipropylene glycol (1,1'-oxydi-2-propanol).................     110-98-5
Endrin.....................................................      72-20-8
Epinephrine................................................      51-43-4
mono-Ethanolamine..........................................     141-43-5
Ethyl carbamate (urethane).................................      5-17-96
Ethylene glycol............................................     107-21-1
Ethylene glycol monobutyl ether (butyl Cellosolve).........     111-76-2
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether (Cellosolve)...............     110-80-5
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether acetate (Cellosolve
 acetate)..................................................     111-15-9
Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (methyl Cellosolve).......     109-86-4
Ethylene glycol monophenyl ether (phenyl Cellosolve).......     122-99-6
Ethylene glycol monopropyl ether (propyl Cellosolve).......    2807-30-9
Ethylene thiourea (2-imidazolidinethione)..................      9-64-57
4-Ethylmorpholine..........................................     100-74-3
3-Ethylphenol..............................................     620-17-7
Fluoroacetic acid, sodium salt.............................      62-74-8
Formaldehyde...............................................      50-00-0
Formamide..................................................      75-12-7
Formic acid................................................      64-18-6
Fumaric acid...............................................     110-17-8
Glutaric acid..............................................     110-94-1

[[Page 553]]

Glycerin (Glycerol)........................................      56-81-5
Glycidol...................................................     556-52-5
Glycinamide................................................     598-41-4
Glyphosate.................................................    1071-83-6
Guthion....................................................      86-50-0
Hexamethylene-1,6-diisocyanate (1,6-diisocyanatohexane)....     822-06-0
Hexamethyl phosphoramide...................................     680-31-9
Hexanoic acid..............................................     142-62-1
Hydrazine..................................................     302-01-2
Hydrocyanic acid...........................................      74-90-8
Hydroquinone...............................................     123-31-9
Hydroxy-2-propionitrile (hydracrylonitrile)................     109-78-4
Indeno (1,2,3-cd) pyrene...................................     193-39-5
Lead acetate...............................................     301-04-2
Lead subacetate (lead acetate, monobasic)..................    1335-32-6
Leucine....................................................      61-90-5
Malathion..................................................     121-75-5
Maleic acid................................................     110-16-7
Maleic anhydride...........................................     108-31-6
Mesityl oxide..............................................     141-79-7
Methane sulfonic acid......................................      75-75-2
Methomyl...................................................   16752-77-5
p-Methoxyphenol............................................     150-76-5
Methyl acrylate............................................      96-33-3
4,4'-Methylene-bis-(2-chloroaniline).......................     101-14-4
4,4'-Methylenediphenyl diisocyanate (diphenyl methane
 diisocyanate).............................................     101-68-8
4,4'-Methylenedianiline....................................     101-77-9
Methylene diphenylamine (MDA)..............................
5-Methylfurfural...........................................     620-02-0
Methylhydrazine............................................      60-34-4
Methyliminoacetic acid.....................................
Methyl methane sulfonate...................................      66-27-3
1-Methyl-2-methoxyaziridine................................
Methylparathion............................................     298-00-0
Methyl sulfuric acid (sulfuric acid, dimethyl ester).......      77-78-1
4-Methylthiophenol.........................................     106-45-6
Monomethylformamide (N-methylformamide)....................     123-39-7
Nabam......................................................     142-59-6
alpha-Naphthol.............................................      90-15-3
beta-Naphthol..............................................     135-19-3
alpha-Naphthylamine........................................     134-32-7
beta-Naphthylamine.........................................      91-59-8
Neopentyl glycol (dimethylolpropane).......................     126-30-7
Niacinamide................................................      98-92-0
o-Nitroaniline.............................................      88-74-4
Nitroglycerin..............................................      55-63-0
2-Nitrophenol..............................................      88-75-5
4-Nitrophenol..............................................     100-02-7
N-Nitrosodimethylamine.....................................      62-75-9
Nitrosoguanidine...........................................     674-81-7
N-Nitroso-n-methylurea.....................................     684-93-5
N-Nitrosomorpholine (4-nitrosomorpholine)..................      59-89-2
Oxalic acid................................................     144-62-7
Parathion..................................................      56-38-2
Pentaerythritol............................................     115-77-5
Phenacetin.................................................      62-44-2
Phenol.....................................................     108-95-2
Phenylacetic acid..........................................     103-82-2
m-Phenylene diamine........................................     108-45-2
o-Phenylene diamine........................................      95-54-5
p-Phenylene diamine........................................     106-50-3
Phenyl mercuric acetate....................................      62-38-4
Phorate....................................................     298-02-2
Phthalic anhydride.........................................      85-44-9
alpha-Picoline (2-methyl pyridine).........................     109-06-8
1,3-Propane sulfone........................................    1120-71-4
beta-Propiolactone.........................................      57-57-8
Proporur (Baygon)..........................................
Propylene glycol...........................................      57-55-6
Pyrene.....................................................     129-00-0
Pyridinium bromide.........................................   39416-48-3
Quinoline..................................................      91-22-5
Quinone (p-benzoquinone)...................................     106-51-4
Resorcinol.................................................     108-46-3

[[Page 554]]

Simazine...................................................     122-34-9
Sodium acetate.............................................     127-09-3
Sodium formate.............................................     141-53-7
Strychnine.................................................      57-24-9
Succinic acid..............................................     110-15-6
Succinimide................................................     123-56-8
Sulfanilic acid............................................     121-47-1
Terephthalic acid..........................................     100-21-0
Tetraethyldithiopyrophosphate..............................    3689-24-5
Tetraethylenepentamine.....................................     112-57-2
Thiofanox..................................................   39196-18-4
Thiosemicarbazide..........................................      79-19-6
2,4-Toluenediamine.........................................      95-80-7
2,6-Toluenediamine.........................................     823-40-5
3,4-Toluenediamine.........................................     496-72-0
2,4-Toluene diisocyanate...................................     584-84-9
p-Toluic acid..............................................      99-94-5
m-Toluidine................................................     108-44-1
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane......................      76-13-1
Triethanolamine............................................     102-71-6
Triethylene glycol dimethyl ether..........................
Tripropylene glycol........................................   24800-44-0
Warfarin...................................................      81-81-2
3,4-Xylenol (3,4-dimethylphenol)...........................      95-65-8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[62 FR 64668, Dec. 8, 1997]
[[Page 555]]

<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>



  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.
  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  Table of OMB Control Numbers
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 557]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                      (Revised as of July 1, 1998)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


40 CFR (PARTS 260 TO 265): SOLID WASTES

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                                                  40 CFR


American Petroleum Institute (API)

  1220 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20005
API Publication 2517, Third Edition, February           260.11; 265.1084
  1989, Evaporative Loss From External Floating-
  Roof Tanks.


American Society for Testing Materials

  1916 Race St., Philadelphia, PA 19103
ASTM D 93-80 Flash Point by Pennsky-Martens Closed          261.21(a)(1)
  Tester.
ASTM D 1946-82 Standard Method for Analysis of               260.11(a); 
  Reformed Gas by Gas Chromatography.               264.1033(e)(2); and 
                                                          265.1033(e)(2)
ASTM D 2382-83 Standard Test Method for Heat of              260.11(a); 
  Combustion of Hydrocarbon Fuels by Bomb           264.1033(e)(2); and 
  Calorimeter (High-Precision Method).                    265.1033(e)(2)
ASTM D 2879-92, Standard Test Method for Vapor          260.11; 265.1084
  Pressure-Temperature Relationship and Initial 
  Decomposition Temperature of Liquids by 
  Isoteniscope.
ASTM D 3278-78 Flash Point for Liquids by                   261.21(a)(1)
  Setaflash Closed Tester.
ASTM Standard Test Methods for Preparing Refuse-                  260.11
  Derived Fuel (RDF) Samples for Analyses of 
  Metals, ASTM E 926-88, Test Method C--Bomb, Acid 
  Digestion Method.


Environmental Protection Agency

  Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, 
  Waste Characterization Branch, Washington, DC 
  20460
Air Pollution Training Institute Course 415:                 260.11(a); 
  Control of Gaseous Emissions, EPA Publication    264.1035(b)(4)(iii); 
  450/2-81-005, December 1981.                     265.1035(b)(4)(iii); 
                                                      270.24(d)(3); and 
                                                            270.25(e)(3)
Screening Procedures for Estimating the Air                    260.11(a)
Quality Impact of Stationary Sources, August 
[[Page 558]]50/4-88-010. Made available from the 
  National Technical Information Service, 5285 
Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/           260.11(a); 
  Chemical Methods, EPA Publication SW-846 [Third  261.22(a)(1) and (2); 
  Edition (November, 1986), as amended by Updates  Part 261, Appendices 
  I (July 1992), II (September 1994), IIA (August           II and III; 
  1993), and IIB (January 1995)]. The Third 03)         265.1084(a)(3), 
  Edition of SW-846 and Updates I, II, IIA, and      (b)(3) and (c)(3); 
  IIB (document number 955-001-00000-1) are                     270.6(a)
  available from the Superintendent of Documents, 
  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 
  20402, (202) 512-1800.
Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/             260.11(a)
  Chemical Methods, EPA Publication SW-846 [Third 
  Edition (November, 1986), as amended by Updates 
  I (July 1992), II (September 1994), IIA (August 
  1993), IIB (January 1995), and III (December 
  1996)]. The Third Edition of SW-846 and Updates 
  I, II, IIA, and IIB (document number 955-001-
  00000-1) are available from the Superintendent 
  of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
  Washington, DC 20402, (202) 512-1800.
47 analytical testing methods contained in Test     260.11(a); Appendix 
  Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/                      III
  Chemical Methods (SW-846), 3rd Edition, November 
  1986 and Revision I, December 1987. The Third 
  Edition of SW-846 and Revision I are available 
  from the Government Printing Office, 
  Superintendent of Documents, Washington, DC 
  20402, (202) 512-1800, as document number 955-
  001-00000-1.


National Fire Protection Association

  1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269-9101, FAX 
  (617) 770-3500
Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, 1981......          264.198(b); 
                                                              265.198(b)


Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

  Environment Directorate 2 rue Andre Pascal 75775 
  Paris Cedex 16, France
OECD Council Decision C(92) 39/Final (Concerning               262.89(e)
  the Control of Transfrontier Movements of Wastes 
  Destined for Recovery Operations), Appendix 3, 
  OECD Green List of Wastes (revised May 1994); 
  Appendix 4, OECD Amber List of Wastes (revised 
  May 1993), and Appendix 5, OECD Red List of 
  Wastes (revised May 1993).



[[Page 559]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 29, 1998)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)

[[Page 560]]

      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture

[[Page 561]]

         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Northeast Dairy Compact Commission (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]

[[Page 562]]

    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 563]]

       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 564]]

      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 565]]

        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

[[Page 566]]

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--deral 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)

[[Page 567]]

        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)

[[Page 568]]

      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense

[[Page 569]]

       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

[[Page 570]]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)

[[Page 571]]

            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 572]]

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 573]]

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)

[[Page 574]]

        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 575]]

        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 577]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 29, 1998)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development, United      22, II
     States
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
   Compliance Board
[[Page 578]]

Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Corporation for National and Community Service    45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII

[[Page 579]]

  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII

[[Page 580]]

Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
     of Certain Employees
[[Page 581]]

  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II

[[Page 582]]

  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, United States        22, II; 48, 7
       Agency for
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II

[[Page 583]]

Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Dairy Compact Commission                7, XIII
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
[[Page 584]]

  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A

[[Page 585]]

  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances            41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S., Scholarship Foundation          45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 587]]

                                     

                                     


<R03>
                       Table of OMB Control Numbers

<R04>

         PART 9--OMB APPROVALS UNDER THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 135 et seq., 136-136y; 15 U.S.C. 2001, 2003, 
2005, 2006, 2601-2671; 21 U.S.C. 331j, 346a, 348; 31 U.S.C. 9701; 33 
U.S.C. 1251 et seq., 1311, 1313d, 1314, 1318, 1321, 1326, 1330, 1342, 
1344, 1345 (d) and (e), 1361; E.O. 11735, 38 FR 21243, 3 CFR, 1971-1975 
Comp. p. 973; 42 U.S.C. 241, 242b, 243, 246, 300f, 300g, 300g-1, 300g-2, 
300g-3, 300g-4, 300g-5, 300g-6, 300j-1, 300j-2, 300j-3, 300j-4, 300j-9, 
1857 et seq., 6901-6992k, 7401-7671q, 7542, 9601-9657, 11023, 11048.

Sec. 9.1  OMB approvals under the Paperwork Reduction Act.

    This part consolidates the display of control numbers assigned to 
collections of information in certain EPA regulations by the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA). 
This part fulfills the requirements of section 3507(f) of the PRA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            OMB control
                     40 CFR citation                            No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Public Information
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 2, subpart B.......................................       2050-0143
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Environmental Impact Assessment of Nongovernmental Activities in
                               Antarctica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.5-8.10................................................       2020-0007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   General Regulation for Assistance Programs for Other than State and
                            Local Governments
------------------------------------------------------------------------
30.400..................................................       2030-0020
30.500..................................................       2030-0020
30.501..................................................       2030-0020
30.503..................................................       2030-0020
30.505..................................................       2030-0020
30.510..................................................       2030-0020
30.520..................................................       2030-0020
30.530..................................................       2030-0020
30.531..................................................       2030-0020
30.532..................................................       2030-0020
30.535..................................................       2030-0020
30.1002.................................................       2030-0020
30.1003.................................................       2030-0020
30.1200.................................................       2030-0020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative
                Agreements to State and Local Governments
------------------------------------------------------------------------
31.10...................................................       2030-0020
31.20-31.21.............................................       2030-0020
31.31-31.32.............................................       2030-0020
31.36(g)-31.36(h).......................................       2030-0020
31.40...................................................       2030-0020
31.42...................................................       2030-0020
31.6....................................................       2030-0020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Procurement Under Assistance Agreements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
33.110..................................................       2030-0003
33.211..................................................       2030-0003
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       State and Local Assistance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
35.2015.................................................       2040-0027
35.2025.................................................       2040-0027
35.2034.................................................       2040-0027
35.2040.................................................       2040-0027
35.2105-35.2107.........................................       2040-0027
35.2110.................................................       2040-0027
35.2114.................................................       2040-0027
35.2118.................................................       2040-0027
35.2120.................................................       2040-0027
35.2127.................................................       2040-0027
35.2130.................................................       2040-0027
35.2140.................................................       2040-0027
35.2211-35.2212.........................................       2040-0027
35.2215-35.2216.........................................       2040-0027
35.2218.................................................       2040-0027
35.3010.................................................       2040-0095
35.3030.................................................       2040-0095
35.3130.................................................       2040-0118
35.3135.................................................       2040-0118
35.3140.................................................       2040-0118
35.3145.................................................       2040-0118
35.3150.................................................       2040-0118
35.3155.................................................       2040-0118
35.3160.................................................       2040-0118
35.3165.................................................       2040-0118
35.3170.................................................       2040-0118
35.6055(a)(2)...........................................       2010-0020
35.6055(b)(1)...........................................       2010-0020
35.6055(b)(2)(i)-(ii)...................................       2010-0020
35.6105(a)(2)(i)-(v), (vii).............................       2010-0020
35.6110(b)(2)...........................................       2010-0020
35.6120.................................................       2010-0020
35.6145.................................................       2010-0020
35.6155(a), (c).........................................       2010-0020
35.6230(a), (c).........................................       2010-0020
35.6300(a)(3)...........................................       2010-0020
35.6315(c)..............................................       2010-0020
35.6320.................................................       2010-0020
35.6340(a)..............................................       2010-0020

[[Page 588]]

35.6350.................................................       2010-0020
35.6500.................................................       2010-0020
35.6550(a)(1)(ii).......................................       2010-0020
35.6550(b)(1)(iii)......................................       2010-0020
35.6550(b)(2)(i)........................................       2010-0020
35.6585.................................................       2010-0020
35.6595(a)..............................................       2010-0020
35.6600(a)..............................................       2010-0020
35.6650.................................................       2010-0020
35.6655.................................................       2010-0020
35.6660.................................................       2010-0020
35.6665(a)..............................................       2010-0020
35.6700.................................................       2010-0020
35.6705.................................................       2010-0020
35.6710.................................................       2010-0020
35.6805.................................................       2010-0020
35.6815(a), (d), (e)....................................       2010-0020
35.9000-35.9070.........................................       2040-0138
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Indian Tribes: Air Quality Planning and Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
49.6....................................................       2060-0306
49.7....................................................       2060-0306
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Requirements for Preparation, Adoption, and Submittal of Implementation
                                  Plans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
51.160-51.166...........................................       2060-0003
51.321-51.323...........................................       2060-0088
51.353-51.354...........................................       2060-0252
51.365-51.366...........................................       2060-0252
51.370-51.371...........................................       2060-0252
51.850-51.860...........................................       2060-0279
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
52.21...................................................       2060-0003
52.741..................................................       2060-0203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Outer Continental Shelf Air Regulations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
55.4-55.8...............................................       2060-0249
55.11-55.14.............................................       2060-0249
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Ambient Air Quality Surveillance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
58.11-58.14.............................................       2060-0084
58.20-58.23.............................................       2060-0084
58.25-58.28.............................................       2060-0084
58.30-58.31.............................................       2060-0084
58.33...................................................       2060-0084
58.35...................................................       2060-0084
58.40-58.41.............................................       2060-0084
58.43...................................................       2060-0084
58.45...................................................       2060-0084
58.50...................................................       2060-0084
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Standards of Performance for New Stationary Sources \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
60.7(d).................................................       2060-0207
60.45-60.47.............................................       2060-0026
60.46a-60.49a...........................................       2060-0023
60.40b..................................................       2060-0072
60.42b..................................................       2060-0072
60.44b-60.49b...........................................       2060-0072
60.42c..................................................       2060-0202
60.44c-60.48c...........................................       2060-0202
60.53-60.54.............................................       2060-0040
60.50a..................................................       2060-0210
60.56a-60.59a...........................................       2060-0210
60.63-60.65.............................................       2060-0025
60.73-60.74.............................................       2060-0019
60.84-60.85.............................................       2060-0041
60.93...................................................       2060-0083
60.104-60.108...........................................       2060-0022
60.113a-60.115a.........................................       2060-0121
60.113b-60.116b.........................................       2060-0074
60.123..................................................       2060-0080
60.133..................................................       2060-0110
60.142-60.144...........................................       2060-0029
60.143a-60.145a.........................................       2060-0029
60.153-60.155...........................................       2060-0035
60.192(b)...............................................       2060-0031
60.194-60.195...........................................       2060-0031
60.203-60.204...........................................       2060-0037
60.213-60.214...........................................       2060-0037
60.223-60.224...........................................       2060-0037
60.233-60.234...........................................       2060-0037
60.243-60.244...........................................       2060-0037
60.253-60.254...........................................       2060-0122
60.273-60.276...........................................       2060-0038
60.273a-60.276a.........................................       2060-0038
60.284-60.286...........................................       2060-0021
60.292-60.293...........................................       2060-0054
60.296..................................................       2060-0054
60.303..................................................       2060-0082
60.310..................................................       2060-0106
60.313-60.316...........................................       2060-0106
60.334-60.335...........................................       2060-0028
60.343-60.344...........................................       2060-0063
60.373-60.374...........................................       2060-0081
60.384-60.386...........................................       2060-0016
60.393-60.396...........................................       2060-0034
60.398..................................................       2060-0034
60.403-60.404...........................................       2060-0111
60.433-60.435...........................................       2060-0105
60.443-60.447...........................................       2060-0004
60.453-60.456...........................................       2060-0108
60.463-60.466...........................................       2060-0107
60.473-60.474...........................................       2060-0002
60.482-2................................................       2060-0012
60.482-3................................................       2060-0012
60.482-4................................................       2060-0012
60.482-7................................................       2060-0012
60.482-8................................................       2060-0012
60.482-10...............................................       2060-0012
60.483-1................................................       2060-0012
60.483-2................................................       2060-0012
60.484-60.487...........................................       2060-0012
60.493-60.496...........................................       2060-0001
60.502-60.503...........................................       2060-0006
60.505..................................................       2060-0006
60.530-60.536...........................................       2060-0161
60.537(a)(1)-(2), (a)(4)-(5), (b)-(i)...................       2060-0161
60.538-60.539...........................................       2060-0161
60.543(b)(2)-(4), (c)-(n)...............................       2060-0156
60.544..................................................       2060-0156
60.545(a)-(d), (f)......................................       2060-0156
60.546(a)-(e), (f)(4)-(6), (g)-(j)......................       2060-0156
60.547..................................................       2060-0156
60.562-1................................................       2060-0145
60.562-2................................................       2060-0145
60.563-60.565...........................................       2060-0145
60.580..................................................       2060-0073
60.583-60.585...........................................       2060-0073
60.592-60.593...........................................       2060-0067
60.603-60.604...........................................       2060-0059
60.613-60.615...........................................       2060-0197
60.622..................................................       2060-0079
60.624-60.625...........................................       2060-0079
60.632-60.636...........................................       2060-0120
60.640..................................................       2060-0120
60.642-60.644...........................................       2060-0120
60.646-60.647...........................................       2060-0120
60.663-60.665...........................................       2060-0197
60.670..................................................       2060-0050
60.672..................................................       2060-0050

[[Page 589]]

60.674-60.676...........................................       2060-0050
60.683-60.685...........................................       2060-0114
60.692-1................................................       2060-0172
60.692-2................................................       2060-0172
60.692-3................................................       2060-0172
60.692-4................................................       2060-0172
60.692-5................................................       2060-0172
60.693-1................................................       2060-0172
60.693-2................................................       2060-0172
60.695-60.698...........................................       2060-0172
60.703-60.705...........................................       2060-0269
60.710..................................................       2060-0171
60.713-60.717...........................................       2060-0171
60.722-60.725...........................................       2060-0162
60.734-60.736...........................................       2060-0251
60.740..................................................       2060-0181
60.743-60.747...........................................       2060-0181
------------------------------------------------------------------------
      National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants \2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
61.24-61.25.............................................       2060-0191
61.32-61.34.............................................       2060-0092
61.53-61.55.............................................       2060-0097
61.65(b)-(d)............................................       2060-0071
61.67-61.71.............................................       2060-0071
61.93-61.95.............................................       2060-0191
61.103-61.105...........................................       2060-0191
61.107..................................................       2060-0191
61.123-61.124...........................................       2060-0191
61.126..................................................       2060-0191
61.132-61.133...........................................       2060-0185
61.135-61.139...........................................       2060-0185
61.142..................................................       2060-0101
61.144-61.147...........................................       2060-0101
61.149..................................................       2060-0101
61.150-61.155...........................................       2060-0101
61.163-61.165...........................................       2060-0043
61.203..................................................       2060-0191
61.206-61.209...........................................       2060-0191
61.223-61.224...........................................       2060-0191
61.242-1................................................       2060-0068
61.242-2................................................       2060-0068
61.242-3................................................       2060-0068
61.242-4................................................       2060-0068
61.242-7................................................       2060-0068
61.242-8................................................       2060-0068
61.242-10...............................................       2060-0068
61.242-11...............................................       2060-0068
61.243-1................................................       2060-0068
61.243-2................................................       2060-0068
61.244-61.247...........................................       2060-0068
61.253-61.255...........................................       2060-0191
61.271-61.276...........................................       2060-0185
61.300..................................................       2060-0182
61.302-61.305...........................................       2060-0182
61.342..................................................       2060-0183
61.344-61.349...........................................       2060-0183
61.354-61.357...........................................       2060-0183
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source
                             Categories \3\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
63.5(d).................................................       2060-0330
63.52-63.56.............................................       2060-0266
63.72...................................................       2060-0222
63.74-63.79.............................................       2060-0222
63.91-63.96.............................................       2060-0264
63.103..................................................       2060-0282
63.105..................................................       2060-0282
63.117-63.118...........................................       2060-0282
63.122-63.123...........................................       2060-0282
63.129-63.130...........................................       2060-0282
63.146-63.148...........................................       2060-0282
63.151-63.152...........................................       2060-0282
63.181-63.182...........................................       2060-0282
63.302-63.311...........................................       2060-0253
63.322-63.325...........................................       2060-0234
63.345-63.347...........................................       2060-0327
63.363-63.367...........................................       2060-0283
63.403-63.406...........................................       2060-0268
63.420..................................................       2060-0325
63.422-63.428...........................................       2060-0325
63.467-63.468...........................................       2060-0273
63.480-63.506...........................................       2060-0356
63.525-63.528...........................................       2060-0290
63.548-63.550...........................................       2060-0296
63.563-63.567...........................................       2060-0289
63.653..................................................       2060-0340
63.654..................................................       2060-0340
63.703-63.707...........................................       2060-0326
63.752-63.753...........................................       2060-0314
63.787(a)-(b)...........................................       2060-0330
63.788(a)-(c)...........................................       2060-0330
63.806-63.807...........................................       2060-0324
63.829-63.830...........................................       2060-0335
63.846(d)...............................................       2060-0360
63.847(b), (g)..........................................       2060-0360
63.848(d)(5), (e), (f)(5)(ii), (g), (k), (m)............       2060-0360
63.850..................................................       2060-0360
63.1311.................................................       2060-0351
63.1314.................................................       2060-0351
63.1315.................................................       2060-0351
63.1319.................................................       2060-0351
63.1320.................................................       2060-0351
63.1325-63.1332.........................................       2060-0351
63.1335.................................................       2060-0351
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Chemical Accident Prevention Provisions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
68.120(a), (e), and (g).................................       2050-0127
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     State Operating Permit Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
70.3-70.11..............................................       2060-0243
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Federal Operating Permit Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
71.5....................................................       2060-0336
71.6(a),(c),(d),(g).....................................       2060-0336
71.7....................................................       2060-0336
71.9(e)-(j).............................................       2060-0336
71.24-71.26.............................................       2060-0276
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Permits Regulation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
72.7-72.10..............................................       2060-0258
72.14...................................................       2060-0258
72.20-72.25.............................................       2060-0258
72.30-72.33.............................................       2060-0258
72.40-72.44.............................................       2060-0258
72.50-72.51.............................................       2060-0258
72.60-72.69.............................................       2060-0258
72.70-72.74.............................................       2060-0258
72.80-72.85.............................................       2060-0258
72.90-72.96.............................................       2060-0258
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Allowance System
------------------------------------------------------------------------
73.10-73.13.............................................       2060-0261
73.16...................................................       2060-0261
73.18-73.21.............................................       2060-0261
73.30-73.38.............................................       2060-0258
73.50-73.53.............................................       2060-0258
73.70-73.77.............................................       2060-0221
73.80-73.86.............................................       2060-0258
73.90...................................................       2060-0258
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 590]]

                         Sulfur Dioxide Opt-ins
------------------------------------------------------------------------
74.12...................................................       2060-0258
74.14...................................................       2060-0258
74.16...................................................       2060-0258
74.18...................................................       2060-0258
74.20...................................................       2060-0258
74.22...................................................       2060-0258
74.24-74.25.............................................       2060-0258
74.41...................................................       2060-0258
74.43-74.44.............................................       2060-0258
74.46-74.47.............................................       2060-0258
74.60-74.64.............................................       2060-0258
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Continuous Emission Monitoring
------------------------------------------------------------------------
75.4-75.5...............................................       2060-0258
75.10-75.18.............................................       2060-0258
75.20-75.24.............................................       2060-0258
75.30-75.34.............................................       2060-0258
75.40-75.48.............................................       2060-0258
75.50-75.52.............................................       2060-0258
75.53-75.56.............................................       2060-0258
75.60-75.67.............................................       2060-0258
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Nitrogen Oxides Emission Reduction Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
76.8-76.15..............................................       2060-0258
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Excess Emissions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
77.3-77.6...............................................       2060-0258
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Appeal Procedures for Acid Rain Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
78.1-78.20..............................................       2060-0258
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Registration of Fuels and Fuel Additives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
79.10-79.11.............................................       2060-0150
79.20-79.21.............................................       2060-0150
79.31-79.33.............................................       2060-0150
79.51(a), (c), (d), (g), (h)............................       2060-0150
79.52...................................................       2060-0150
79.57(a)(5).............................................       2060-0150
79.57(f)(5).............................................       2060-0150
79.58(e)................................................       2060-0150
79.59(b)-(d)............................................       2060-0150
79.60...................................................       2060-0150
79.61(e)................................................       2060-0150
79.62-79.68.............................................       2060-0297
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
80.20...................................................       2060-0066
80.25...................................................       2060-0066
80.27...................................................       2060-0178
80.29(c)................................................       2060-0308
80.40...................................................       2060-0277
80.46...................................................       2060-0277
80.65...................................................       2060-0277
80.68-80.69.............................................       2060-0277
80.74-80.77.............................................       2060-0277
80.79...................................................       2060-0277
80.83...................................................       2060-0277
80.91-80.93.............................................       2060-0277
80.91-80.94.............................................       2060-0277
80.101-80.106...........................................       2060-0277
80.125..................................................       2060-0277
80.127-80.130...........................................       2060-0277
80.128-80.130...........................................       2060-0277
80.141(c)-(f)...........................................       2060-0275
80.157..................................................       2060-0275
80.158..................................................       2060-0275
80.160..................................................       2060-0275
80.161..................................................       2060-0275
80.162..................................................       2060-0275
80.163(d)(3)............................................       2060-0275
80.164..................................................       2060-0275
80.165..................................................       2060-0275
80.166..................................................       2060-0275
80.167(d)...............................................       2060-0275
80.170..................................................       2060-0275
80.171..................................................       2060-0275
80.173..................................................       2060-0275
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Protection of Stratospheric Ozone
------------------------------------------------------------------------
82.9-82.13..............................................       2060-0170
82.21...................................................       2060-0170
82.36...................................................       2060-0247
82.38...................................................       2060-0247
82.40...................................................       2060-0247
82.42...................................................       2060-0247
82.122..................................................       2060-0259
82.156..................................................       2060-0256
82.160-82.162...........................................       2060-0256
82.164..................................................       2060-0256
82.166..................................................       2060-0256
82.176(a)...............................................       2060-0226
82.176(c)(3)............................................       2060-0226
82.178..................................................       2060-0226
82.180..................................................       2060-0350
82.180(a)(5)............................................       2060-0226
82.180(b)(3)............................................       2060-0226
82.184(c)...............................................       2060-0226
82.184(e)...............................................       2060-0226
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Control of Air Pollution From Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Engines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
85.503..................................................       2060-0104
85.505..................................................       2060-0104
85.1403.................................................       2060-0302
85.1404.................................................       2060-0302
85.1406.................................................       2060-0302
85.1407.................................................       2060-0302
85.1408.................................................       2060-0302
85.1409.................................................       2060-0302
85.1410.................................................       2060-0302
85.1411.................................................       2060-0302
85.1412.................................................       2060-0302
85.1413.................................................       2060-0302
85.1414.................................................       2060-0302
85.1415.................................................       2060-0302
85.1503-85.1507.........................................       2060-0095
85.1509-85.1510.........................................       2060-0095
85.1511(b)-(d), (f).....................................       2060-0095
85.1511(b)(3)...........................................       2060-0007
85.1512.................................................       2060-0095
85.1514-85.1515.........................................       2060-0095
85.1703.................................................       2060-0124
85.1705-85.1706.........................................       2060-0007
85.1901-85.1909.........................................       2060-0048
85.2112-85.2123.........................................       2060-0065
85.2114.................................................       2060-0016
85.2115.................................................       2060-0016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Control of Air Pollution From New and In-Use Motor Vehicles and New and
     In-Use Motor Vehicle Engines: Certification and Test Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
86.004-38...............................................       2060-0104
86.004-40...............................................       2060-0104
86.079-31--86.079-33....................................       2060-0104
86.079-36...............................................       2060-0104
86.079-39...............................................       2060-0104
86.080-12...............................................       2060-0104

[[Page 591]]

86.082-34...............................................       2060-0104
86.085-13...............................................       2060-0104
86.085-37...............................................       2060-0104
86.087-38...............................................       2060-0104
86.090-14...............................................       2060-0104
86.090-21...............................................       2060-0104
86.090-25...............................................       2060-0104
86.090-26...............................................       2060-0104
86.090-27...............................................       2060-0104
86.091-7................................................       2060-0104
86.091-15...............................................       2060-0104
86.091-21...............................................       2060-0104
86.091-23...............................................       2060-0104
86.091-28...............................................       2060-0104
86.091-30...............................................       2060-0104
86.092-14...............................................       2060-0104
86.092-15...............................................       2060-0104
86.092-23...............................................       2060-0104
86.092-24...............................................       2060-0104
86.092-26...............................................       2060-0104
86.092-35...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-7-86.094-9.......................................       2060-0104
86.094-15-86.094-16.....................................       2060-0104
86.094-17...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-18...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-21...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-23...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-24(a)(3)(iii)....................................       2060-0314
86.094-25...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-30...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-35...............................................       2060-0104
86.095-14...............................................       2060-0104
86.095-23...............................................       2060-0104
86.095-24...............................................       2060-0104
86.095-26...............................................       2060-0104
86.095-30...............................................       2060-0104
86.095-35...............................................       2060-0104
86.094-38...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-7................................................       2060-0104
86.096-8................................................       2060-0104
86.096-9................................................       2060-0104
86.096-10...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-14...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-21...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-23...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-24...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-26...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-30...............................................       2060-0104
86.096-35...............................................       2060-0104
86.097-9................................................       2060-0104
86.098-23...............................................       2060-0104
86.098-28...............................................       2060-0104
86.099-8................................................       2060-0104
86.099-9................................................       2060-0104
86.099-10...............................................       2060-0104
86.111-94...............................................       2060-0104
86.113-82...............................................       2060-0104
86.113-87...............................................       2060-0104
86.113-90...............................................       2060-0104
86.113-91...............................................       2060-0104
86.113-94...............................................       2060-0104
86.135-82...............................................       2060-0104
86.135-90...............................................       2060-0104
86.135-94...............................................       2060-0104
86.142-90...............................................       2060-0104
86.144-90...............................................       2060-0104
86.144-94...............................................       2060-0104
86.150-98...............................................       2060-0104
86.336-79...............................................       2060-0104
86.337-79...............................................       2060-0104
86.412-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.414-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.415-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.416-80...............................................       2060-0104
86.421-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.423-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.427-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.428-80...............................................       2060-0104
86.429-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.431-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.432-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.434-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.435-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.436-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.437-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.438-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.439-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.440-78...............................................       2060-0104
86.513-94...............................................       2060-0104
86.537-90...............................................       2060-0104
86.542-90...............................................       2060-0104
86.603-88...............................................       2060-0064
86.604-84...............................................       2060-0064
86.605-88...............................................       2060-0064
86.606-84...............................................       2060-0064
86.607-84...............................................       2060-0064
86.608-88...............................................       2060-0064
86.608-90...............................................       2060-0064
86.608-96...............................................       2060-0104
86.609-84...............................................       2060-0064
86.609-96...............................................       2060-0104
86.612-84...............................................       2060-0064
86.614-84...............................................       2060-0064
86.615-84...............................................       2060-0064
86.709-94...............................................       2060-0104
86.709-99...............................................       2060-0104
86.884-5................................................       2060-0104
86.884-7................................................       2060-0104
86.884-9................................................       2060-0104
86.884-10...............................................       2060-0104
86.884-12...............................................       2060-0104
86.884-13...............................................       2060-0104
86.1003-90..............................................       2060-0064
86.1004-84..............................................       2060-0064
86.1005-90..............................................       2060-0064
86.1006-84..............................................       2060-0064
86.1007-84..............................................       2060-0064
86.1008-90..............................................       2060-0064
86.1008-96..............................................       2060-0104
86.1009-84..............................................       2060-0064
86.1009-96..............................................       2060-0104
86.1012-84..............................................       2060-0064
86.1014-84..............................................       2060-0064
86.1015-87..............................................       2060-0064
86.1106-87..............................................       2060-0132
86.1108-87..............................................       2060-0132
86.1110-87..............................................       2060-0132
86.1111-87..............................................       2060-0104
86.1112-87-86.1115-87...................................       2060-0132
86.1213-85..............................................       2060-0104
86.1213-87..............................................       2060-0104
86.1242-85..............................................       2060-0104
86.1242-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1308-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1310-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1311-94..............................................       2060-0104
86.1313-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1313-87..............................................       2060-0104
86.1313-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1313-91..............................................       2060-0104
86.1313-94..............................................       2060-0104
86.1313-98..............................................       2060-0104
86.1314-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1316-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1316-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1319-84..............................................       2060-0104

[[Page 592]]

86.1319-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1321-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1321-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1323-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1327-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1327-88..............................................       2060-0104
86.1327-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1327-98..............................................       2060-0104
86.1332-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1332-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1334-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1335-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1336-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1340-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1340-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1341-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1341-98..............................................       2060-0104
86.1342-90..............................................       2060-0104
86.1344-94..............................................       2060-0104
86.1413.................................................       2060-0104
86.1427.................................................       2060-0104
86.1432.................................................       2060-0104
86.1434.................................................       2060-0104
86.1437.................................................       2060-0104
86.1442.................................................       2060-0104
86.1542-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1544-84..............................................       2060-0104
86.1705.................................................       2060-0345
86.1707.................................................       2060-0345
86.1708.................................................       2060-0345
86.1709.................................................       2060-0345
86.1710.................................................       2060-0345
86.1712.................................................       2060-0345
86.1713.................................................       2060-0345
86.1714.................................................       2060-0345
86.1717.................................................       2060-0345
86.1721.................................................       2060-0345
86.1723.................................................       2060-0345
86.1724.................................................       2060-0345
86.1725.................................................       2060-0345
86.1726.................................................       2060-0345
86.1728.................................................       2060-0345
86.1734.................................................       2060-0345
86.1735.................................................       2060-0345
86.1770.................................................       2060-0345
86.1771.................................................       2060-0345
86.1776.................................................       2060-0345
86.1777.................................................       2060-0345
86.1778.................................................       2060-0345
86.2500.................................................       2060-0104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Clean-Fuel Vehicles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
88.104-94(a), (c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k)....       2060-0104
88.105-94...............................................       2060-0104
88.204-94(b)(1).........................................       2060-0314
88.204-94(c)............................................       2060-0314
88.305-94...............................................       2060-0104
88.306-94(a), (b) introductory text.....................       2060-0104
88.306-94(b)(1).........................................       2060-0314
88.306-94(b)(2).........................................       2060-0314
88.306-94(b)(4).........................................       2060-0314
88.306-94(c)............................................       2060-0314
88.306-94(f)............................................       2060-0314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Control of Emissions From New and In-Use Nonroad Engines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
89.1....................................................       2060-0124
89.2....................................................       2060-0124
89.114-96-89.120-96.....................................       2060-0287
89.122-96-89.127-96.....................................       2060-0287
89.129-96...............................................       2060-0287
89.203-96-89.207-96.....................................       2060-0287
89.209-96-89.211-96.....................................       2060-0287
89.304-96-89.331-96.....................................       2060-0287
89.404-96-89.424-96.....................................       2060-0287
89.505-89.905...........................................       2060-0064
89.511..................................................       2060-0064
89.512..................................................       2060-0064
89.603-89.605...........................................       2060-0095
89.607-89.610...........................................       2060-0095
89.611..................................................      2060-0007,
                                                               2060-0095
89.612..................................................       2060-0095
89.801..................................................       2060-0048
89.803..................................................       2060-0048
89.903..................................................       2060-0048
89.905..................................................       2060-0007
89.906..................................................       2060-0007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Control of Emissions From New and In-use Nonroad Engines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
90.107-90.108...........................................       2060-0338
90.113..................................................       2060-0338
90.115-90.124...........................................       2060-0338
90.126..................................................       2060-0338
90.304-90.329...........................................       2060-0338
90.404-90.427...........................................       2060-0338
90.505-90.509...........................................       2060-0295
90.511-90.512...........................................       2060-0295
90.604..................................................       2060-0294
90.611-90.613...........................................       2060-0294
90.800..................................................       2060-0048
90.802-90.804...........................................       2060-0048
90.806..................................................       2060-0048
90.903..................................................       2060-0124
90.905-90.906...........................................       2060-0007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Determining Conformity of Federal Actions to State or Federal
                          Implementation Plans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
93.150-93.160...........................................       2060-0279
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Mandatory Patent Licenses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
95.2....................................................       2060-0307
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Oil Pollution Prevention
------------------------------------------------------------------------
112.1-112.7.............................................       2050-0021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Oil Pollution Prevention; Non-Transportation-Related Onshore Facilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
112.20..................................................       2050-0135
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification for Hazardous
                               Substances
------------------------------------------------------------------------
116.4...................................................       2050-0046
117.3...................................................       2050-0046
117.21..................................................       2050-0046
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   EPA Administered Permit Programs: The National Pollutant Discharge
                           Elimination System
------------------------------------------------------------------------
122.21(f)-(l)...........................................      2040-0086,
                                                               2040-0170
122.21(j)(4)............................................       2040-0150
122.21(m)-(p)...........................................      2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0170
122.26(c), (d)..........................................       2040-0086
122.41(h)...............................................      2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0170

[[Page 593]]

122.41(j)...............................................      2040-0009,
                                                              2040-0110,
                                                               2040-0170
122.41(l)...............................................      2040-0110,
                                                              2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0170
122.42(c)...............................................       2040-0086
122.42(a), (b), (l).....................................      2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0170
122.44(g), (i)..........................................      2040-0004,
                                                              2040-0170,
                                                               2040-0110
122.44(r)...............................................       2040-0180
122.45(b)...............................................      2040-0004,
                                                               2040-0110
122.45(b)(4)............................................       2040-0068
122.47(a)...............................................      2040-0110,
                                                               2040-0170
122.47(b)...............................................      2040-0110,
                                                              2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0170
122.48..................................................      2040-0004,
                                                               2040-0170
122.62(a)...............................................      2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0170
122.63..................................................      2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0170
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        State Permit Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
123.21-123.24...........................................      2040-0057,
                                                               2040-0170
123.25..................................................      2040-0004,
                                                              2040-0110,
                                                              2040-0170,
                                                               2040-0180
123.26-123.29...........................................      2040-0057,
                                                               2040-0170
123.43..................................................      2040-0057,
                                                               2040-0170
123.44..................................................      2040-0057,
                                                              2040-0170,
                                                               2040-0180
123.45..................................................      2040-0057,
                                                               2040-0170
123.62..................................................      2040-0057,
                                                              2040-0170,
                                                               2040-0180
123.63..................................................      2040-0057,
                                                              2040-0170,
                                                               2040-0180
123.64..................................................      2040-0057,
                                                               2040-0170
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Procedures for Decisionmaking
------------------------------------------------------------------------
124.5...................................................       2040-0068
124.31..................................................       2050-0149
124.32..................................................       2050-0149
124.33..................................................       2050-0149
124.53-124.54...........................................       2040-0057
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Criteria and Standards for the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
                                 System
------------------------------------------------------------------------
125.59-125.67, and appendix A and B.....................       2040-0088
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Water Quality Planning and Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
130.6-130.10............................................       2040-0071
130.15..................................................       2040-0071
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Water Quality Standards Regulation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
131.1...................................................       2040-0180
131.5...................................................       2040-0180
131.6-131.8.............................................       2040-0049
131.20..................................................       2040-0049
131.21..................................................      2040-0049,
                                                               2040-0180
131.22..................................................       2040-0049
131.31-131.36...........................................       2040-0049
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Water Quality Guidance for the Great Lakes System
------------------------------------------------------------------------
132.1...................................................       2040-0180
132.2...................................................       2040-0180
132.3...................................................       2040-0180
132.4...................................................       2040-0180
132.5...................................................       2040-0180
Part 132, appendix A....................................       2040-0180
Part 132, appendix B....................................       2040-0180
Part 132, appendix C....................................       2040-0180
Part 132, appendix D....................................       2040-0180
Part 132, appendix E....................................       2040-0180
Part 132, appendix F....................................       2040-0180
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Marine Sanitation Device Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 140................................................       2040-0187
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               National Primary Drinking Water Regulations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
141.2...................................................       2040-0090
141.4...................................................       2040-0090
141.11-141.15...........................................       2040-0090
141.21-141.22...........................................       2040-0090
141.23-141.24...........................................       2040-0090
141.25-141.30...........................................       2040-0090
141.31-141.32...........................................       2040-0090
141.33-141.35...........................................       2040-0090
141.40..................................................       2040-0090
141.41-141.43...........................................       2040-0090
141.50-141.52...........................................       2040-0090
141.60-141.63...........................................       2040-0090
141.70-141.75...........................................       2040-0090
141.80-141.91...........................................       2040-0090
141.100.................................................       2040-0090
141.110-141.111.........................................       2040-0090
141.140-141.144.........................................       2040-0183
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       National Primary Drinking Water Regulations Implementation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
142.2-142.3.............................................       2040-0090
142.10-142.15...........................................       2040-0090
142.16..................................................       2060-0090
142.17-142.24...........................................       2040-0090
142.56-142.57...........................................       2040-0090
142.60-142.61...........................................       2040-0090
142.62..................................................       2040-0090
142.63-142.64...........................................       2040-0090
142.70-142.78...........................................       2040-0090
142.81-142.81...........................................       2040-0090
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Underground Injection Control Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
144.8...................................................       2040-0042
144.12..................................................       2040-0042
144.14-144.15...........................................       2040-0042
144.23..................................................       2040-0042
144.25-144.28...........................................       2040-0042
144.31-144.33...........................................       2040-0042
144.38..................................................       2040-0042
144.41..................................................       2040-0042
144.51-144.55...........................................       2040-0042

[[Page 594]]

144.62-144.66...........................................       2040-0042
144.70..................................................       2040-0042
------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Underground Injection Control Program: Criteria and Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
146.10..................................................       2040-0042
146.12-146.15...........................................       2040-0042
146.22-146.25...........................................       2040-0042
146.32-146.35...........................................       2040-0042
146.52..................................................       2040-0042
146.64..................................................       2040-0042
146.66-146.73...........................................       2040-0042
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              State Underground Injection Control Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
147.104.................................................       2040-0042
147.304-147.305.........................................       2040-0042
147.504.................................................       2040-0042
147.754.................................................       2040-0042
147.904.................................................       2040-0042
147.1154................................................       2040-0042
147.1354-147.1355.......................................       2040-0042
147.1454................................................       2040-0042
147.1654................................................       2040-0042
147.1954................................................       2040-0042
147.2103-147.2104.......................................       2040-0042
147.2154................................................       2040-0042
147.2402................................................       2040-0042
147.2905................................................       2040-0042
147.2912-147.2913.......................................       2040-0042
147.2915................................................       2040-0042
147.2918................................................       2040-0042
147.2920-147.2926.......................................       2040-0042
147.2929................................................       2040-0042
147.3002-147.3003.......................................       2040-0042
147.3006-147.3007.......................................       2040-0042
147.3011................................................       2040-0042
147.3014-147.3016.......................................       2040-0042
147.3101................................................       2040-0042
147.3104-147.3105.......................................       2040-0042
147.3107-147.3109.......................................       2040-0042
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Hazardous Waste Injection Restrictions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
148.5...................................................       2040-0042
148.20-148.23...........................................       2040-0042
------------------------------------------------------------------------
          Pesticide Registration and Classification Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
152.46..................................................       2070-0060
152.50..................................................      2070-0024,
                                                              2070-0040,
                                                               2070-0060
152.80..................................................      2070-0040,
                                                               2070-0060
152.85..................................................      2070-0040,
                                                               2070-0060
152.98..................................................       2070-0060
152.122.................................................       2070-0060
152.132.................................................       2070-0044
152.135.................................................       2070-0060
152.164.................................................       2070-0060
152.404.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                               2070-0060
152.406.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                               2070-0060
152.412.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                               2070-0060
152.414.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                               2070-0060
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Registration Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
155.30..................................................       2070-0057
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Labeling Requirements for Pesticides and Devices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
156.36..................................................       2070-0052
156.206.................................................       2070-0060
156.208.................................................       2070-0060
156.210.................................................       2070-0060
156.212.................................................       2070-0060
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Packaging Requirements for Pesticides and Devices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
157.22..................................................       2070-0052
157.24..................................................       2070-0052
157.34..................................................       2070-0052
157.36..................................................       2070-0052
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Data Requirements for Registration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
158.30..................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.32..................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0053,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.34..................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.45..................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.75..................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.101.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.155.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.160.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.162.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.165.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.167.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.170.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107

[[Page 595]]

158.175.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.180.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.190.................................................      2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.240.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.290.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.340.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.390.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.440.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.490.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.540.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.590.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.640.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.690.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
158.740.................................................      2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Good Laboratory Practice Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 160................................................      2070-0024,
                                                              2070-0032,
                                                              2070-0040,
                                                              2070-0055,
                                                              2070-0057,
                                                              2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                State Registration of Pesticide Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
162.153.................................................       2070-0055
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Certification of Usefulness of Pesticide Chemicals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
163.4...................................................      2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0024
163.5...................................................      2070-0060,
                                                               2070-0024
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Exemption of Federal and State Agencies for Use of Pesticides Under
                          Emergency Conditions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
166.20..................................................       2070-0032
166.32..................................................       2070-0032
166.43..................................................       2070-0032
166.50..................................................       2070-0032
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Registration of Pesticide and Active Ingredient Producing
             Establishments, Submission of Pesticide Reports
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 167................................................       2070-0078
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Statements of Enforcement Policies and Interpretations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
168.65..................................................       2070-0027
168.75..................................................       2070-0027
168.85..................................................      2070-0027,
                                                             2070-0028,,
                                                               2070-0078
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Books and Records of Pesticide Production and Distribution
------------------------------------------------------------------------
169.2...................................................       2070-0028
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Worker Protection Standards for Agricultural Pesticides
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 170................................................       2070-0148
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Certification of Pesticide Applicators
------------------------------------------------------------------------
171.7...................................................       2070-0029
171.8...................................................       2070-0029
171.9...................................................       2070-0029
171.10..................................................       2070-0029
171.11..................................................       2070-0029
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Experimental Use Permits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
172.4...................................................       2070-0040
172.8...................................................       2070-0040
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Issuance of Food Additive Regulations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
177.81..................................................       2070-0024
177.92..................................................       2070-0024
177.98..................................................       2070-0024
177.99..................................................       2070-0024
177.102.................................................       2070-0024
177.105.................................................       2070-0024
177.110.................................................       2070-0024
177.116.................................................       2070-0024
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Tolerances and Exemptions from Tolerances for Pesticide Chemicals in or
                     on Raw Agricultural Commodities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
180.7...................................................       2070-0024
180.8...................................................       2070-0024
180.9...................................................       2070-0024
180.31..................................................       2070-0024
180.32..................................................       2070-0024
180.33..................................................       2070-0024
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      404 State Program Regulations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
233.10-233.12...........................................       2040-0168
233.21..................................................       2040-0168
233.30..................................................       2040-0168
233.50..................................................       2040-0168
233.52..................................................       2040-0168
233.61..................................................       2040-0140
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Criteria for Classification of Solid Waste Disposal Facilities and
                                Practices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
257.24..................................................       2050-0154
257.25..................................................       2050-0154
257.27..................................................       2050-0154
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 596]]

              Criteria for Municipal Solid Waste Landfills
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 258................................................       2050-0122
258.10-258.16...........................................       2050-0122
258.20..................................................       2050-0122
258.23..................................................       2050-0122
258.28-258.29...........................................       2050-0122
258.51..................................................       2050-0122
258.53-258.55...........................................       2050-0122
258.57-258.58...........................................       2050-0122
258.60-258.61...........................................       2050-0122
258.71-258.74...........................................       2050-0122
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Hazardous Waste Management System: General
------------------------------------------------------------------------
260.20-260.22...........................................       2050-0053
260.23..................................................       2050-0145
260.31-260.33...........................................       2050-0053
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste
------------------------------------------------------------------------
261.3...................................................       2050-0085
261.4...................................................       2050-0053
261.35..................................................       2050-0115
------------------------------------------------------------------------
          Standards Applicable to Generators of Hazardous Waste
------------------------------------------------------------------------
262.12..................................................       2050-0028
262.20..................................................       2050-0039
262.22-262.23...........................................       2050-0039
262.34..................................................      2050-0035,
                                                               2050-0085
262.40(a)...............................................       2050-0039
262.40(b)...............................................       2050-0024
262.40(c)...............................................       2050-0035
262.41..................................................       2050-0024
262.42..................................................       2050-0039
262.43..................................................       2050-0035
262.44(a)-(b)...........................................       2050-0039
262.44(c)...............................................       2050-0035
262.53-262.57...........................................       2050-0035
262.60..................................................       2050-0035
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Standards Applicable to Transporters of Hazardous Waste
------------------------------------------------------------------------
263.11..................................................       2050-0028
263.20-263.22...........................................       2050-0039
263.30..................................................       2050-0039
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Standards for Owners and Operators of Hazardous Waste Treatment,
                    Storage, and Disposal Facilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
264.11..................................................       2050-0028
264.12(a)...............................................       2050-0120
264.13..................................................      2050-0120,
                                                               2050-0009
264.14..................................................       2050-0009
264.15..................................................      2050-0120,
                                                               2050-0009
264.16..................................................      2050-0120,
                                                               2050-0009
264.17..................................................       2050-0120
264.18..................................................       2050-0009
264.19..................................................       2050-0009
264.32..................................................       2050-0009
264.35..................................................       2050-0009
264.37..................................................       2050-0120
264.51..................................................       2050-0009
264.52..................................................       2050-0009
264.53..................................................       2050-0120
264.54..................................................       2050-0120
264.56..................................................       2050-0120
264.71..................................................       2050-0039
264.72..................................................       2050-0039
264.73..................................................       2050-0120
264.74..................................................       2050-0120
264.75..................................................       2050-0024
264.76..................................................       2050-0039
264.90..................................................       2050-0009
264.96..................................................       2050-0120
264.97(g)...............................................       2050-0120
264.97(h)...............................................       2050-0009
264.97(j)...............................................       2050-0120
264.98(c), (g)(1), (g)(5), (g)(6).......................       2050-0033
264.98(g)(4), (h).......................................       2050-0009
264.99(c), (g), (h)(1), (i)(1), (i)(2)..................       2050-0033
264.99(h)(2), (i)(3), (j)...............................       2050-0009
264.100(e), (f), (g)....................................       2050-0033
264.100(h)..............................................       2050-0009
264.101.................................................       2050-0120
264.112(a), (b), (c)....................................       2050-0009
264.112(d)..............................................       2050-0120
264.113(a), (b), (d)....................................       2050-0120
264.113(e)..............................................       2050-0050
264.115.................................................       2050-0120
264.116.................................................       2050-0120
264.118.................................................       2050-0009
264.119(a), (b).........................................       2050-0120
264.119(c)..............................................       2050-0009
264.120.................................................       2050-0120
264.142(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.142(b), (c), (d)....................................       2050-0120
264.143.................................................       2050-0120
264.144(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.144(b), (c), (d)....................................       2050-0120
264.145.................................................       2050-0120
264.147(a)(7), (b)(7), (f),(g)..........................       2050-0120
264.147(a)(1), (b)(1), (c), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j).....       2050-0009
264.148.................................................       2050-0120
264.149.................................................       2050-0009
264.150.................................................       2050-0009
264.190.................................................       2050-0050
264.191.................................................       2050-0050
264.192(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.192(g)..............................................       2050-0050
264.193(c), (d), (e), (g), (h)..........................       2050-0009
264.193(i)..............................................       2050-0050
264.196.................................................       2050-0050
264.197(b)..............................................       2050-0050
264.197(c)..............................................       2050-0009
264.221.................................................       2050-0009
264.222(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.222(b)..............................................       2050-0050
264.223(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.223(b), (c).........................................       2050-0050
264.226(c)..............................................      2050-0050,
                                                               2050-0009
264.226(d)..............................................       2050-0050
264.227.................................................       2050-0050
264.231.................................................       2050-0009
264.251.................................................       2050-0009
264.252(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.252(b)..............................................       2050-0050
264.253(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.253(b), (c).........................................       2050-0050
264.254.................................................       2050-0050
264.259.................................................       2050-0009
264.271.................................................       2050-0009
264.272.................................................       2050-0009
264.276.................................................      2050-0050,
                                                               2050-0009
264.278(a)-(f), (h).....................................       2050-0050
264.278(g)..............................................      2050-0050,
                                                               2050-0009
264.280.................................................       2050-0050
264.283.................................................       2050-0009

[[Page 597]]

264.301.................................................       2050-0009
264.302(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.302(b)..............................................       2050-0050
264.303(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.303(b)..............................................       2050-0050
264.304(a)..............................................       2050-0009
264.304(b), (c).........................................       2050-0050
264.314.................................................       2050-0050
264.317.................................................       2050-0009
264.340.................................................       2050-0009
264.343.................................................       2050-0050
264.344.................................................       2050-0009
264.347.................................................       2050-0050
264.552.................................................       2050-0009
264.570.................................................       2050-0050
264.571.................................................       2050-0050
264.573.................................................       2050-0050
264.574.................................................       2050-0050
264.575.................................................       2050-0009
264.603.................................................       2050-0050
264.1033(a).............................................       2050-0009
264.1033(j).............................................       2050-0050
264.1034................................................       2050-0050
264.1035................................................       2050-0050
264.1036................................................       2050-0050
264.1061................................................       2050-0050
264.1062................................................       2050-0050
264.1063................................................       2050-0050
264.1064................................................      2050-0050,
                                                               2050-0009
264.1065................................................       2050-0050
264.1089................................................       2060-0318
264.1090................................................       2060-0318
264.1100................................................       2050-0050
264.1101................................................       2050-0050
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Interim Status Standards for Owners and Operators of Hazardous Waste
               Treatment, Storage, and Disposal Facilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
265.11..................................................       2050-0028
265.12(a)...............................................       2050-0120
265.13..................................................       2050-0120
265.15..................................................       2050-0120
265.16..................................................       2050-0120
265.19..................................................       2050-0120
265.37..................................................       2050-0120
265.51..................................................       2050-0120
265.52..................................................       2050-0120
265.53..................................................       2050-0120
265.54..................................................       2050-0120
265.56..................................................       2050-0120
265.71..................................................       2050-0039
265.72..................................................       2050-0039
265.73..................................................       2050-0120
265.75..................................................       2050-0024
265.76..................................................       2050-0039
265.90..................................................       2050-0033
265.92..................................................       2050-0033
265.93..................................................       2050-0033
265.94..................................................       2050-0033
265.112.................................................       2050-0120
265.113(a), (b), (d)....................................       2050-0120
265.113(e)..............................................       2050-0050
265.115.................................................       2050-0120
265.116.................................................       2050-0120
265.118.................................................       2050-0120
265.119.................................................       2050-0120
265.120.................................................       2050-0120
265.142.................................................       2050-0120
265.143.................................................       2050-0120
265.144.................................................       2050-0120
265.145.................................................       2050-0120
265.147.................................................       2050-0120
265.148.................................................       2050-0120
265.149.................................................       2050-0120
265.150.................................................       2050-0120
265.190.................................................      2050-0035,
                                                               2050-0050
265.191.................................................      2050-0035,
                                                               2050-0050
265.192.................................................      2050-0035,
                                                               2050-0050
265.193.................................................      2050-0035,
                                                               2050-0050
265.195.................................................       2050-0120
265.196.................................................      2050-0035,
                                                               2050-0050
265.197(b)..............................................       2050-0050
265.197(c)..............................................       2050-0120
265.221.................................................       2050-0050
265.222.................................................       2050-0050
265.223.................................................       2050-0050
265.225.................................................       2050-0050
265.226.................................................       2050-0050
265.229.................................................       2050-0050
265.254.................................................       2050-0050
265.255.................................................       2050-0050
265.259.................................................       2050-0050
265.260.................................................       2050-0050
265.273.................................................       2050-0120
265.276.................................................       2050-0050
265.278.................................................       2050-0050
265.280.................................................       2050-0050
265.301.................................................       2050-0050
265.302.................................................       2050-0050
265.303.................................................       2050-0050
265.304.................................................       2050-0050
265.314.................................................       2050-0050
265.340.................................................       2050-0050
265.352.................................................       2050-0050
265.383.................................................       2050-0050
265.404.................................................       2050-0050
265.440.................................................       2050-0050
265.441.................................................       2050-0050
265.443.................................................       2050-0050
265.444.................................................       2050-0050
265.445.................................................       2050-0120
265.1033................................................       2050-0050
265.1034................................................       2050-0050
265.1035................................................       2050-0050
265.1061................................................       2050-0050
265.1062................................................       2050-0050
265.1063................................................       2050-0050
265.1064................................................       2050-0050
265.1090................................................       2060-0318
265.1100................................................       2050-0050
265.1101................................................       2050-0050
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Standards for the Management of Specific Hazardous Wastes and Specific
             Types of Hazardous Waste Management Facilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
266.70 (b)..............................................       2050-0028
266.70(c)...............................................       2050-0050
266.80..................................................       2050-0028
266.100.................................................       2050-0073
266.102.................................................       2050-0073
266.103.................................................       2050-0073
266.104.................................................       2050-0073
266.106.................................................       2050-0073
266.107.................................................       2050-0073
266.108.................................................       2050-0073
266.109.................................................       2050-0073
266.111.................................................       2050-0073
266.112.................................................       2050-0073

[[Page 598]]

Appendix IX.............................................       2050-0073
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Land Disposal Restrictions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
268.4-268.5.............................................       2050-0085
268.6...................................................       2050-0062
268.7...................................................       2050-0085
268.9...................................................       2050-0085
268.42..................................................       2050-0085
268.44..................................................       2050-0085
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  EPA Administered Permit Programs: The Hazardous Waste Permit Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
270.1...................................................      2050-0028,
                                                              2050-0034,
                                                               2050-0009
270.10..................................................       2050-0009
270.11..................................................       2050-0034
270.13..................................................       2050-0034
270.14..................................................       2050-0009
270.14(b)(21)...........................................      2050-0062,
                                                               2050-0085
270.15..................................................       2050-0009
270.16..................................................       2050-0009
270.17..................................................       2050-0009
270.18..................................................       2050-0009
270.19..................................................       2050-0009
270.20..................................................       2050-0009
270.21..................................................       2050-0009
270.22..................................................       2050-0073
270.23..................................................       2050-0009
270.24..................................................       2050-0009
270.25..................................................       2050-0009
270.26..................................................       2050-0115
270.30..................................................       2050-0120
270.33..................................................       2050-0009
270.40..................................................       2050-0009
270.41..................................................       2050-0009
270.42..................................................       2050-0009
270.51..................................................       2050-0009
270.62..................................................      2050-0009,
                                                               2050-0149
270.63..................................................       2050-0009
270.65..................................................       2050-0009
270.66..................................................      2050-0073,
                                                               2050-0149
270.72..................................................       2050-0034
270.73..................................................       2050-0009
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Requirements for Authorization of State Hazardous Waste Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
271.5-271.8.............................................       2050-0041
271.20-271.21...........................................       2050-0041
271.23..................................................       2050-0041
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Standards for Universal Waste Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
273.14..................................................       2050-0145
273.15..................................................       2050-0145
273.18..................................................       2050-0145
273.32..................................................       2050-0145
273.34..................................................       2050-0145
273.35..................................................       2050-0145
273.38..................................................       2050-0145
273.39..................................................       2050-0145
273.61..................................................       2050-0145
273.62..................................................       2050-0145
273.80..................................................       2050-0145
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Standards for Management of Used Oil
------------------------------------------------------------------------
279.10-279.11...........................................       2050-0124
279.42..................................................      2050-0028,
                                                               2050-0124
279.43-279.44...........................................       2050-0124
279.46..................................................       2050-0050
279.51..................................................       2050-0028
279.52-279.55...........................................       2050-0124
279.56..................................................       2050-0050
279.57..................................................      2050-0050,
                                                               2050-0124
279.62..................................................       2050-0028
279.63..................................................       2050-0124
279.65-279.66...........................................       2050-0050
279.72..................................................       2050-0050
279.73..................................................       2050-0028
279.74-279.75...........................................       2050-0050
279.82..................................................       2050-0124
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Technical Standards and Corrective Action Requirements for Owners and
              Operators of Underground Storage Tanks (USTs)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
280.11(a)...............................................       2050-0068
280.20(a)-(b)...........................................       2050-0068
280.20(e)...............................................       2050-0068
280.22(a)-(f)...........................................       2050-0068
280.22(g)...............................................       2050-0068
280.31..................................................       2050-0068
280.33(f)...............................................       2050-0068
280.34(a)...............................................       2050-0068
280.34(b)...............................................       2050-0068
280.34(c)...............................................       2050-0068
280.40..................................................       2050-0068
280.43..................................................       2050-0068
280.44..................................................       2050-0068
280.45..................................................       2050-0068
280.50..................................................       2050-0068
280.53..................................................       2050-0068
280.61..................................................       2050-0068
280.62..................................................       2050-0068
280.63..................................................       2050-0068
280.64..................................................       2050-0068
280.65..................................................       2050-0068
280.66(a)...............................................       2050-0068
280.66(c)...............................................       2050-0068
280.66(d)...............................................       2050-0068
280.67..................................................       2050-0068
280.71(a)...............................................       2050-0068
280.72(a)...............................................       2050-0068
280.74..................................................       2050-0068
280.95..................................................       2050-0068
280.96..................................................       2050-0068
280.97..................................................       2050-0068
280.98..................................................       2050-0068
280.99..................................................       2050-0068
280.100.................................................       2050-0068
280.101.................................................       2050-0068
280.102.................................................       2050-0068
280.103.................................................       2050-0068
280.104.................................................       2050-0068
280.105.................................................       2050-0068
280.106.................................................       2050-0068
280.107.................................................       2050-0068
280.108.................................................       2050-0068
280.109(a)..............................................       2050-0068
280.109(b)..............................................       2050-0068
280.110.................................................       2050-0068
280.111.................................................       2050-0068
280.111(b)(11)..........................................       2050-0068
280.114(a)-(d)..........................................       2050-0068
280.114(e)..............................................       2050-0068
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Approval of State Underground Storage Tank Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
281.120(a)..............................................       2050-0068

[[Page 599]]

281.120(g)..............................................       2050-0068
281.121.................................................       2050-0068
281.122.................................................       2050-0068
281.124.................................................       2050-0068
281.125.................................................       2050-0068
281.140.................................................       2050-0068
281.143(a)..............................................       2050-0068
281.150.................................................       2050-0068
281.152.................................................       2050-0068
281.161.................................................       2050-0068
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
300.405.................................................       2050-0046
300.425.................................................       2050-0095
300.430.................................................       2050-0096
300.435.................................................       2050-0096
300.920.................................................       2050-0141
Part 300, appendix A....................................       2050-0095
------------------------------------------------------------------------
          Designation, reportable quantities, and notification
------------------------------------------------------------------------
302.4...................................................       2050-0046
302.6...................................................       2050-0046
302.8...................................................       2050-0086
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Hazardous Substances Superfund; Response Claims Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
307.11-307.14...........................................       2050-0106
307.21-307.23...........................................       2050-0106
307.30-307.32...........................................       2050-0106
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Reimbursement to Local Governments for Emergency Response to Hazardous
                           Substance Releases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
310.05..................................................       2050-0077
310.10-310.12...........................................       2050-0077
310.20..................................................       2050-0077
310.30..................................................       2050-0077
310.40..................................................       2050-0077
310.50..................................................       2050-0077
310.60..................................................       2050-0077
310.70..................................................       2050-0077
310.80..................................................       2050-0077
310.90..................................................       2050-0077
Part 310, appendix II...................................       2050-0077
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Worker Protection Standards for Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency
                                Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
311.1-311.2.............................................       2050-0105
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trade Secrecy Claims for Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know;
                          Health Professionals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
350.5-350.16............................................       2050-0078
350.27..................................................       2050-0078
350.40..................................................       2050-0078
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Emergency planning and notification
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 355, appendix A, appendix B........................       2050-0046
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Toxic Chemical Release Reporting: Community Right-to-Know
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 372................................................       2070-0093
Part 372, subpart A.....................................      2070-0093,
                                                               2070-0143
372.22..................................................      2070-0093,
                                                               2070-0143
372.25..................................................       2070-0093
372.27..................................................       2070-0143
372.30..................................................      2070-0093,
                                                               2070-0143
372.38..................................................      2070-0093,
                                                               2070-0143
Part 372, subpart C.....................................      2070-0093,
                                                               2070-0143
Part 372, subpart D.....................................      2070-0093,
                                                               2070-0143
372.85..................................................       2070-0093
372.95..................................................       2070-0143
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of
                                Pollution
------------------------------------------------------------------------
403.5(b)................................................       2040-0009
403.6-403.7.............................................       2040-0009
403.8(a)-(e)............................................       2040-0009
403.8(f)................................................       2040-0009
403.9-403.10............................................       2040-0009
403.12(b)-(g)...........................................       2040-0009
403.12(h), (i)..........................................       2040-0009
403.12(j), (k), (l), (o)................................       2040-0009
403.12(m), (p)..........................................       2040-0009
403.13..................................................       2040-0009
403.15..................................................       2040-0009
403.17-403.18...........................................      2040-0009,
                                                               2040-0170
------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Steam Electric Generating Point Source Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
423.12-423.13...........................................       2040-0033
423.15..................................................       2040-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Point Source Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
430.14-430.17...........................................       2040-0033
430.24-430.27...........................................       2040-0033
430.54-430.57...........................................       2040-0033
430.64-430.67...........................................       2040-0033
430.74-430.77...........................................       2040-0033
430.84-430.87...........................................       2040-0033
430.94-430.97...........................................       2040-0033
430.104-430.107.........................................       2040-0033
430.114-430.117.........................................       2040-0033
430.134-430.137.........................................       2040-0033
430.144-430.147.........................................       2040-0033
430.154-430.157.........................................       2040-0033
430.164-430.167.........................................       2040-0033
430.174-430.177.........................................       2040-0033
430.184-430.187.........................................       2040-0033
430.194-430.197.........................................       2040-0033
430.204-430.207.........................................       2040-0033
430.214-430.217.........................................       2040-0033
430.224-430.227.........................................       2040-0033
430.234-430.237.........................................       2040-0033
430.244-430.247.........................................       2040-0033
430.254-430.257.........................................       2040-0033
430.264-430.267.........................................       2040-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        The Builders' Paper and Board Mills Point Source Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
431.14-431.17...........................................       2040-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Point Source Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
439.14-439.17...........................................       2040-0033
439.24-439.27...........................................       2040-0033
439.34-439.37...........................................       2040-0033
439.44-439.47...........................................       2040-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 600]]

                   Coil Coating Point Source Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
465.03..................................................       2040-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Porcelain Enameling Point Source Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
466.03..................................................       2040-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Aluminum Forming Point Source Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
467.03..................................................       2040-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              State Sludge Management Program Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
501.15(a)...............................................      2040-0086,
                                                               2040-0110
501.15(b)...............................................      2040-0004,
                                                              2040-0068,
                                                               2040-0110
501.15(c)...............................................       2040-0068
501.16..................................................       2040-0057
501.21..................................................       2040-0057
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Standards for the Use or Disposal of Sewage Sludge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
503.17-503.18...........................................       2040-0157
503.27-503.28...........................................       2040-0157
503.47-503.48...........................................       2040-0157
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Fuel Economy of Motor Vehicles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
600.006-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.007-80..............................................       2060-0104
600.010-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.113-88..............................................       2060-0104
600.113-93..............................................       2060-0104
600.206-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.207-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.209-85..............................................       2060-0104
600.306-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.307-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.311-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.312-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.313-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.314-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.507-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.509-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.510-86..............................................       2060-0104
600.512-86..............................................       2060-0104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Toxic Substances Control Act: General
------------------------------------------------------------------------
700.45..................................................      2070-0012,
                                                               2070-0038
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
704.5...................................................      2010-0019,
                                                               2070-0067
704.11..................................................      2010-0019,
                                                               2070-0067
704.25..................................................       2070-0067
704.33..................................................       2070-0067
704.43..................................................       2070-0067
704.45..................................................       2070-0067
704.95..................................................       2070-0067
704.102.................................................       2070-0067
704.104.................................................  2070-0067L='s
                                                            '<ls-thn-eq>
704.175.................................................       2070-0067
                      Chemical Imports and Exports
------------------------------------------------------------------------
707.65..................................................       2070-0030
707.67..................................................       2070-0030
707.72..................................................       2070-0030
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Inventory Reporting Regulations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 710................................................       2070-0070
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Chemical Information Rules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
712.5...................................................       2070-0054
712.7...................................................       2070-0054
712.20..................................................       2070-0054
712.28..................................................       2070-0054
712.30..................................................       2070-0054
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Health and Safety Data Reporting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
716.5...................................................       2070-0004
716.10..................................................       2070-0004
716.20..................................................       2070-0004
716.25..................................................       2070-0004
716.30..................................................       2070-0004
716.35..................................................       2070-0004
716.40..................................................       2070-0004
716.45..................................................       2070-0004
716.50..................................................       2070-0004
716.60..................................................       2070-0004
716.65..................................................       2070-0004
716.105.................................................       2070-0004
716.120.................................................       2070-0004
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Records and Reports of Allegations That Chemical Substances Cause
       Significant Adverse Reactions to Health or the Environment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
717.5...................................................       2070-0017
717.7...................................................       2070-0017
717.12..................................................       2070-0017
717.15..................................................       2070-0017
717.17..................................................       2070-0017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Premanufacture Notification
------------------------------------------------------------------------
720.1...................................................       2070-0012
720.22..................................................       2070-0012
720.25..................................................       2070-0012
720.30..................................................       2070-0012
720.36..................................................       2070-0012
720.38..................................................       2070-0012
Part 720, subpart C.....................................       2070-0012
720.62..................................................       2070-0012
720.75..................................................       2070-0012
720.78..................................................       2070-0012
720.80..................................................       2070-0012
720.85..................................................       2070-0012
720.87..................................................       2070-0012
720.90..................................................       2070-0012
720.102.................................................       2070-0012
Part 720, appendix A....................................       2070-0012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Significant New Uses of Chemical Substances
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 721, subpart A.....................................      2070-0012,
                                                               2070-0038
721.72..................................................      2070-0012,
                                                               2070-0038
721.125.................................................      2070-0012,
                                                               2070-0038
721.160.................................................      2070-0012,
                                                               2070-0038
721.170.................................................      2070-0012,
                                                               2070-0038
721.185.................................................      2070-0012,
                                                               2070-0038
721.225.................................................       2070-0012

[[Page 601]]

721.267.................................................       2070-0012
721.275.................................................       2070-0012
721.285.................................................       2070-0012
721.320.................................................       2070-0012
721.323.................................................       2070-0012
721.325.................................................       2070-0012
721.336.................................................       2070-0012
721.370.................................................       2070-0012
721.390.................................................       2070-0012
721.400.................................................       2070-0012
721.415.................................................       2070-0012
721.430.................................................       2070-0012
721.445.................................................       2070-0012
721.460.................................................       2070-0012
721.470.................................................       2070-0012
721.484.................................................       2070-0012
721.490.................................................       2070-0012
721.505.................................................       2070-0012
721.520.................................................       2070-0012
721.530.................................................       2070-0012
721.536.................................................       2070-0012
721.540.................................................       2070-0012
721.550.................................................       2070-0012
721.562.................................................       2070-0012
721.575.................................................       2070-0012
721.600.................................................       2070-0012
721.625.................................................       2070-0012
721.639.................................................       2070-0012
721.642.................................................       2070-0012
721.646.................................................       2070-0012
721.650.................................................       2070-0038
721.700.................................................       2070-0012
721.715.................................................       2070-0012
721.750.................................................       2070-0012
721.757.................................................       2070-0012
721.775.................................................       2070-0012
721.785.................................................       2070-0012
721.805.................................................       2070-0012
721.825.................................................       2070-0012
721.840.................................................       2070-0012
721.875.................................................       2070-0012
721.925.................................................       2070-0012
721.950.................................................       2070-0012
721.982.................................................       2070-0012
721.1000................................................       2070-0012
721.1025................................................       2070-0038
721.1050................................................       2070-0012
721.1068................................................       2070-0012
721.1075................................................       2070-0012
721.1120................................................       2070-0012
721.1150................................................       2070-0012
721.1175................................................       2070-0012
721.1187................................................       2070-0012
721.1193................................................       2070-0012
721.1210................................................       2070-0012
721.1225................................................       2070-0012
721.1240................................................       2070-0012
721.1300................................................       2070-0012
721.1325................................................       2070-0012
721.1350................................................       2070-0012
721.1372................................................       2070-0012
721.1375................................................       2070-0012
721.1425................................................       2070-0038
721.1430................................................       2070-0038
721.1435................................................       2070-0038
721.1440................................................       2070-0038
721.1450................................................       2070-0012
721.1500................................................       2070-0012
721.1525................................................       2070-0012
721.1550................................................       2070-0012
721.1555................................................       2070-0012
721.1568................................................       2070-0012
721.1575................................................       2070-0012
721.1612................................................       2070-0012
721.1625................................................       2070-0012
721.1630................................................       2070-0012
721.1637................................................       2070-0012
721.1640................................................       2070-0012
721.1643................................................       2070-0012
721.1645................................................       2070-0012
721.1650................................................       2070-0012
721.1660................................................       2070-0038
721.1675................................................       2070-0012
721.1700................................................       2070-0012
721.1725................................................       2070-0012
721.1728................................................       2070-0012
721.1732................................................       2070-0012
721.1735................................................       2070-0012
721.1737................................................       2070-0012
721.1738................................................       2070-0012
721.1740................................................       2070-0012
721.1745................................................       2070-0012
721.1750................................................       2070-0012
721.1755................................................       2070-0012
721.1765................................................       2070-0012
721.1769................................................       2070-0012
721.1775................................................       2070-0012
721.1790................................................       2070-0038
721.1800................................................       2070-0012
721.1820................................................       2070-0012
721.1825................................................       2070-0012
721.1850................................................       2070-0012
721.1875................................................       2070-0012
721.1900................................................       2070-0012
721.1920................................................       2070-0012
721.1925................................................       2070-0012
721.1950................................................       2070-0012
721.2025................................................       2070-0012
721.2050................................................       2070-0012
721.2075................................................       2070-0012
721.2084................................................       2070-0038
721.2085................................................       2070-0012
721.2086................................................       2070-0012
721.2088................................................       2070-0012
721.2089................................................       2070-0012
721.2092................................................       2070-0038
721.2095................................................       2070-0012
721.2097................................................       2070-0012
721.2120................................................       2070-0012
721.2140................................................       2070-0012
721.2170................................................       2070-0012
721.2175................................................       2070-0012
721.2250................................................       2070-0012
721.2260................................................       2070-0012
721.2270................................................       2070-0012
721.2275................................................       2070-0012
721.2287................................................       2070-0038
721.2340................................................       2070-0012
721.2355................................................       2070-0038
721.2380................................................       2070-0012
721.2410................................................       2070-0012
721.2420................................................       2070-0012
721.2475................................................       2070-0012
721.2520................................................       2070-0012
721.2527................................................       2070-0012
721.2540................................................       2070-0012
721.2560................................................       2070-0012
721.2565................................................       2070-0012
721.2575................................................       2070-0012
721.2600................................................       2070-0038
721.2625................................................       2070-0012
721.2650................................................       2070-0012
721.2675................................................       2070-0012
721.2725................................................       2070-0038
721.2750................................................       2070-0012
721.2800................................................       2070-0038

[[Page 602]]

721.2815................................................       2070-0012
721.2825................................................       2070-0012
721.2840................................................       2070-0012
721.2860................................................       2070-0012
721.2880................................................       2070-0012
721.2900................................................       2070-0012
721.2920................................................       2070-0012
721.2930................................................       2070-0012
721.2940................................................       2070-0012
721.2950................................................       2070-0012
721.3000................................................       2070-0012
721.3020................................................       2070-0012
721.3028................................................       2070-0012
721.3034................................................       2070-0012
721.3040................................................       2070-0012
721.3060................................................       2070-0012
721.3063................................................       2070-0012
721.3080................................................       2070-0012
721.3100................................................       2070-0012
721.3120................................................       2070-0012
721.3140................................................       2070-0012
721.3152................................................       2070-0012
721.3160................................................       2070-0038
721.3180................................................       2070-0012
721.3200................................................       2070-0012
721.3220................................................       2070-0038
721.3248................................................       2070-0012
721.3260................................................       2070-0012
721.3320................................................       2070-0012
721.3340................................................       2070-0012
721.3350................................................       2070-0038
721.3360................................................       2070-0012
721.3364................................................       2070-0012
721.3374................................................       2070-0012
721.3380................................................       2070-0012
721.3390................................................       2070-0012
721.3420................................................       2070-0012
721.3430................................................       2070-0038
721.3435................................................       2070-0012
721.3437................................................       2070-0012
721.3440................................................       2070-0012
721.3460................................................       2070-0012
721.3480................................................       2070-0012
721.3486................................................       2070-0012
721.3500................................................       2070-0012
721.3520................................................       2070-0012
721.3560................................................       2070-0012
721.3620................................................       2070-0012
721.3625................................................       2070-0012
721.3627................................................       2070-0012
721.3628................................................       2070-0012
721.3629................................................       2070-0012
721.3640................................................       2070-0012
721.3680................................................       2070-0012
721.3700................................................       2070-0012
721.3720................................................       2070-0012
721.3740................................................       2070-0012
721.3760................................................       2070-0012
721.3764................................................       2070-0012
721.3780................................................       2070-0012
721.3790................................................       2070-0012
721.3800................................................       2070-0012
721.3815................................................       2070-0012
721.3840................................................       2070-0012
721.3860................................................       2070-0012
721.3870................................................       2070-0012
721.3880................................................       2070-0012
721.3900................................................       2070-0012
721.4000................................................       2070-0012
721.4020................................................       2070-0012
721.4040................................................       2070-0012
721.4060................................................       2070-0012
721.4080................................................       2070-0038
721.4100................................................       2070-0012
721.4110................................................       2070-0012
721.4128................................................       2070-0012
721.4133................................................       2070-0012
721.4140................................................       2070-0038
721.4155................................................       2070-0038
721.4160................................................       2070-0038
721.4180................................................       2070-0038
721.4200................................................       2070-0012
721.4215................................................       2070-0012
721.4220................................................       2070-0012
721.4240................................................       2070-0012
721.4250................................................       2070-0012
721.4255................................................       2070-0012
721.4260................................................       2070-0012
721.4270................................................       2070-0012
721.4280................................................       2070-0012
721.4300................................................       2070-0012
721.4320................................................       2070-0012
721.4340................................................       2070-0012
721.4360................................................       2070-0038
721.4380................................................       2070-0012
721.4390................................................       2070-0012
721.4400................................................       2070-0012
721.4420................................................       2070-0012
721.4460................................................       2070-0012
721.4463................................................       2070-0012
721.4466................................................       2070-0012
721.4470................................................       2070-0012
721.4473................................................       2070-0012
721.4484................................................       2070-0012
721.4480................................................       2070-0012
721.4490................................................       2070-0012
721.4494................................................       2070-0012
721.4497................................................       2070-0012
721.4500................................................       2070-0012
721.4520................................................       2070-0012
721.4550................................................       2070-0012
721.4568................................................       2070-0012
721.4585................................................       2070-0012
721.4587................................................       2070-0012
721.4590................................................       2070-0012
721.4594................................................       2070-0012
721.4600................................................       2070-0012
721.4620................................................       2070-0012
721.4640................................................       2070-0012
721.4660................................................       2070-0012
721.4663................................................       2070-0012
721.4668................................................       2070-0012
721.4680................................................       2070-0012
721.4685................................................       2070-0012
721.4700................................................       2070-0012
721.4720................................................       2070-0012
721.4740................................................       2070-0038
721.4780................................................       2070-0012
721.4790................................................       2070-0012
721.4794................................................       2070-0012
721.4800................................................       2070-0012
721.4820................................................       2070-0012
721.4840................................................       2070-0012
721.4880................................................       2070-0012
721.4925................................................       2070-0038
721.5050................................................       2070-0012
721.5075................................................       2070-0012
721.5175................................................       2070-0038
721.5192................................................       2070-0012
721.5200................................................       2070-0012
721.5225................................................       2070-0012
721.5250................................................       2070-0012
721.5275................................................       2070-0012
721.5276................................................       2070-0012
721.5278................................................       2070-0012
721.5282................................................       2070-0012

[[Page 603]]

721.5285................................................       2070-0012
721.5300................................................       2070-0012
721.5310................................................       2070-0012
721.5325................................................       2070-0012
721.5330................................................       2070-0012
721.5350................................................       2070-0012
721.5375................................................       2070-0012
721.5385................................................       2070-0012
721.5400................................................       2070-0012
721.5425................................................       2070-0012
721.5450................................................       2070-0012
721.5475................................................       2070-0012
721.5500................................................       2070-0012
721.5525................................................       2070-0012
721.5540................................................       2070-0012
721.5545................................................       2070-0012
721.5550................................................       2070-0012
721.5575................................................       2070-0012
721.5600................................................       2070-0038
721.5700................................................       2070-0012
721.5705................................................       2070-0012
721.5710................................................       2070-0038
721.5740................................................       2070-0012
721.5760................................................       2070-0012
721.5763................................................       2070-0012
721.5769................................................       2070-0012
721.5780................................................       2070-0012
721.5800................................................       2070-0012
721.5820................................................       2070-0012
721.5840................................................       2070-0012
721.5860................................................       2070-0012
721.5880................................................       2070-0012
721.5900................................................       2070-0012
721.5910................................................       2070-0012
721.5915................................................       2070-0012
721.5920................................................       2070-0012
721.5930................................................       2070-0012
721.5960................................................       2070-0012
721.5970................................................       2070-0012
721.5980................................................       2070-0012
721.5990................................................       2070-0012
721.6000................................................       2070-0038
721.6020................................................       2070-0012
721.6060................................................       2070-0012
721.6070................................................       2070-0012
721.6080................................................       2070-0012
721.6085................................................       2070-0012
721.6090................................................       2070-0012
721.6097................................................       2070-0012
721.6100................................................       2070-0012
721.6110................................................       2070-0012
721.6120................................................       2070-0012
721.6140................................................       2070-0012
721.6160................................................       2070-0012
721.6180................................................       2070-0012
721.6186................................................       2070-0012
721.6200................................................       2070-0012
721.6220................................................       2070-0012
721.6440................................................       2070-0012
721.6470................................................       2070-0012
721.6500................................................       2070-0012
721.6520................................................       2070-0012
721.6540................................................       2070-0012
721.6560................................................       2070-0012
721.6580................................................       2070-0012
721.6600................................................       2070-0012
721.6620................................................       2070-0012
721.6625................................................       2070-0012
721.6640................................................       2070-0012
721.6660................................................       2070-0012
721.6680................................................       2070-0012
721.6700................................................       2070-0012
721.6720................................................       2070-0012
721.6740................................................       2070-0012
721.6760................................................       2070-0012
721.6780................................................       2070-0012
721.6820................................................       2070-0012
721.6840................................................       2070-0012
721.6880................................................       2070-0012
721.6900................................................       2070-0012
721.6920................................................       2070-0012
721.6940................................................       2070-0012
721.6960................................................       2070-0012
721.6980................................................       2070-0012
721.7000................................................       2070-0012
721.7020................................................       2070-0012
721.7040................................................       2070-0012
721.7046................................................       2070-0012
721.7080................................................       2070-0012
721.7100................................................       2070-0012
721.7140................................................       2070-0012
721.7160................................................       2070-0012
721.7180................................................       2070-0012
721.7200................................................       2070-0012
721.7210................................................       2070-0012
721.7220................................................       2070-0012
721.7240................................................       2070-0012
721.7260................................................       2070-0012
721.7280................................................       2070-0012
721.7300................................................       2070-0012
721.7320................................................       2070-0012
721.7340................................................       2070-0012
721.7360................................................       2070-0012
721.7370................................................       2070-0012
721.7400................................................       2070-0012
721.7420................................................       2070-0012
721.7440................................................       2070-0012
721.7450................................................       2070-0012
721.7460................................................       2070-0012
721.7480................................................       2070-0012
721.7500................................................       2070-0012
721.7540................................................       2070-0012
721.7560................................................       2070-0012
721.7580................................................       2070-0012
721.7600................................................       2070-0012
721.7620................................................       2070-0012
721.7655................................................       2070-0012
721.7660................................................       2070-0012
721.7680................................................       2070-0012
721.7780................................................       2070-0012
721.7710................................................       2070-0012
721.7720................................................       2070-0012
721.7700................................................       2070-0012
721.7740................................................       2070-0012
721.7760................................................       2070-0012
721.7770................................................       2070-0012
721.8075................................................       2070-0012
721.8082................................................       2070-0012
721.8090................................................       2070-0012
721.8100................................................       2070-0012
721.8155................................................       2070-0012
721.8160................................................       2070-0012
721.8170................................................       2070-0012
721.8175................................................       2070-0012
721.8225................................................       2070-0012
721.8250................................................       2070-0012
721.8265................................................       2070-0012
721.8275................................................       2070-0012
721.8290................................................       2070-0012
721.8300................................................       2070-0012
721.8325................................................       2070-0012
721.8335................................................       2070-0012
721.8350................................................       2070-0012
721.8375................................................       2070-0012
721.8400................................................       2070-0012
721.8425................................................       2070-0012

[[Page 604]]

721.8450................................................       2070-0012
721.8475................................................       2070-0012
721.8500................................................       2070-0012
721.8525................................................       2070-0012
721.8550................................................       2070-0012
721.8575................................................       2070-0012
721.8600................................................       2070-0012
721.8650................................................       2070-0012
721.8654................................................       2070-0012
721.8670................................................       2070-0012
721.8673................................................       2070-0012
721.8675................................................       2070-0012
721.8700................................................       2070-0012
721.8750................................................       2070-0012
721.8775................................................       2070-0012
721.8825................................................       2070-0012
721.8850................................................       2070-0012
721.8875................................................       2070-0012
721.8900................................................       2070-0012
721.8965................................................       2070-0012
721.9000................................................       2070-0038
721.9075................................................       2070-0012
721.9100................................................       2070-0012
721.9220................................................       2070-0012
721.9240................................................       2070-0012
721.9260................................................       2070-0012
721.9280................................................       2070-0012
721.9300................................................       2070-0012
721.9320................................................       2070-0012
721.9360................................................       2070-0012
721.9400................................................       2070-0012
721.9420................................................       2070-0012
721.9460................................................       2070-0012
721.9470................................................       2070-0038
721.9480................................................       2070-0012
721.9495................................................       2070-0012
721.9500................................................       2070-0012
721.9505................................................       2070-0012
721.9507................................................       2070-0012
721.9510................................................       2070-0012
721.9520................................................       2070-0012
721.9525................................................       2070-0012
721.9526................................................       2070-0012
721.9527................................................       2070-0012
721.9530................................................       2070-0012
721.9540................................................       2070-0012
721.9550................................................       2070-0012
721.9570................................................       2070-0012
721.9580................................................       2070-0038
721.9620................................................       2070-0012
721.9630................................................       2070-0012
721.9650................................................       2070-0012
721.9656................................................       2070-0012
721.9658................................................       2070-0012
721.9660................................................       2070-0038
721.9665................................................       2070-0012
721.9675................................................       2070-0012
721.9680................................................       2070-0012
721.9700................................................       2070-0012
721.9720................................................       2070-0012
721.9730................................................       2070-0012
721.9740................................................       2070-0012
721.9750................................................       2070-0012
721.9780................................................       2070-0012
721.9800................................................       2070-0012
721.9820................................................       2070-0012
721.9850................................................       2070-0012
721.9870................................................       2070-0012
721.9892................................................       2070-0012
721.9900................................................       2070-0012
721.9920................................................       2070-0012
721.9925................................................       2070-0012
721.9930................................................       2070-0038
721.9940................................................       2070-0012
721.9957................................................       2070-0038
721.9970................................................       2070-0012
721.9975................................................       2070-0012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Premanufacture Notification Exemptions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
723.50..................................................       2070-0012
723.175.................................................       2070-0012
723.250(m)(1)...........................................       2070-0012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lead-Based Paint Poisioning Prevention in Certain Residential Structures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 745, subpart F.....................................       2070-0151
Part 745, subpart L.....................................       2070-0155
Part 745, subpart Q.....................................       2070-0155
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Water Treatment Chemicals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 749, subpart D.....................................       2060-0193
749.68..................................................       2060-0193
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) Manufacturing, Processing, Distribution
                    in Commerce, and Use Prohibitions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
761.20..................................................      2070-0008,
                                                               2070-0021
761.30..................................................      2070-0003,
                                                              2070-0008,
                                                               2070-0021
761.60..................................................       2070-0011
761.65..................................................       2070-0112
761.70..................................................       2070-0011
761.75..................................................       2070-0011
761.80..................................................       2070-0021
761.93..................................................       2070-0149
761.93(a)(1)(iii).......................................       2070-0149
761.93(b)...............................................       2070-0149
761.125.................................................       2070-0112
761.180.................................................       2070-0112
761.185.................................................       2070-0008
761.187.................................................       2070-0008
761.193.................................................       2070-0008
761.202.................................................       2070-0112
761.205.................................................       2070-0112
761.207.................................................       2070-0112
761.207(a)..............................................       2050-0039
761.208.................................................       2070-0112
761.209.................................................       2070-0112
761.210.................................................       2070-0112
761.211.................................................       2070-0112
761.215.................................................       2070-0112
761.218.................................................       2070-0112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Asbestos
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 763, subpart E.....................................       2070-0091
Part 763, subpart G.....................................       2070-0072
Part 763, subpart I.....................................       2070-0082
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Dibenzo-para-dioxin/Dibenzofurans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
766.35(b)(1)............................................       2070-0054
766.35(b)(2)............................................       2070-0054
766.35(b)(3)............................................       2070-0017
766.35(b)(4)(iii).......................................       2070-0054
766.35(c)(1)(i).........................................       2070-0054
766.35(c)(1)(ii)........................................       2070-0054
766.35(c)(1)(iii).......................................       2070-0017
766.35(d) Form..........................................       2070-0017
766.38..................................................       2070-0054
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 605]]

     Procedures Governing Testing Consent Agreements and Test Rules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
790.5...................................................       2070-0033
790.42..................................................       2070-0033
790.45..................................................       2070-0033
790.50..................................................       2070-0033
790.55..................................................       2070-0033
790.60..................................................       2070-0033
790.62..................................................       2070-0033
790.68..................................................       2070-0033
790.80..................................................       2070-0033
790.82..................................................       2070-0033
790.85..................................................       2070-0033
790.99..................................................       2070-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Good Laboratory Practice Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 792................................................      2010-0019,
                                                              2070-0004,
                                                              2070-0017,
                                                              2070-0033,
                                                              2070-0054,
                                                               2070-0067
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Provisional Test Guidelines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
795.45..................................................       2070-0067
795.232.................................................       2070-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Identification of Specific Chemical Substance and Mixture Testing
                              Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
799.1053................................................       2070-0033
799.1250................................................       2070-0033
799.1560................................................       2070-0033
799.1575................................................       2070-0033
799.1645................................................       2070-0033
799.1700................................................       2070-0033
799.2155................................................       2070-0033
799.2325................................................       2070-0033
799.2475................................................       2070-0033
799.2500................................................       2070-0033
799.2700................................................       2070-0033
799.3300................................................       2070-0033
799.4360................................................       2070-0033
799.4440................................................       2070-0033
799.5000................................................       2070-0033
799.5025................................................       2070-0033
799.5050................................................       2070-0033
799.5055................................................       2070-0033
799.5075................................................       2070-0033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The ICRs referenced in this section of the table encompass the
  applicable general provisions contained in 40 CFR part 60, subpart A,
  which are not independent information collection requirements.
\2\ The ICRs referenced in this section of the table encompass the
  applicable general provisions contained in 40 CFR part 61, subpart A,
  which are not independent information collection requirements.
\3\ The ICRs referenced in this section of the table encompass the
  applicable general provisions contained in 40 CFR part 63, subpart A,
  which are not independent information collection requirements.

[58 FR 27472, May 10, 1993]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 9.1 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.

[[Page 607]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
Title 40 was established at 36 FR 12213, June 29, 1971. For the period 
before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections Affected, 1964-
1972 and 1973-1985,'' published in six separate volumes.

                                  1986

40 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260  Authority citation revised....................................25471
    Public briefings...............................................39859
260.1  (a) and (b) (1) through (4) amended.........................40636
260.2  (b) revised.................................................28682
    (a) and (b) amended............................................40636
260.3  Introductory text amended...................................40636
260.10  Amended; eff. 9-22-86......................................10174
    Amended; eff. 10-29-86.........................................16443
    Amended........................................................25471
    Introductory text amended......................................40636
260.20  (a) amended................................................40636
260.22  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
261  Petitions denied..............................................12148
    Determination..................................................24496
    Petitions denied..............................................25887,
  35355, 41100, 41313, 41315, 41317, 41319, 41321, 41490, 41493, 41501, 
                                       41616, 41617, 41620, 41624, 43712
    Guidance document availability.................................26892
    Authority citation revised.....................................28682
    Petition denial corrected......................................31330
    Public briefings...............................................39859
    Petitions granted..............................................41082
    Intrepretation.................................................43350
    Effective date corrected.......................................46668
    Appendix IX amended...............................1254, 15889, 25701
    Appendixes III and VII amended; eff. 8-13-86....................5330
    Appendixes III, VII, and VIII amended; eff. 8-25-86.............6541
    Appendix IX amended...........................................25701,
  25891, 29219, 29222, 32460, 37021, 37725, 41308, 41310, 41313, 41327, 
                                              41483, 41486, 41490, 41499
    Appendix IX corrected..........................................27038
    Appendix IX correctly designated...............................27039
    Appendix VIII revised..........................................28305
    Appendixes III and VII amended.................................37729
261.1(a)(1) revised; eff. 9-22-86..................................10174
    (a) introductory text and (1) amended..........................40636
261.4  Policy and interpretation....................................7722
    (a)(8) added...................................................25471
    (c) and (d)(1) introductory text amended.......................40636
261.5  Policy and interpretation....................................7722
    Revised; eff. 9-22-86..........................................10174
    (f)(3) introductory text and (g)(3) introductory text revised 
                                                                   28682
    (b), (c), (e) introductory text, (f)(2), and (g)(2) amended....40636
261.6  (a)(3)(i) revised...........................................28682
    (a)(3) amended; (c)(1) revised.................................40637
261.7  (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) amended..............................40637
261.20  (b) amended................................................40636
261.30  (c) amended................................................40636
261.31  Table corrected.............................................2702
    Table amended; eff. 8-25-86.....................................6541

[[Page 608]]

261.32  Table amended; eff. 8-13-86.................................5330
    Table amended..................................................19322
    Table corrected................................................33612
    Table amended..................................................37729
261.33  (e) table revised..........................................28298
    (f) table amended; eff. 8-25-86.................................6541
    Policy and interpretation.......................................7722
    (f) introductory text revised; eff. 9-22-86....................10175
    (f) table revised..............................................28300
262  Authority citation revised....................................25472
    Public briefings...............................................39859
262.11  (d) added..................................................40637
262.20  (e) added; eff. 9-22-86....................................10175
262.34  (a) introductory text revised; (d), (e), and (f) added; 
        eff. 9-22-86...............................................10175
    (a) introductory text republished; (a)(1) and (d)(2) revised; 
(d) (3) and (4) redesignated as (d) (4) and (5); new (d)(3) added 
                                                                   25472
262.41  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
    (a) introductory text, (3), (4), and (5) revised; (b) amended 
                                                                   28682
262.44  Added; eff. 9-22-86........................................10176
262.50  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
262.50--262.58 (Subpart E)  Revised................................28682
262.60 (Subpart F)  Added..........................................28685
262.70 (Subpart G)  Added..........................................28685
262  Appendix policy and interpretation.............................7722
    Appendix amended........................................28685, 35192
263  Authority citation revised.............................28685, 40637
263.12  Amended....................................................40637
263.20  (h) added; eff. 9-22-86....................................10176
    (a), (c), (e)(2), (f)(2), and (g)(3) revised; (g)(4) added.....28685
264  Authority citation revised....................................25472
    Guidance document availability.................................26008
    Public briefings...............................................39859
264.1  Policy and interpretation....................................7722
264.13  (a)(1) and (b)(6) revised; (b)(7) added....................40637
264.15  (b)(4) revised.............................................25472
264.18  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
264.70  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
264.73  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
    (b)(6) revised.................................................25472
    (b)(3) revised; (b) (10) through (14) and OMB number added.....40637
264.75  (h) revised; (i) and (j) added.............................28556
264.90--264.101 (Subpart F)  Policy and interpretation..............7722
264.90  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
264.101  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.110  (b)(3) added..............................................25472
264.140  (b)(3) added..............................................25472
264.110--264.120 (Subpart G)  Revised; eff. 10-29-86...............16444
264.141  (f) amended; eff. 10-29-86................................16447
264.142  (a), (b) introductory text, and (c) revised; eff. 10-29-
        86.........................................................16447
264.143  (a)(10), (b)(4)(ii), (c)(5), (d)(8), (e)(5), (f)(1)(i) 
        (B) and (D), (ii) (B) and (D), and (2), and (i) revised; 
        eff. 10-29-86..............................................16448
264.144  (a), (b) introductory text, and (c) revised; eff. 10-29-
        86.........................................................16449
264.145  Introductory text, (a)(11), (b)(4)(ii), (c)(5), (d)(9), 
        (e)(5), (f)(1)(i) (B) and (D), (ii) (B) and (D), (2), and 
        (i) revised; eff. 10-29-86.................................16449
264.147  (e) revised; eff. 10-29-86................................16450
    (g) redesignated as (h); new (g) added; (a)(2) and (3) and 
(b)(2) and (3) revised; interim....................................25354
264.151  (b) revised; (f) and (g) amended; eff. 10-29-86...........16450
    (g) revised; interim...........................................25354
    (h) redesignated as (h)(1); (h)(2) added; interim..............25355
264.190--264.199 (Subpart J)  Revised..............................25472
264.190  (b) corrected.............................................29430
264.191  OMB number corrected......................................29430
264.192  (b) introductory text corrected...........................29430

[[Page 609]]

264.193  (a)(3), (e)(1)(iv) and (2)(iii), (f)(2), and (i) (1) and 
        (2) corrected..............................................29430
264.196  (d)(2) correctly revised; (d)(3)(iv) and (f) Note 
        corrected..................................................29430
264.197  (c) introductory text corrected...........................29430
264.221  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.222  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.226  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.227  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.228  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.252  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.253  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.254  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.301  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.302  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.303  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.310  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
264.314  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
265  Guidance document availability................................26008
    Public briefings...............................................39859
265.1  Policy and interpretation....................................7722
265.13  (b)(6) revised.............................................25478
    (a)(1) and (b)(6) revised; (b)(7) added........................40638
265.15  (b)(4) revised.............................................25478
265.18  Policy and interpretation...................................7722
265.73  (b) (3) and (6) revised....................................25479
    (b)(3) revised; (b) (8) through (12) and OMB number added......40638
265.75  (h) revised; (i) and (j) added.............................28556
265.110--265.120 (Subpart G)  Revised; eff. 10-29-86...............16451
265.110  (b)(2) revised............................................25479
265.140  (a) revised; eff. 10-29-86................................16455
    (b) revised....................................................25479
265.141  (f) amended; eff. 10-29-86................................16456
265.142  (a), (b) introductory text, (c) revised; (b) (i) and (ii) 
        redesignated as (b) (1) and (2); eff. 10-29-86.............16456
265.143  (a)(10), (b)(4)(ii), (c)(8), (d)(5), (e)(1)(i) (B) and 
        (D), (ii) (B) and (D), (2), and (h) revised; eff. 10-29-86
                                                                   16456
265.144  (a), (b) introductory text, and (c) revised; eff. 10-29-
        86.........................................................16457
265.145  Introductory text, (a)(11), (b)(4)(ii), (c)(9), (d)(5), 
        (e)(1)(i) (B) and (D), (ii) (B) and (D), (2), and (h) 
        revised; eff. 10-29-86.....................................16457
265.147  (e) revised; eff. 10-29-86................................16458
    (g) redesignated as (h); new (g) added; (a)(2) and (3) and 
(b)(2) and (3) revised; interim....................................25355
265.190--265.201 (Subpart J)  Revised..............................25479
265.192  (a)(3)(i)(G) correctly revised; (a)(3)(ii) (A), (B), and 
        (C) corrected..............................................29430
265.193  (a)(4), (e)(2)(ii), (g) introductory text, and (i)(1) 
        corrected..................................................29430
265.221  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
265.254  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
265.301  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
265.314  Policy and interpretation..................................7722
    (d) correctly reinstated and republished.......................19177

                                  1987

40 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260  Authority citation revised.............................41295, 46963
260.10  Amended....................................................46963
260.11  (a) amended.................................................8073
    (a) introductory text revised..................................41295
261  Petitions denied..............................................28696
    Authority citation revised.....................................28698
261.3  (c)(2)(ii)(B) revised.......................................11821
261.6  (a)(3)(vii) revised.........................................11821

[[Page 610]]

261.32  Table amended..............................................28698
261.33  Introductory text revised..................................21306
    (c) correctly revised..........................................26012
261  Appendix IX amended.......................2522, 17403, 29848, 29851
262  Authority citation revised....................................35898
262.42  Revised....................................................35898
262.44  Revised....................................................35899
262.51  Revised....................................................25787
264  Authority citation revised...................................25946,
                                                     44320, 45798, 46963
264.1  (h) correctly added.........................................21016
264.10  (b) revised................................................46963
264.13  (b)(7)(iii) revised........................................25787
    (a)(1) corrected...............................................21016
264.15  (b)(4) amended.............................................46963
264.18  (b)(1)(ii) introductory text revised.......................46963
264.73  (b)(6) revised.............................................46963
    (b)(14) corrected..............................................21016
264.90  (d) added..................................................46963
264.98  (h)(2), (3) introductory text and (4)(i) introductory text 
        revised....................................................25946
264.99  (f) revised................................................25946
264.100  (e) introductory text revised; (e) (1) and (2) 
        redesignated as (e) (3) and (4); new (e) (1) and (2) added
                                                                   45798
264.101  (c) added.................................................45798
264.111  (c) revised...............................................46963
264.112  (a)(2) revised............................................46963
264.114  Amended...................................................46963
264.117  (a)(1) (i) and (ii) revised...............................46963
264.118  (b) (1) and (2) (i) and (ii) revised......................46964
264.144  (a) introductory text revised.............................46964
264.147  (g)(2) revised............................................44320
    (b) introductory text amended..................................46964
    (g) redesignation as (h); new (g) addition; (a) (2) and (3) 
and (b) (2) and (3) revision at 51 FR 25354 confirmed..............44320
264.151  (h)(2) revised............................................44320
    (h) redesignation as (h)(1); (h)(2) addition at 51 FR 25355 
confirmed..........................................................44320
264.600--264.604 (Subpart X)  Added................................46964
264  Appendix IX added.............................................25947
265  Authority citation revised.............................44321, 45798
265.1  (c)(2) removed..............................................45798
    (e) correctly added............................................21016
265.13  (b)(7)(iii) revised........................................25788
265.147  (g)(2) revised............................................44321
    (g) redesignation as (h); new (g) addition; (a) (2) and (3) 
and (b) (2) and (3) revision at 51 FR 25355 confirmd...............44321
265.228  Revised; eff. 9-15-87......................................8708

                                  1988

40 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260.10  Amended.............................................27301, 34086
261  Technical correction and clarification.........................5573
    Strategies and procedures.......................................6822
    Petition denial at 51 FR 41624 withdrawn; policy determination
                                                                   21639
    Authority citation revised..............................27163, 27301
    Petitions denied...............................................30055
    Petition denials at 52 FR 41317 and 41620 withdrawn............38291
261.4  (e) and (f) added...........................................27301
    (b)(7) revised.................................................35420
261.5  (e) Comment added; (f)(2) revised...........................27163
261.32  Table amended..............................................35420
261.33  (e) table correctly revised................................13383
    (f) table correctly revised....................................13384
    (f) table amended..............................................43881
    (e) table amended..............................................43884
261  Appendix VII amended..........................................35421
    Appendix VIII correctly revised................................13388
    Appendix VIII amended.........................................43881,
                                                                   43884
    Appendix IX corrected....................................4850, 15170
    Appendix IX amended......................................7913, 20117
    Appendix IX amended...........................................29045,
                                                     31334, 37761, 47693
    Appendix IX correctly designated...............................29988
262.10  (b), (c) and (d) correctly revised.........................27164
262.20  (a) amended................................................45090
262.51  Correctly revised..........................................27164
262.70  Correctly revised..........................................27165

[[Page 611]]

262  Appendix (Hazardous waste manifest form effectiveness 
        extended to 12-31-88)......................................37563
    Appendix amended...............................................45091
264  Technical correction...........................................7740
264.1  (g)(4) correctly revised....................................27165
264.13  (b)(7)(iii) revised........................................31211
264.54  Amended....................................................37935
264.73  (b) (10) through (14) revised; (b) (15) and (16) added.....31211
264.91  (a) (1) and (2) revised....................................39728
264.92  Revised....................................................39728
264.97  (a)(1) amended; (a)(3), (i), and (j) added; (g)(3) 
        redesignated as (a)(1)(i); new (a)(1)(i), (g), and (h) 
        revised....................................................39728
264.98  (c), (d), (f), (g), and (h) revised; (i), (j) and (k) 
        removed....................................................39729
264.99  (c), (d), (f), and (g) revised; (h) and (l) removed; (i), 
        (j), and (k) redesignated as (h), (i), and (j); new (h) 
        introductory text, and (i) introductory text revised.......39730
264.112  (c) introductory text, (1), and (2) introductory text 
        revised....................................................37935
264.114  Amended...................................................34086
264.118  (d) introductory text, (1) and (2) introductory text 
        revised....................................................37935
264.141  (h) added.................................................33950
264.147  (h) redesignated as (k); (a) introductory text, (2), and 
        (3), (b) introductory text, (2), (3), and (4), (g) 
        heading, and (1) introductory text revised; (g)(1)(ii) 
        removed; (g)(2) (i) and (ii) amended; (a) (4) through (7), 
        (b) (5) through (7), new (h), (i), and (j) added...........33950
264.151  (b), (h)(2), (i), and (j) amended; (g) revised; (k), (l), 
        and (m) added..............................................33952
264.190  (a) amended; (b) revised..................................34086
264.193  (f)(3) revised............................................34086
264.196  First Note revised........................................34086
265  Technical correction...........................................7740
    Clarification...................................................9944
    Authority citation revised.....................................31211
265.1  (c)(8) correctly revised....................................27165
265.13  (b)(7)(iii) revised........................................31211
265.73  (b) (8) through (12) revised; (b) (13) and (14) added......31211
265.110  (b)(2) redesignated as (b)(3); new (b)(2) added...........34086
265.112  (c)(3) and (4) amended....................................37935
265.114  Amended...................................................34086
265.118  (d) (3) and (4) amended...................................37935
265.141  (h) added.................................................33959
265.147  (h) redesignated as (k); (a) introductory text, (2), and 
        (3), (b) introductory text, (2), (3), and (4), (g) heading 
        and (1) introductory text revised; (g)(1)(ii) removed; 
        (g)(2) (i) and (ii) amended; (a) (4) through (7), (b) (5) 
        through (7), new (h), (i), and (j) added...................33959
265.190  (a) amended; (b) revised..................................34087
265.193  (f)(3) and (g)(3)(iii) revised............................34087
265.196  First Note revised........................................34087
265.201  (c)(3) revised............................................34087

                                  1989

40 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260  Technical correction..........................................26198
260.11  (a) amended................................................40266
260.22  (b) revised................................................27116
261  Administrative stay............................................4021
    Petition denied...................................18503-18505, 37333
    Hazardous waste identification and listing..............31335, 47355
261.3  (a)(2) (i) and (iii) revised................................36641
261.4  (b)(7) revised..............................................36641
261.31  Table amended..............................................50977
261.32  Table amended..............................................41407
261  Appendix IX amended...........................................5085,
           11712, 15938, 15939, 19893, 20589, 21951, 27169, 31680, 34180
    Appendix IX Table 2 amended....................................38524
    Appendix IX corrected..........................................39359
    Appendix IX technical correction...............................40239
    Appendix III Tables 2 and 3 amended............................40266
    Appendix VII Table amended.....................................41407
    Appendix III Table 1 amended...................................41407
    Appendix IX Table 1 amended....................................43821
    Appendix VII amended...........................................50978

[[Page 612]]

    Appendix VIII amended..........................................50978
262  Appendix (Hazardous waste manifest form effectiveness 
        extended)...................................................7036
264  Technical correction...................................26198, 36970
264.13  (a)(1), (3)(i) and (b)(1) revised..........................33394
264.73  Amended....................................................26647
264.110--264.120 (Subpart G)  Amended (OMB number).................33395
264.112  (d)(2) revised............................................33394
264.113  (a) introductory text, (1)(ii)(A), (b) introductory text, 
        (1)(ii)(A) and (c) revised; (d) and (e) added..............33394
264.142  (a) (3) and (4) revised...................................33395
265.13  (a)(1), (3)(i) and (b)(1) revised..........................33396
265.73  Amended; OMB numbers.......................................26648
265.110--265.120 (Subpart G)  Amended (OMB numbers)................33397
265.112  (d)(2) revised............................................33396
265.113  (a) introductory text, (1)(ii)(A), (b) introductory text, 
        (1)(ii)(A) and (c) revised; (d) and (e) added..............33396
265.142  (a) (3) and (4) revised...................................33397

                                  1990

40 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260  Court remand response..........................................6640
260.10  Amended; eff. 7-23-90.......................................2353
    Amended........................................................50482
260.11  (a) amended.................................................8949
    (a) amended; eff. 12-21-90.....................................25493
261  Petition denied...............................................18876
    Court remand response...........................................6640
    Compliance waiver notices......................................13480
    Technical correction...........................................32733
    Hazardous waste identification and listing.....................38058
    Hazardous waste identification and listing; clarification......39409
261.4  (b)(7) revised; eff. 7-23-90.................................2353
    (b)(6)(i) introductory text and (9) revised; (b)(10) added; 
eff. 9-25-90.......................................................11862
    (b)(10) revised; eff. 9-25-90..................................26987
    Technical amendment............................................31388
    (b)(11) added; interim.........................................40837
    (a)(9) added...................................................50482
261.6  (c)(1) revised; (c)(2)(iii) and (d) added; eff. 12-21-90....25493
261.8  Added; eff. 9-25-90.........................................11862
    Technical amendment............................................31388
261.11  (a)(3) introductory text revised...........................18726
261.20  (b) revised................................................22684
261.21  (b) revised................................................22684
261.22  (b) revised................................................22684
261.23  (b) revised................................................22684
261.24  Revised; eff. 9-25-90......................................11862
    (b) introductory text revised..................................22684
    Table 1 amended; eff. 9-25-90..................................26987
    Technical correction...........................................31388
261.30  (b) revised; eff. 9-25-90..................................11863
    Technical correction...........................................31388
261.31  Table amended........................................5342, 22684
    Table amended; existing text and table designated as (a); (b) 
added..............................................................46396
    (a) table amended..............................................50482
    (a) table and (b)(2)(ii)(B) corrected..........................51707
261.32  Table amended; eff. 11-2-90................................18505
261.33  (c) revised................................................22684
261.35  Added (OMB number pending).................................50482
261  Appendix III Table 2 footnote (a) and Table 3 amended..........8950
    Appendix II revised; eff. 9-25-90..............................11863
    Appendix IX, Table 1 amended...................................11192
    Appendix III Table 1 and Appendix VII Table amended; eff. 11-
2-90...............................................................18505
    Appendix VII amended.............................22684, 46396, 50483
    Appendix IX technical correction...............................23634
    Appendix II revised; eff. 9-25-90..............................26987
    Appendix IX amended........29018, 29020, 29022, 29359, 34718, 43132, 
                                                            47329, 47335
    Appendix II technical correction...............................31388
    Appendix III, Table 1 amended..................................50483
    Appendix VIII amended..........................................50483
262  Court remand response..........................................6640
262.11  (c) introductory text revised..............................22684

[[Page 613]]

262.23  (e) added.....................................2354; eff. 7-23-90
262.34  (a)(4) revised.............................................22684
    (a)(2) through (4) redesignated as (a)(3) through (5); new 
(a)(2) added (OMB number pending)..................................50483
264  Court remand response..........................................6640
    Technical correction...........................................32733
    Hazardous waste identification and listing; clarification......39409
264.13  (a)(2) amended.............................................22685
    (b)(6) revised; eff. 12-21-90..................................25494
264.15  (b)(4) amended; eff. 12-21-90..............................25494
264.73  (b)(3) and (6) revised.....................................25494
264.77  (c) revised; eff. 12-21-90.................................25494
264.113  Technical correction......................................25976
264.190  Introductory text revised; (c) added......................50484
264.221  (c) revised...............................................19263
264.229  Introductory text revised.................................22685
264.256  Introductory text revised.................................22685
264.281  Introductory text revised.................................22685
264.301  (e)(1) revised; eff. 9-25-90..............................11875
    (c) revised....................................................19264
    Technical correction...........................................31388
264.312  (a) introductory text and (b) revised.....................22685
264.316  (f) added.................................................22685
264.570--264.575 (Subpart W)  Added................................50484
264.571  OMB number pending........................................50484
264.572  OMB number pending........................................50484
264.573  OMB number pending........................................50484
264.574  OMB number pending........................................50484
264.1030--264.1049 (Subpart AA)  Added; eff. 12-21-90..............25494
264.1050--264.1079 (Subpart BB)  Added; eff. 12-21-90..............25501
265  Court remand response..........................................6640
    Technical correction...........................................32733
    Hazardous waste identification and listing; clarification......39409
265.1  (e) revised.................................................22685
265.13  (a)(2) amended.............................................22685
    (b)(6) revised; eff. 12-21-90..................................25506
265.15  (b)(4) amended; eff. 12-21-90..............................25506
265.73  (b)(3) and (6) revised; eff. 12-21-90......................25507
265.77  (d) added; eff. 12-21-90...................................25507
265.113  Technical correction......................................25976
265.190  Introductory text revised; (c) added......................50486
265.221  (d)(1) revised; eff. 9-25-90..............................11876
    Technical correction...........................................31388
265.229  Introductory text revised.................................22685
265.256  (a) introductory text revised.............................22685
265.273  (a) revised; eff. 9-25-90.................................11876
    Technical correction...........................................31388
265.281  Introductory text revised.................................22686
265.312  (a) introductory text and (b) revised.....................22686
265.316  (f) added.................................................22686
265.440--265.445 (Subpart W)  Added................................50486
265.441  OMB number pending........................................50486
265.443  OMB number pending........................................50486
265.444  OMB number pending........................................50486
265.445  OMB number pending........................................50486
265.1030--265.1049 (Subpart AA)  Added; eff. 12-21-90..............25507
265.1050--265.1099 (Subpart BB)  Added.............................25512

                                  1991

40 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260.10  Amended; eff. 8-21-91.......................................7206
    Amended........................................................66368
260.11  (a) amended; eff. 8-21-91...................................7206
261  Technical amendment.............................................643
    Hazardous waste identification and listing.....................41072
    Petition denied................................................41944
    Regulation at 55 FR 38058 removed..............................58312
261.2  (d)(2) redesignated as (d)(3); new (d)(2) added; eff. 8-21-
        91..........................................................7206
    (d)(3) and (4) correctly designated as (d)(4) and (5)..........32688
    (d)(2) revised.................................................42512
261.3  (d)(1) revised...............................................3876
    (c)(2)(ii)(B) amended..........................................32692
    (c)(2)(ii)(C) added............................................41176
    (c)(2)(ii)(B) correctly designated.............................42512
261.4  (b)(11) revised..............................................3978
    (b)(12) added; interim..........................................5915

[[Page 614]]

    (a)(10) added; (b)(4) revised; (b)(7) and (8) amended; eff. 8-
21-91...............................................................7206
    (b)(11) revised................................................13411
    (b)(7) introductory text amended; eff. 7-15-91.................27318
    (a)(9) revised.................................................30195
    (a)(11) added..................................................41177
261.6  (a)(3)(vii) removed; (a)(3)(viii) and (ix) redesignated as 
        (a)(3)(vii) and (viii); eff. 8-21-91........................7207
    (a)(2) introductory text and (ii) amended......................32692
261.20  (b) revised.................................................3876
261.31  (a) table amended....................................3877, 27336
    (a) table amended; interim.....................................21959
261.32  Table amended..............................................19952
261.33  (e) table amended...........................................7568
261.35  (b) revised................................................30195
261  Appendix VIII amended..........................................7568
    Appendix IX amended.........14202, 19587, 19593, 41289, 67000, 67207
262  Authority citation revised....................................43705
262.10  Note 2 revised..............................................3877
262.11  (c) introductory text revised...............................3877
262.34  (d)(4) revised..............................................3877
    (a)(3) through (5) redesignated as (2) through (4) and 
revised; (a)(1) revised............................................30195
262.53  (b) revised................................................43705
262.56  (b) revised................................................43705
264.112  (d)(1) revised; eff. 8-21-91...............................7207
264.147  (a)(2) revised; (b) introductory text amended.............30200
264.340  (a) revised; eff. 8-21-91..................................7207
264.570--264.575 (Subpart W)  Revised..............................30196
264.572  (a)(4) revised............................................27336
264.1030  (a) and (b) introductory text amended....................19290
264.1033  (f)(3) amended...........................................19290
264.1035  (b)(4)(ii) amended.......................................19290
264.1052  (b)(1) amended...........................................19290
265.13  (b)(6) amended.............................................19290
265.73  (b)(3) amended.............................................19290
265.91  (a)(3) added...............................................66369
265.112  (a), (d)(1) and (2) revised; eff. 8-21-91..................7207
    (d)(2) revised.................................................42512
265.113  (a) introductory text and (b) introductory text revised; 
        eff. 8-21-91................................................7207
    (a) introductory text and (b) introductory text amended........42512
265.147  (a)(2) revised............................................30200
    (a)(1)(i) and (ii) correctly added.............................47912
265.340  (a) revised; eff. 8-21-91..................................7208
265.370  Amended...................................................32692
265.440  (a) revised...............................................30198
265.443  (a)(4) revised............................................27336
    (b)(2)(ii) redesignated as (iii); new (b)(2)(ii) added; (m) 
introductory text and (1) introductory text revised; (m)(3) 
amended............................................................30198
265.1030  (b) introductory text amended............................19290
265.1034  (c)(1)(vi) amended.......................................19290
265.1035  (b)(4)(ii) and (c)(5) amended............................19290
265.1052  (e)(3) amended...........................................19290
265.1064  (c) introductory text amended............................19290

                                  1992

40 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260.10  Amended; eff. 7-29-92.......................................3486
    Amended...................................37263, 38564, 41611, 54460
    Regulation at 57 FR 37263 effective date corrected......39275, 41173
260.20  (a) amended................................................38564
261.2  (c)(2)(iv) revised..........................................38564
261.3  Revised......................................................7632
    (a)(2)(i), (c)(2)(ii)(B) and (d)(1) corrected; (c)(2)(ii)(C) 
correctly added....................................................23063
    (a)(2)(iii) and (c)(2)(ii)(C) revised; (f) added...............37263
    Regulation at 57 FR 37263 effective date corrected......39275, 41173
    (a)(2)(v) added................................................41611
    (e) removed....................................................49279
261.4  (b)(15) added...............................................21534
    (a)(10) revised................................................27888
    (b)(15) revised................................................29220
    (b)(15) correctly revised......................................29220
    (b)(6)(ii) introductory text and (9) revised...................30658
    (a)(10) revised................................................37305
261.5  (j) amended.................................................41612

[[Page 615]]

261.6  (a)(2)(iii) and (3)(iii) removed; (a)(2)(iv), (v) and 
        (3)(iv) through (viii) redesignated as (a)(2)(iii), (iv) 
        and (3)(iii) through (vii); (a)(4) added...................41612
261.11  (a)(3) introductory text revised..............................14
261.31  Table amended..............................................61502
261.32  Amended....................................................37305
    Table amended..................................................47385
261  Appendix VII amended...................................37305, 47385
    Appendix IX amended..............................37885, 37888, 57674
    Appendix II amended............................................55117
262.34  (a)(1)(iii) introductory text amended; (a)(1)(iii)(B) and 
        (a)(1) concluding text revised; (a)(1)(iv) added; (a)(2) 
        removed....................................................37264
264.1  (g)(2) revised..............................................38564
264.13  (a)(1) revised..............................................8088
    (c)(3) added...................................................54460
264.15  (b)(4) revised; eff. 7-29-92................................3486
264.19  Added; eff. 7-29-92.........................................3486
264.73  (b)(6) revised; eff. 7-29-92................................3487
264.110  (b)(1), (2) and (3) amended; (b)(4) added.................37264
264.111  (c) revised...............................................37265
264.112  (a)(2) revised............................................37265
264.140  (b)(1), (2) and (3) amended; (b)(4) added.................37265
264.142  (a) introductory text revised.............................37265
264.143  (f)(10) introductory text revised.........................42835
264.145  (f)(11) introductory text revised.........................42836
264.147  (a)(7), (b)(7) and (f)(6) revised; (h)(4) and (5) added 
                                                                   42836
264.151  (f), (g), (h) and (k) revised; (n) added..................42836
264.221  (c) and (d) revised; (f), (g) and (h) redesignated as 
        (g), (h) and (i); new (f) added; eff. 7-29-92...............3487
264.222  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3487
264.223  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3488
264.226  (d) added; eff. 7-29-92....................................3488
264.228  (b)(2) and (3) redesignated as (b)(3) and (4); new (b)(2) 
        added; eff. 7-29-92.........................................3488
264.251  (c) through (g) redesignated as (g) through (k); new (c) 
        through (f) added; eff. 7-29-92.............................3488
264.252  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3489
264.253  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3489
264.254  (c) added; eff. 7-29-92....................................3489
264.301  (c) and (d) revised; (f) through (k) redesignated as (g) 
        through (l); new (f) added; eff. 7-29-92....................3489
264.302  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3490
264.303  (c) added; eff. 7-29-92....................................3490
264.304  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3491
264.310  (b)(3), (4) and (5) redesignated as (b)(4), (5) and (6); 
        new (b)(3) added; eff. 7-29-92..............................3491
264.314  (e) redesignated as (f); (a)(2), (b), and (d)(1)(ii) 
        revised; new (e) added.....................................54460
264.316  (b) and (c) revised.......................................54460
264.570  (a) revised; (c) added....................................61502
264.571  (a) amended; (b) revised..................................61503
264.572  Revised...................................................61503
264.573  (a)(4), (b) introductory text and (i) revised; (b)(3) 
        added......................................................61503
    (a)(4) revised..................................................5861
264.1100--264.1102 (Subpart DD)  Added.............................37265
265  Authority citation revised.....................................3491
265.1  (c)(6) revised..............................................38564
265.13  (a)(1) revised..............................................8088
    (c)(3) added...................................................54461
265.15  (b)(4) revised; eff. 7-29-92................................3491
265.19  Added; eff. 7-29-92.........................................3491
265.73  (b)(6) revised; eff. 7-29-92................................3492
265.110  (b)(1), (2) and (3) amended; (b)(4) added.................37267
265.111  (c) revised...............................................37267
265.112  (d)(4) amended............................................37267
265.140  (b) revised...............................................37267
265.142  (a) introductory text revised.............................37267
265.143  (e)(10) introductory text revised.........................42843
265.145  (e)(11) introductory text revised.........................42843
265.147  (a)(7), (b)(7) and (f)(6) revised; (h)(4) and (5) added 
                                                                   42843

[[Page 616]]

265.221  Heading, (a) and (c) revised; (f) and (g) redesignated 
        from 265.222 (a) and (b); eff. 7-29-92......................3492
    (h) added......................................................37267
265.222  Heading revised; (a) and (b) redesignated as 265.221 (f) 
        and (g); new (a) through (c) added; eff. 7-29-92............3492
265.223  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3492
265.226  Heading revised; (b) added; eff. 7-29-92...................3493
265.228  (b)(2) and (3) redesignated as (b)(3) and (4); new (b)(2) 
        added; eff. 7-29-92.........................................3493
265.254  Revised; eff. 7-29-92......................................3493
265.255  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3493
265.259  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3494
265.260  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3494
265.301  Heading, (a) and (c) revised; (f), (g), (h) and (i) 
        redesignated from 265.302 (a), (b), (c) and (d); eff. 7-
        29-92.......................................................3494
    (d)(1) revised.................................................30658
265.302  (a), (b), (c) and (d) redesignated as 265.301 (f), (g), 
        (h) and (i); heading revised; (a), (b) and (c) added; eff. 
        7-29-92.....................................................3494
265.303  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3494
265.304  Added; eff. 7-29-92........................................3495
265.310  (b)(2), (3) and (4) redesignated as (b)(3), (4) and (5); 
        new (b)(2) added; eff. 7-29-92..............................3495
265.314  (f) redesignated as (g); (a)(2), (b) and (c)(1)(ii) 
        revised; new (f) added.....................................54461
265.316  (b) and (c) revised.......................................54461
265.440  (a) revised; (c) added....................................61503
265.441  (a) amended; (b) revised..................................61504
265.442  Revised...................................................61504
265.443  (a)(4), (b) introductory text and (i) revised; (b)(3) 
        added......................................................61504
265.443  (a)(4) revised.............................................5861
265.1100--265.1102 (Subpart DD)  Added.............................37268

                                  1993

40 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260.10  Amended.....................................................8682
260.11  (a) amended.........................................38883, 46049
260.22  (d)(1)(i) revised..........................................46049
261  Clarification.................................................15287
    OMB number.....................................................34370
    Determination..................................................42466
261.4  (b)(15) redesignated as (b)(13); (b)(14) added..............26424
261.5  (j) amended.................................................26424
261.22  (a)(1) and (2) revised.....................................46049
261.24  (a) revised................................................46049
261  Appendix II corrected..........................................6854
    Appendix IX amended.....................................40070, 42244
    Appendixes II and III revised..................................46049
    Appendix X removed.............................................46050
262  OMB number....................................................34370
264  OMB number....................................................34370
264.1  (g)(2) revised..............................................26424
    (g)(6) revised; interim........................................29884
264.3  Amended......................................................8683
264.101  (b) revised................................................8683
264.112  OMB number................................................18017
264.113  OMB number................................................18017
264.115  OMB number................................................18017
264.116  OMB number................................................18017
264.118  OMB number................................................18017
264.119  OMB number................................................18017
264.120  OMB number................................................18017
264.142  OMB number................................................18017
264.143  OMB number................................................18017
264.144  OMB number................................................18017
264.145  OMB number................................................18017
264.147  OMB number................................................18017
264.148  OMB number................................................18017
264.149  OMB number................................................18017
264.150  OMB number................................................18017
264.190  (a) amended...............................................46050
264.314  (c) revised...............................................46050
264.552--264.553 (Subpart S)  Added.................................8683
264.1035  OMB number...............................................18017
264.1036  OMB number...............................................18017
264.1062  OMB number...............................................18017
264.1064  OMB number...............................................18017
264.1065  OMB number...............................................18017
265  OMB number....................................................34370
265.1  (b) amended..................................................8685
    (c)(6) revised.................................................26424
    (c)(10) revised; interim.......................................29884
265.112  OMB number................................................18017
265.113  OMB number................................................18017
265.115  OMB number................................................18017
265.116  OMB number................................................18017
265.118  OMB number................................................18017
265.119  OMB number................................................18017
265.120  OMB number................................................18017
265.142  OMB number................................................18017
265.143  OMB number................................................18017
265.144  OMB number................................................18017

[[Page 617]]

265.145  OMB number................................................18017
265.147  OMB number................................................18017
265.148  OMB number................................................18017
265.149  OMB number................................................18017
265.150  OMB number................................................18017
265.190  (a) amended...............................................46050
265.314  (d) revised...............................................46050
265.1035  OMB number...............................................18017
265.1064  OMB number...............................................18017

                                  1994

40 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260.11  (a)  amended.................................................468
    (a)  corrected.................................................28484
    (a) and (b) amended............................................62926
260.30  Introductory text and (b) revised..........................48041
260.31  (a) introductory text and (b) introductory text revised....48041
260.32  Introductory text revised..................................48041
260.33  Revised....................................................48041
261.2  (e)(1)(iii) revised.........................................48041
261.3  (c)(2)(ii)(B) revised.......................................38545
261.4  (e)(2)(i), (ii), (3), (f)(3), (4) and (5) revised............8365
    (a)(12) added..................................................38545
261.6  (a)(3)(v) removed; (a)(3)(vi) and (vii) redesignated as 
        (a)(3)(v) and (vi); (a)(3)(iv) and new (vi) revised........38545
261.33  (e) table amended..........................................31551
261  Appendix VIII  amended...................................468, 31551
    Appendix IX  amended.....................................5726, 47814
    Appendix IX  corrected.........................................52862
262.34  (a)(1)(i), (ii) and (d)(2) revised.........................62926
264.1  (g)(6) revised..............................................48042
264.13  (b)(6) amended; (b)(8) added...............................62926
264.15  (b)(4) amended.............................................62926
264.73  (b)(3) and (6) revised.....................................62926
264.77  (c) revised................................................62926
264.151  (d) and (k) amended; eff. 8-9-94..........................29960
264.179  Added.....................................................62926
264.200  Added.....................................................62926
264.232  Added.....................................................62926
264.601  Introductory text amended.................................62927
264.1033  (k)(2) revised; (m) added................................62927
264.1080--264.1091 (Subpart CC)  Added.............................62927
264  appendix I amended............................................13891
265.1  (c)(10) revised.............................................48042
    (b) amended....................................................62934
265.13  (b)(6) amended; (b)(8) added...............................62935
265.15  (b)(4) amended.............................................62935
265.73  (b)(3) and (6) revised.....................................62935
265.77  (d) revised................................................62935
265.178  Added.....................................................62935
265.202  Added.....................................................62935
265.231  Added.....................................................62935
265.1033  (j)(2) revised; (l) added................................62935
265.1080--265.1091 (Subpart CC)  Added.............................62935
265  Appendix I amended............................................13892

                                  1995

40 CFR
                                                                   60 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260  Technical correction..........................................35452
260.10  Amended....................................................25540
260.11  (a) amended..........................................3095, 17004
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.........26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
260.20  (a) revised................................................25540
260.23  Added......................................................25540
261  Determination..................................................7366
    Interpretation.................................................41817
261.3  (a)(2)(iv)(E) amended; (a)(2)(iv)(F), (G) and (c)(2)(ii)(D) 
        added; eff. 8-9-95..........................................7848
261.5  (c), (f)(3) and (g)(3) revised..............................25541
261.6  (a)(3)(ii) removed; (a)(3)(iii) through (vi) redesignated 
        as (a)(3)(ii) through (v)..................................25541
261.9  Added.......................................................25541
261.31  (a) amended................................................33913
261.32  Table amended; eff. 8-9-95..................................7849
261.33  (e) table and (f) table amended; eff. 8-9-95................7849
    (e) table and (f) table corrected..............................19165
    (e) table corrected............................................25620
261  Appendix IX amended................1746, 31114, 31118, 54312, 54313
    Appendixes VII and VIII amended; eff. 8-9-95....................7853

[[Page 618]]

    Appendix VIII corrected........................................19165
262  Technical correction..........................................35452
262.10  (b) through (f) redesignated as (c) through (g); new (b) 
        added......................................................25541
262.11  (d) revised................................................25541
262.34  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264  Technical correction..........................................35452
264.1  (g)(11) added...............................................25542
264.13  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.15  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.73  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.77  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.179  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.200  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.232  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.314  (e)(2)(ii) amended; (e)(2)(iii) added.....................35705
264.601  Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.1033  Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95 
                                                                   26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.1080--264.1091 (Subpart CC)  Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. 
        date delayed to 12-6-95....................................26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
264.1080  (b)(1) and (c) revised; eff. 12-6-95.....................26828
    (d) added......................................................50428
    (b)(1) and (c) revised.........................................56953
264.1089  (i) added................................................50429
265  Technical correction..........................................35452
265.1  (c)(14) added...............................................25542
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.........26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.13  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.15  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.73  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.77  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95.....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.178  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.202  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.231  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95....26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952

[[Page 619]]

265.314  (f)(2)(ii) amended; (f)(2)(iii) added.....................35705
265.1033  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. date delayed to 12-6-95 
                                                                   26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.1080--265.1091 (Subpart CC)  Regulation at 59 FR 62935 eff. 
        date delayed to 12-6-95....................................26828
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 6-6-96..........56952
265.1080  (b)(1) and (c) introductory text revised; eff. 12-6-95 
                                                                   26829
    (d) added......................................................50429
    (b)(1) and (c) introductory text revised.......................56953
265.1082  (a) introductory text, (1), (2) introductory text, (iii) 
        and (iv) revised; eff. 12-6-95.............................26829
    (a) introductory text, (1), (2) introductory text, (iii) and 
(iv) revised.......................................................56954
265.1090  (i) added................................................50429

                                  1996

40 CFR
                                                                   61 FR
                                                                    Page
260.2  (b) revised; eff. 7-11-96...................................16309
260.11  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.....28508
261.4  (a)(12) revised.............................................13106
261.5  (f)(3)  and (g)(3) revised; eff. 1-1-97.....................34278
261.6  (a)(5) added; eff. 7-11-96..................................16309
    (c)(1) revised.................................................59950
261  Appendix IX amended...............18091, 37401, 46383, 48638, 50242
    Appendix IX corrected...................................40520, 57334
262  Authority citation revised....................................16309
262.10  (d) through (g) redesignated (e) through (h); new (d) 
        added; eff.7-11-96.........................................16309
262.34  (a)(1)(i) amended...........................................4911
    (a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii) revised...............................59950
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.........28508
262.53  (b) revised; eff. 7-11-96..................................16309
262.56  (b) revised; eff. 7-11-96..................................16309
262.58  Added; eff. 7-11-96........................................16310
262.80--262.89 (Subpart H)  Added; eff. 7-11-96....................16310
263  Authority citation revised....................................16314
263.10  (d) added; eff. 7-11-96....................................16314
263.20  (a) revised; eff. 7-11-96..................................16315
264.12  (a) redesignated as (a)(1); (a)(2) added; eff. 7-11-96.....16315
264.13  (b)(8)(i) and (ii) revised..................................4911
    Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.........28508
264.15  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.....28508
264.71  (d) added; eff. 7-11-96....................................16315
264.73  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.....28508
264.77  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.....28508
264.179  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96....28508
    Revised........................................................59950
264.200  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96....28508
    Revised........................................................59950
264.232  Regulation at 59 FR 62926 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96....28508
    Revised........................................................59950
264.601  Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96....28508
264.1030  (b) revised; note amended................................59950
264.1033  (a)(2) amended; (k)(2) and (m) revised....................4911
    Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.........28508
    (l) and (m) redesignated as (m) and (n); (f)(2)(vi)(B), (k) 
and new (n) revised; new (l) and (o) added.........................59950
264.1034  (b) introductory text revised............................59951
264.1035  (c)(9) and (10) added; (d) revised.......................59952
264.1050  (b) revised; (f) added; note amended.....................59952
264.1055  Revised..................................................59952
264.1058  (e) added................................................59952
264.1064  (g)(6) added.............................................59952
264.1080--264.1091 (Subpart CC)  Regulation at 59 FR 62927 eff. 
        date delayed to 10-6-96....................................28508

[[Page 620]]

264.1080  (b)(1) and (c) revised...................................28509
    (b)(7) and (8) added...........................................59952
264.1082  (c)(2)(iii) and (d) amended...............................4911
    Revised........................................................59953
264.1083  (a)(1) and (b)(1) amended.................................4911
    Revised........................................................59954
264.1084  (b)(4) and (e) introductory text amended; (c) revised.....4912
    Revised........................................................59955
264.1085  Revised..................................................59960
    (d) introductory text and (f) introductory text amended.........4912
264.1086  Revised..................................................59962
    (b)(1) amended; (b)(2)(ii)(B), (3) and (c) introductory text 
revised; (b)(2)(ii)(C) added........................................4912
264.1087  (c)(3)(ii) revised.................................4913, 59965
    (b)(3), (c)(2), (5)(i)(D) and (E) revised; (b)(4) and (c)(7) 
added..............................................................59965
264.1088  (d) revised...............................................4913
    Revised........................................................59966
264.1089  (a)(1) and (e) amended....................................4913
    Revised........................................................59966
264.1090  (a) and (c) amended; (d) revised..........................4913
    (a) and (b) revised............................................59968
264.1091  (a)(3) added..............................................4913
    Removed........................................................59968
265  Authority citation revised....................................16315
265.1  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96......28508
265.12  (a) redesignated as (a)(1); (a)(2) added; eff. 7-11-96.....16315
265.13  (b)(8)(i) and (ii) revised..................................4913
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.........28508
265.15  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.....28508
265.71  (d) added; eff. 7-11-96....................................16315
265.73  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.....28508
265.77  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.....28508
265.178  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96....28508
    Revised........................................................59968
265.202  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96....28508
    Revised........................................................59968
265.231  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96....28508
    Revised........................................................59968
265.1030  (b) revised; note amended................................59968
265.1033  (a)(2) amended; (j)(2) and (l) revised....................4913
    Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. date delayed to 10-6-96.........28508
    (k) and (l) redesignated as (l) and (m); (f)(2)(iv)(B), (j) 
and new (m) revised; new (k) and (n) added.........................59969
265.1034  (b) introductory text revised............................59970
265.1035  (c)(3) and (d) revised; (c)(9) and (10) added............59970
265.1050  (b) revised; (e) added; note amended.....................59970
265.1055  Revised..................................................59971
265.1058  (e) added................................................59971
265.1064  (g)(6) added.............................................59971
265.1080--265.1091 (Subpart CC)  Regulation at 59 FR 62934 eff. 
        date delayed to 10-6-96....................................28508
265.1080  (b)(1) and (c) introductory text revised.................28510
    (b)(7) and (8) added...........................................59971
265.1081  Amended............................................4914, 59971
265.1082  (a) introductory text, (1), (2) introductory text, (iii) 
        and (iv) revised...........................................28510
265.1083  (c)(2)(iii) and (d) amended...............................4914
    Revised........................................................59972
265.1084  (a)(2)(iii) and (b)(2)(iii) added; (a)(5)(iv) 
        introductory text and (b)(4)(iv) introductory text 
        revised; (a)(5)(v)(C), (b)(6)(iii)(B), (iv) and (c)(3)(i) 
        amended.....................................................4914
    Revised........................................................59974
265.1085  (b)(4) amended; (c) revised...............................4914
    Revised........................................................59979
265.1086  (d) amended...............................................4915
    Revised........................................................59984
265.1087  (b)(1) amended; (b)(2)(ii)(B), (3) and (c) introductory 
        text revised; (b)(2)(ii)(C) added...........................4915

[[Page 621]]

    Revised........................................................59986
265.1088  (c)(3)(ii) revised........................................4915
    (b)(3), (c)(2), (3)(ii), (5)(i)(D) and (E) revised; (b)(4) and 
(c)(7) added.......................................................59989
265.1089  (d) revised...............................................4915
    Revised........................................................59990
265.1090  (a)(1) and (e) amended....................................4915
    Revised........................................................59990
2265.1091  (a)(1)(i) revised........................................4915
    Removed........................................................59992
265  Appendix VI added.............................................59992

                                  1997

40 CFR
                                                                   62 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
260.10  Amended; eff. 8-12-97.......................................6650
260.11  (a) revised................................................32462
260.31  (d) added..................................................59290
    Regulation at 62 FR 59290 withdrawn............................67736
261  Authority citation revised.....................................6651
261.1  (c)(9) through (12) added; eff. 8-11-97.....................26018
261.2  (a)(2)(iii) amended; (a)(2)(iv) added; eff. 8-12-97..........6651
    (c) table amended; eff. 8-11-97................................26018
261.4  (a)(13) and (14) added; eff. 8-11-97........................26019
261.6  (a)(3)(ii) revised; eff. 8-11-97............................26019
261.32  Table amended..............................................32977
261.33  (f) amended................................................32977
261  Appendix IX amended........................1678, 7684, 55347, 63463
    Appendix IX corrected...........................................8632
    Appendixes VII and VIII amended................................32977
262  Authority citation revised...............................1834, 6651
262.10  (i) added; eff. 8-12-97.....................................6651
262.20  (f) added; eff. 8-12-97.....................................6651
262  Appendix amended...............................................1834
263  Authority citation revised.....................................6651
263.10  (e) and (f) added; eff. 8-12-97.............................6651
264.1  (g)(8)(i)(D), (iv) and (i) added; eff. 8-12-97...............6651
264.15  (b)(4) revised.............................................64656
264.70  Revised; eff. 8-12-97.......................................6652
264.73  (b)(6) revised.............................................64656
264.1030  (d) added................................................52641
    (b)(3) and (c) revised; (e) added..............................64656
264.1031  Amended..................................................64657
264.1033  (a)(2) revised...........................................64657
264.1034  (d)(1)(iii) and (f) revised..............................32462
264.1050  (g) added................................................52641
    (b)(3), (c) and (f) revised....................................64657
264.1060  Revised..................................................64657
264.1062  (b)(2) and (3) revised...................................64658
264.1063  (d)(2) revised...........................................32462
264.1064  (g)(6) and (m) revised...................................64658
264.1080  (e) added................................................52642
    (b)(1) and (c) revised.........................................64658
264.1082  (b), (c)(2)(ix)(A), (B), (3) and (4)(ii) revised.........64658
264.1083  (a)(2) and (b)(1) revised................................64658
264.1084  (c)(2)(iii) introductory text, (B), (f)(3)(i)(D)(4) and 
        (iii) introductory text revised; (e)(4), (f)(4) and 
        (j)(2)(iii) added..........................................64659
264.1085  (b)(2), (d)(1)(iii), and (2)(i)(B) revised; (e)(2)(iii) 
        added......................................................64659
264.1086  (c)(2), (4)(i), (d)(2), (4)(i) and (g) introductory text 
        revised....................................................64659
264.1087  (c)(3)(ii) and (7) revised...............................64660
264.1089  (a), (b)(1)(ii)(B) and (f)(1) revised; (j) added.........64660
264.1200--264.1202 (Subpart EE)  Added; eff. 8-12-97................6652
264  Appendix IX amended...........................................32462
265.1  (c)(11)(i)(D), (iv) and (f) added; eff. 8-12-97..............6653
265.15  (b)(4) revised.............................................64661
265.70  Revised; eff. 8-12-97.......................................6653
265.73  (b)(6) revised.............................................64661
265.1030  (c) added................................................52642
    (b)(3) revised; (d) added......................................64661
265.1033  (a)(2) and (f)(2)(vi)(B) revised.........................64661
265.1034  (d)(1)(iii) and (f) revised..............................32463
265.1050  (f) added................................................52642
    (b)(3) and (e) revised.........................................64661
265.1060  Revised..................................................64662
265.1062  (b)(2) and (3) revised...................................64662
265.1063  (d)(2) revised...........................................32463
265.1064  (g)(6) and (m) revised...................................64662
265.1080  (e) added................................................52642

[[Page 622]]

    (b)(1) and (c) introductory text revised.......................64662
265.1081  Amended..................................................64662
265.1082  Revised..................................................64662
265.1083  (b), (c)(2)(i), (ix)(A), (B), (3) and (4)(ii) revised....64663
265.1084  (a)(3)(v) and (b)(3)(v) added; (a)(2), (3)(ii)(B), (iii) 
        introductory text, (A), (F) introductory text, (G) 
        introductory text, (1), (iv), (4)(iv), (b)(1), (3)(ii)(B), 
        (iii) introductory text, (F) introductory text, (G) 
        introductory text, (iv), (8)(iii), (9)(iv) and (d)(5)(ii) 
        revised....................................................64664
265.1085  (c)(2)(iii) introductory text, (B) and (f)(3)(i)(D)(4) 
        revised; (e)(4), (f)(4) and (j)(2)(iii) added..............64666
265.1086  (b)(2), (d)(1)(iii) and (2)(i)(B) revised; (e)(2)(iii) 
        added......................................................64666
265.1087  (c)(4)(i), (d)(4)(i) and (g) introductory text revised 
                                                                   64666
265.1088  (c)(3)(ii) and (7) revised...............................64667
265.1090  (a), (b)(1)(ii)(B) and (f)(1) revised; (j) added.........64667
265.1200--265.1202 (Subpart EE)  Added; eff. 8-12-97................6653
265  Appendix VI revised...........................................64668

                                  1998

   (Regulations published from January 1, 1998, through July 1, 1998)

40 CFR
                                                                   63 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
261.2  (c)(4) Table 1, (c)(3) and (e)(1)(iii) revised; eff. 8-24-
        98.........................................................28636
261.3  (a)(2)(i) and (iii) revised; eff. 8-24-98...................28637
261.4  (a)(15) added...............................................18635
    (a)(9)(iii) and (16) added; (b)(7) re
</pre></body></html>
