<html><body><pre>
[Title 29 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - July 1, 1998 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


[[Page i]]

          29


<R02>
          Labor

<R03>

          PART 1900 to Sec. 1910.999

                         Revised as of July 1, 1998

          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT
          AS OF JULY 1, 1998

          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration
          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                     




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1998



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 29:
      Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor (Continued):
    Chapter XVII--Occupational Safety and Health 
        Administration, Department of Labor...................       5
  Finding Aids:
    Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference..........     923
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     933
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     951
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     961



[[Page iv]]


      


-------------------------------------------------------------------

   Cite this Code:  CFR

   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part and
   section number. Thus,  29 CFR 1902.1 refers to title 29, part
   1902, section 1.

-------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, July 1, 1998), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 523-4534.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.

[[Page vii]]

    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, The United States 
Government Manual, the Federal Register, Public Laws, Weekly Compilation 
of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available 
in electronic format at www.access.gpo.gov/nara (``GPO Access''). For 
more information, contact Electronic Information Dissemination Services, 
U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 
(toll-free). E-mail, gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.nara.gov/fedreg. The NARA 
site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

July 1, 1998.



[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 29--Labor is composed of nine volumes. The parts in these 
volumes are arranged in the following order: parts 0-99, parts 100-499, 
parts 500-899, parts 900-1899, parts 1900-1910.999, part 1910.1000-End, 
parts 1911-1925, part 1926, and part 1927 to end. The contents of these 
volumes represent all current regulations codified under this title as 
of July 1, 1998.

    The OMB control numbers for title 29 CFR part 1910 appear in 
Sec. 1910.8. For the convenience of the user, Sec. 1910.8 appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the volume containing Sec. 1910.1000 to the end.

    Redesignation tables appear in the Finding Aids section of the 
eighth volume.

    Subject indexes appear following the occupational safety and health 
standards (part 1910), and following the safety and health regulations 
for: Longshoring (part 1918), Gear Certification (part 1919), and 
Construction (part 1926).

    For this volume, Cheryl E. Sirofchuck was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>



[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                             TITLE 29--LABOR


<R02>

               (This book contains parts 1900 to 1910.999)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

          SUBTITLE B--Regulations Relating to Labor (Continued)

chapter xvii--Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
  Department of Labor.......................................        1902


cross references: Railroad Retirement Board: See Employees' Benefits, 20 
  CFR chapter II.


  Social Security Administration, Department of Health and Human 
Services: See Employees' Benefits, 20 CFR chapter III.


  Editorial Note: Other regulations issued by the Department of Labor 
appear in 20 CFR chapters I, IV and V, VI, VII; 29 CFR subtitle A, 
chapters II, IV, V, XXV; 41 CFR chapters 50, 60, and 61. For Standards 
for a Merit System of Personnel Administration: See 5 CFR part 900.

[[Page 3]]

          Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor (Continued)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 5]]


<R02>
                    CHAPTER XVII--OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY
                       AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION,
                           DEPARTMENT OF LABOR


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------


  Editorial Note: Chapter XVII is continued in the volumes containing 29 
CFR part 1910 (Secs. 1910.1000 to end), parts 1911 to 1925, part 1926, 
and part 1927 to End.

Part                                                                Page
1900-1901       [Reserved]

1902            State plans for the development and 
                    enforcement of State standards..........           7
1903            Inspections, citations and proposed 
                    penalties...............................          27
1904            Recording and reporting occupational 
                    injuries and illnesses..................          43
1905            Rules of practice for variances, 
                    limitations, variations, tolerances, and 
                    exemptions under the Williams-Steiger 
                    Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
                    1970....................................          50
1906

Administration witnesses and documents in private litigation [Reserved]

1908            Consultation agreements.....................          61
1910            Occupational safety and health standards....          70
                Subject index for 29 CFR part 1910--
                    Occupational safety and health standards         880

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
PARTS 1900-1901  [RESERVED]

<R05>



<R03>
PART 1902--STATE PLANS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND ENFORCEMENT OF STATE STANDARDS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
1902.1  Purpose and scope.
1902.2  General policies.

                   Subpart B--Criteria for State Plans

1902.3  Specific criteria.
1902.4  Indices of effectiveness.
1902.5  Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968.
1902.6  Consultation with the National Institute for Occupational Safety 
          and Health.

 Subpart C--Procedures for Submission, Approval and Rejection of State 
                                  Plans

1902.10  Submission.

           Procedure for Proposed or Possible Approval of Plan

1902.11  General notice.
1902.12  Opportunity for modifications and clarifications.
1902.13  Informal hearing.
1902.14  Formal hearing.
1902.15  Certification of the record of a hearing.

          Procedure for Proposed or Possible Rejection of Plan

1902.17  The proceeding.
1902.18  Previous hearing or other opportunity for comment on plan.
1902.19  Notice of hearing.

                                Decisions

1902.20  Decision following informal proceeding.
1902.21  Tentative decision following formal proceeding.
1902.22  Final decision following formal proceeding.
1902.23  Publication of decisions.

 Subpart D--Procedures for Determinations Under Section 18(e) of the Act

                                 General

1902.30  Purpose and scope.
1902.31  Definitions.
1902.32  General policies.

            Completion of Developmental Steps--Certification

1902.33  Developmental period.
1902.34  Certification of completion of developmental steps.
1902.35  Effect of certification.

                     Basis for 18(e) Determinations

1902.36  General provisions.
1902.37  Factors for determination.

                   Procedures for 18(e) Determination

1902.38  Evaluation of plan following certification.
1902.39  Completion of evaluation.
1902.40  Informal hearing.
1902.41  Decision.
1902.42  Effect of affirmative 18(e) determination.
1902.43  Affirmative 18(e) decision.
1902.44  Requirements applicable to State plans granted affirmative 
          18(e) determinations.
1902.45  [Reserved]
1902.46  Negative 18(e) determination.

  Procedure for Reconsideration and Revocation of an Affirmative 18(e) 
                              Determination

1902.47  Reconsideration of an affirmative 18(e) determination.
1902.48  The proceeding.
1902.49  General notice.
1902.50  Informal hearing.
1902.51  Certification of the records of a hearing.
1902.52  Decision.
1902.53  Publication of decisions.

    Authority: Secs. 8, 18, Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 
(29 U.S.C. 657, 667).

    Source: 36 FR 20751, Oct. 29, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 1902.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) This part applies the provisions of section 18 of the Williams-
Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Act) relating to State plans for the development and 
enforcement of State occupational safety and health standards. The 
provisions of the part set forth the procedures by which the Assistant 
Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health (hereinafter referred to as 
the Assistant Secretary) under a delegation of authority from the 
Secretary of Labor (Secretary's Order No. 12-71, 36 FR 8754, May 12, 
1971) will approve or reject State plans submitted to the Secretary. In 
the Act, Congress declared it to be its purpose and policy ``* * * to 
assure so far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation safe 
and healthful working conditions

[[Page 8]]

and to preserve our human resources'' by, among other actions and 
programs, ``* * * encouraging the State to assume the fullest 
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of their 
occupational safety and health laws. Section 18(a) of the Act is read as 
preventing any State agency or court from asserting jurisdiction under 
State law over any occupational safety or health issue with respect to 
which a Federal standard has been issued under section 6 of the Act. 
However, section 18(b) provides that any State that desires to assume 
responsibility for the development and enforcement therein of 
occupational safety and health standards relating to issues covered by 
corresponding standards promulgated under section 6 of the Act shall 
submit a plan for doing so to the Assistant Secretary.
    (b) Section 18(c) of the Act sets out certain criteria that a plan 
which is submitted under section 18(b) of the Act must meet, either 
initially or upon modification, if it is to be approved. Foremost among 
these criteria is the requirement that the plan must provide for the 
development of State standards and the enforcement of such standards 
which are or will be at least as effective in providing safe and 
healthful employment and places of employment as the standards 
promulgated under section 6 of the Act which relate to the same issues.
    (c)(1) If the Assistant Secretary approves a State plan submitted 
under section 18(b), he may, but is not required to, exercise his 
enforcement authority with respect to Federal standards corresponding to 
standards approved under the plan until he determines, in accordance 
with section 18(e) of the Act, on the basis of actual operations under 
the plan, that the State is applying the criteria of section 18(c) of 
the Act. The Assistant Secretary shall not make this determination (i) 
for at least 3 years after initial approval of the plan, and (ii) in the 
case of a developmental plan approved under Sec. 1902.2(b), until the 
State has completed all the steps specified in its plan which are 
designed to make it at least as effective as the Federal program and the 
Assistant Secretary has had at least 1 year in which to evaluate the 
program on the basis of actual operations. After the determination that 
the State is applying the criteria of section 18(c) of the Act, the 
Assistant Secretary's enforcement authority shall not apply with respect 
to any occupational safety or health issue covered by the plan. 
Notwithstanding plan approval and a determination under section 18(e) 
that the section 18(c) criteria are being followed, the Assistant 
Secretary shall make a continuing evaluation, as provided in section 
18(f) of the Act, of the manner in which the State is carrying out the 
plan.
    (2) Federal enforcement authority which must be retained by the 
Assistant Secretary until actual operations prove the State plan to be 
at least as effective as the Federal program, will be exercised to the 
degree necessary to assure occupational safety and health. Factors to be 
considered in determining the level of Federal effort during this period 
include:
    (i) Whether the plan is developmental (i.e., approved under 
Sec. 1902.2(b)) or complete (i.e., approved under Sec. 1902.2 (a)).
    (ii) Results of evaluations conducted by the Assistant Secretary.
    (3) Whenever the Assistant Secretary determines, after giving notice 
and affording the State an opportunity for a hearing, that in the 
administration of the State plan there is a failure to comply 
substantially with any provision of the plan or any assurance contained 
therein, he shall withdraw approval of such plan in whole or in part, 
and upon notice the State shall cease operations under any disapproved 
plan or part thereof, except that it will be permitted to retain 
jurisdiction as to any case commenced before withdrawal of approval 
whenever the issues involved do not relate to the reasons for the 
withdrawal of the plan.
    (4) A determination of approval of a State plan under section 18(e) 
does not affect the authority and responsibility of the Assistant 
Secretary to enforce Federal standards covering issues not included 
under the State plan.
    (d) The policy of the Act is to encourage the assumption by the 
States of the fullest responsibility for the development and enforcement 
of their own occupational safety and health standards. This assumption 
of responsibility

[[Page 9]]

is considered to include State development and enforcement of standards 
on as many occupational safety and health issues as possible. To these 
ends, the Assistant Secretary intends to cooperate with the States so 
that they can obtain approval of plans for the development and 
enforcement of State standards which are or will be at least as 
effective as the Federal standards and enforcement.
    (e) After the Assistant Secretary has approved a plan, he may 
approve one or more grants under section 23(g) of the Act to assist the 
State in administering and enforcing its program for occupational safety 
and health in accordance with appropriate instructions or procedures to 
be promulgated by the Assistant Secretary.
[36 FR 20751, Oct. 29, 1971, as amended at 61 FR 9230, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.2  General policies.

    (a) Policy. The Assistant Secretary will approve a State plan which 
provides for an occupational safety and health program with respect to 
covered issues that in his judgment meets or will meet the criteria set 
forth in Sec. 1902.3. Included among these criteria is the requirement 
that the State plan provide for the development and enforcement of 
standards relating to issues covered by the plan which are or will be at 
least as effective in providing safe and healthful employment and places 
of employment as standards promulgated and enforced under section 6 of 
the Act on the same issues. In determining whether a State plan 
satisfies the requirement of effectiveness, the Assistant Secretary will 
measure the plan against the indices of effectiveness set forth in 
Sec. 1902.4.
    (b) Developmental plan. A State plan for an occupational safety and 
health program may be approved although, upon submission it does not 
fully meet the criteria set forth in Sec. 1902.3, if it includes 
satisfactory assurances by the State that it will take the necessary 
steps to bring the State program into conformity with these criteria 
within the 3-year period immediately following the commencement of the 
plan's operation. In such case, the State plan shall include the 
specific actions it proposes to take and a time schedule for their 
accomplishment not to exceed 3 years, at the end of which the State plan 
will meet the criteria in Sec. 1902.3. A developmental plan shall 
include the date or dates within which intermediate and final action 
will be accomplished. If necessary program changes require legislative 
action by a State, a copy of a bill or a draft of legislation that will 
be or has been proposed for enactment shall be submitted, accompanied by 
(1) a statement of the Governor's support of the legislation and (2) a 
statement of legal opinion that the proposed legislation will meet the 
requirements of the Act and this part in a manner consistent with the 
State's constitution and laws. On the basis of the State's submission 
the Assistant Secretary will approve the plan if he finds that there is 
a reasonable expectation that the State plan will meet the criteria in 
Sec. 1902.3 within the indicated 3-year period. In such case, the 
Assistant Secretary shall not make a determination under section 18(e) 
of the Act that a State is fully applying the criteria in Sec. 1902.3 
until the State has completed all the developmental steps specified in 
its plan which are designed to make it at least as effective as the 
Federal program, and the Assistant Secretary has had at least 1 year to 
evaluate the plan on the basis of actual operations. If at the end of 3 
years from the date of commencement of the plan's development, the State 
is found by the Assistant Secretary, after affording the State notice 
and opportunity for a hearing, not to have substantially completed the 
developmental steps of the plan, the Assistant Secretary shall withdraw 
the approval of the plan.
    (c) Scope of State plan. (1) A State plan may cover any occupational 
safety and health issue with respect to which a Federal standard has 
been promulgated under section 6 of the Act. An ``issue'' is considered 
to be an industrial, occupational or hazard grouping which is at least 
as comprehensive as a corresponding grouping contained in (i) one or 
more sections in subpart B or R of part 1910 of this chapter, or (ii) 
one or more of the remaining subparts of part 1910. However, for cause 
shown the Assistant Secretary may approve a

[[Page 10]]

plan relating to other industrial, occupational or hazard groupings if 
he determines that the plan is administratively practicable and that 
such groupings would not conflict with the purposes of the Act.
    (2) Each State plan shall describe the occupational safety and 
health issue or issues and the State standard or standards applicable to 
each such issue or issues over which it desires to assume enforcement 
responsibility in terms of the corresponding Federal industrial, 
occupational or hazard groupings and set forth the reasons, supported 
with appropriate data, for any variations the State proposes from the 
coverage of Federal standards.
    (3) The State plan shall apply to all employers and employees within 
the affected industry, occupational or hazard grouping unless the 
Assistant Secretary finds that the State has shown good cause why any 
group or groups of employers or employees should be excluded. Any 
employers or employees so excluded shall be covered by applicable 
Federal standards and enforcement provisions in the Act.


<R04>
                   Subpart B--Criteria for State Plans


<R05>
Sec. 1902.3  Specific criteria.

    (a) General. A State plan must meet the specific criteria set forth 
in this section.
    (b) Designation of State agency. (1) The State plan shall designate 
a State agency or agencies as the agency or agencies responsible for 
administering the plan throughout the State.
    (2) The plan shall also describe the authority and responsibilities 
vested in such agency or agencies. The plan shall contain assurances 
that any other responsibilities of the designated agency shall not 
detract significantly from the resources and priorities assigned to 
administration of the plan.
    (3) A State agency or agencies must be designated with overall 
responsibility for administering the plan throughout the State. However, 
political subdivisions of the State may have the responsibility and 
authority for the development and enforcement of standards, provided 
that the State agency or agencies are given adequate authority by 
statute, regulation, or agreement, to insure that the commitments of the 
State under the plan will be fulfilled.
    (c) Standards. (1) The State plan shall include or provide for the 
development or adoption of, and contain assurances that the State will 
continue to develop or adopt, standards which are or will be at least as 
effective as those promulgated under section 6 of the Act. Indices of 
the effectiveness of standards and procedures for the development or 
adoption of standards against which the Assistant Secretary will measure 
the State plan in determining whether it is approvable are set forth in 
Sec. 1902.4(b).
    (2) The State plan shall not include standards for products 
distributed or used in interstate commerce which are different from 
Federal standards for such products unless such standards are required 
by compelling local conditions and do not unduly burden interstate 
commerce. This provision, reflecting section 18(c)(2) of the Act, is 
interpreted as not being applicable to customized products or parts not 
normally available on the open market, or to the optional parts or 
additions to products which are ordinarily available with such optional 
parts or additions.
    (d) Enforcement. (1) The State plan shall provide a program for the 
enforcement of the State standards which is, or will be, at least as 
effective as that provided in the Act, and provide assurances that the 
State's enforcement program will continue to be at least as effective as 
the Federal program. Indices of the effectiveness of a State's 
enforcement plan against which the Assistant Secretary will measure the 
State plan in determining whether it is approvable are set forth in 
Sec. 1902.4(c).
    (2) The State plan shall require employers to comply with all 
applicable State occupational safety and health standards covered by the 
plan and all applicable rules issued thereunder, and employees to comply 
with all standards, rules, and orders applicable to their conduct.
    (e) Right of entry and inspection. The State plan shall contain 
adequate assurance that inspectors will have a right to enter and 
inspect covered workplaces which is, or will be, at least as effective 
as that provided in section

[[Page 11]]

8 of the Act. Where such entry or inspection is refused, the State 
agency or agencies shall have the authority, through appropriate legal 
process, to compel such entry and inspection.
    (f) Prohibition against advance notice. The State plan shall contain 
a prohibition against advance notice of inspections. Any exceptions must 
be expressly authorized by the head of the designated agency or agencies 
or his representative and such exceptions may be no broader than those 
authorized under the Act and the rules published in part 1903 of this 
chapter relating to advance notice.
    (g) Legal authority. The State plan shall contain satisfactory 
assurances that the designated agency or agencies have, or will have, 
the legal authority necessary for the enforcement of its standards.
    (h) Personnel. The State plan shall provide assurance that the 
designated agency or agencies have, or will have, a sufficient number of 
adequately trained and qualified personnel necessary for the enforcement 
of the standards. For this purpose qualified personnel means persons 
employed on a merit basis, including all persons engaged in the 
development of standards and the administration of the State plan. 
Conformity with the Standards for a Merit System of Personnel 
Administration, 45 CFR part 70, issued by the Secretary of Labor, 
including any amendments thereto, and any standards prescribed by the 
U.S. Civil Service Commission pursuant to section 208 of the 
Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-648; 84 Stat. 1915) 
modifying or superseding such standards, will be deemed to meet this 
requirement.
    (i) Resources. The State plan shall contain satisfactory assurances 
through the use of budget, organizational description, and any other 
appropriate means that the State will devote adequate funds to the 
administration and enforcement of the program. The Assistant Secretary 
will make periodic evaluations of the adequacy of the State resources 
devoted to the plan.
    (j) State and local government employees. The State plan shall 
include, to the extent permitted by State law, an effective and 
comprehensive occupational safety and health program covering all 
employees of public agencies of the State and its political 
subdivisions. Such program shall be as effective as the programs 
contained in the plan which are applicable to employees covered by the 
plan.
    (k) Employer records and reports. The State plan shall provide 
assurances that employers covered by the plan will maintain records and 
make reports to the Assistant Secretary in the same manner and to the 
same extent as if the plan were not in effect.
    (l) State agency reports to the Assistant Secretary. The State plan 
shall provide assurances that the designated agency or agencies shall 
make such reasonable reports to the Assistant Secretary in such form and 
containing such information as he may from time to time require. The 
agency or agencies shall establish specific goals, consistent with the 
goals of the Act, including measures of performance, output and results 
which will determine the efficiency and effectiveness of the State 
program, and shall make periodic reports to the Assistant Secretary on 
the extent to which the State, in implementation of its plan, has 
attained these goals. Reports will also include data and information on 
the implementation of the specific inspection and voluntary compliance 
activities included within the State plan. Further, these reports shall 
contain such statistical information pertaining to work-related deaths, 
injuries, and illnesses in employments and places of employment covered 
by the plan as the Assistant Secretary may from time to time require.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
1218-0004)

[36 FR 20751, Oct. 29, 1971, as amended at 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.4  Indices of effectiveness.

    (a) General. In order to satisfy the requirements of effectiveness 
under Sec. 1902.3 (c)(1) and (d)(1), the State plan shall:
    (1) Establish the same standards, procedures, criteria and rules as 
have been established by the Assistant Secretary under the Act, or;

[[Page 12]]

    (2) Establish alternative standards, procedures, criteria, and rules 
which will be measured against each of the indices of effectiveness in 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section to determine whether the 
alternatives are at least as effective as the Federal program with 
respect to the subject of each index. For each index the State must 
demonstrate by the presentation of factual or other appropriate 
information that its plan is or will be at least as effective as the 
Federal program.
    (b) Standards. (1) The indices for measurement of a State plan with 
regard to standards follow in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. The 
Assistant Secretary will determine whether the State plan satisfies the 
requirements of effectiveness with regard to each index as provided in 
paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) The Assistant Secretary will determine whether the State plan:
    (i) Provides for State standards with respect to specific issues 
which are or will be at least as effective as the standards promulgated 
under section 6 of the Act relating to the same issues. In the case of 
any State standards dealing with toxic materials or harmful physical 
agents, they should adequately assure, to the extent feasible, that no 
employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional 
capacity even if such employee has regular exposure to the hazard dealt 
with by such standard for the period of his working life, by such means 
as, in the development and promulgation of standards, obtaining the best 
available evidence through research, demonstrations, experiments, and 
experience under this and other safety and health laws.
    (ii) Provides an adequate method to assure that its standards will 
continue to be at least as effective as Federal standards, including 
Federal standards relating to issues covered by the plan, which become 
effective subsequent to any approval of the plan.
    (iii) Provides a procedure for the development and promulgation of 
standards which allows for the consideration of pertinent factual 
information and affords interested persons, including employees, 
employers and the public, an opportunity to participate in such 
processes, by such means as establishing procedures for consideration of 
expert technical knowledge, and providing interested persons, including 
employers, employees, recognized standards-producing organizations, and 
the public an opportunity to submit information requesting the 
development or promulgation of new standards or the modification or 
revocation of existing standards and to participate in any hearings. 
This index may also be satisfied by such means as the adoption of 
Federal standards, in which case the procedures at the Federal level 
before adoption of a standard under section 6 may be considered to meet 
the conditions of this index.
    (iv) Provides authority for the granting of variances from State 
standards, upon application of an employer or employers which correspond 
to variances authorized under the Act, and for consideration of the 
views of interested parties, by such means as giving affected employees 
notice of each application and an opportunity to request and participate 
in hearings or other appropriate proceedings relating to applications 
for variances.
    (v) Provides for prompt and effective standards setting actions for 
the protection of employees against new and unforseen hazards, by such 
means as the authority to promulgate emergency temporary standards.
    (vi) Provides that State standards contain appropriate provision for 
the furnishing to employees of information regarding hazards in the 
workplace, including information about suitable precautions, relevant 
symptoms, and emergency treatment in case of exposure, by such means as 
labeling, posting, and, where appropriate, medical examination at no 
cost to employees, with the results of such examinations being furnished 
only to appropriate State officials and, if the employee so requests, to 
his physician.
    (vii) Provides that State standards, where appropriate, contain 
specific provision for the protection of employees from exposure to 
hazards, by such means as containing appropriate provision for use of 
suitable protective equipment and for control or technological 
procedures with respect to such

[[Page 13]]

hazards, including monitoring or measuring such exposure.
    (c) Enforcement. (1) The indices for measurement of a State plan 
with regard to enforcement follow in paragraph (c)(2) of this section. 
The Assistant Secretary will determine whether the State plan satisfies 
the requirements of effectiveness with regard to each index as provided 
in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) The Assistant Secretary will determine whether the State plan:
    (i) Provides for inspection of covered workplaces in the State, 
including inspections in response to complaints, where there are 
reasonable grounds to believe a hazard exists, in order to assure, so 
far as possible, safe and healthful working conditions for covered 
employees, by such means as providing for inspections under conditions 
such as those provided in section 8 of the Act.
    (ii) Provides an opportunity for employees and their 
representatives, before, during, and after inspections, to bring 
possible violations to the attention of the State agency with 
enforcement responsibility in order to aid inspections, by such means as 
affording a representative of the employer and a representative 
authorized by employees an opportunity to accompany the State 
representative during the physical inspection of the workplace, or where 
there is no authorized representative, by providing for consultation by 
the State representative with a reasonable number of employees.
    (iii) Provides for the notification of employees, or their 
representatives, when the State decides not to take compliance action as 
a result of violations alleged by such employees or their 
representatives and further provides for informal review of such 
decisions, by such means as written notification of decisions not to 
take compliance action and the reasons therefor, and procedures for 
informal review of such decisions and written statements of the 
disposition of such review.
    (iv) Provides that employees be informed of their protections and 
obligations under the Act, including the provisions of applicable 
standards, by such means as the posting of notices or other appropriate 
sources of information.
    (v) Provides necessary and appropriate protection to an employee 
against discharge or discrimination in terms and conditions of 
employment because he has filed a complaint, testified, or otherwise 
acted to exercise rights under the Act for himself or others, by such 
means as providing for appropriate sanctions against the employer for 
such actions and by providing for the withholding, upon request, of the 
names of complainants from the employer.
    (vi) Provides that employees have access to information on their 
exposure to toxic materials or harmful physical agents and receive 
prompt information when they have been or are being exposed to such 
materials or agents in concentrations or at levels in excess of those 
prescribed by the applicable safety and health standards, by such means 
as the observation by employees of the monitoring or measuring of such 
materials or agents, employee access to the records of such monitoring 
or measuring, prompt notification by an employer to any employee who has 
been or is being exposed to such agents or materials in excess of the 
applicable standards, and information to such employee of corrective 
action being taken.
    (vii) Provides procedures for the prompt restraint or elimination of 
any conditions or practices in covered places of employment which could 
reasonably be expected to cause death or serious physical harm 
immediately or before the imminence of such danger can be eliminated 
through the enforcement procedures otherwise provided for in the plan, 
by such means as immediately informing employees and employers of such 
hazards, taking steps to obtain immediate abatement of the hazard by the 
employer, and where appropriate, authority to initiate necessary legal 
proceedings to require such abatement.
    (viii) Provides adequate safeguards to protect trade secrets, by 
such means as limiting access to such trade secrets to authorized State 
officers or employees concerned with carrying out the plan and by 
providing for the issuance of appropriate orders to protect the 
confidentiality of trade secrets.

[[Page 14]]

    (ix) Provides that the State agency (or agencies) will have the 
necessary legal authority for the enforcement of standards, by such 
means as provisions for appropriate compulsory process to obtain 
necessary evidence or testimony in connection with inspection and 
enforcement proceedings.
    (x) Provides for prompt notice to employers and employees when an 
alleged violation of standards has occurred, including the proposed 
abatement requirements, by such means as the issuance of a written 
citation to the employer and posting of the citation at or near the site 
of the violation; further provides for advising the employer of any 
proposed sanctions, by such means as a notice to the employer by 
certified mail within a reasonable time of any proposed sanctions.
    (xi) Provides effective sanctions against employers who violate 
State standards and orders, such as those prescribed in the Act.
    (xii) Provides for an employer to have the right of review of 
violations alleged by the State, abatement periods, and proposed 
penalties and for employees or their representatives to have an 
opportunity to participate in review proceedings, by such means as 
providing for administrative or judicial review, with an opportunity for 
a full hearing on the issues.
    (xiii) Provides that the State will undertake programs to encourage 
voluntary compliance by employers and employees by such means as 
conducting training and consultation with employers and employees.
    (d) Additional indices. Upon his own motion or after consideration 
of data, views and arguments received in any proceeding held under 
subpart C of this part, the Assistant Secretary may prescribe additional 
indices for any State plan which shall be in furtherance of the purpose 
of this part, as expressed in Sec. 1902.1.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.5  Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968.

    This part shall be construed in a manner consistent with the 
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4201-4233), and any 
regulations pursuant thereto.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.6  Consultation with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.

    The Assistant Secretary will consult, as appropriate, with the 
Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
with regard to plans submitted by the States under this part.


<R04>
 Subpart C--Procedures for Submission, Approval and Rejection of State 
                                  Plans


<R05>
Sec. 1902.10  Submission.

    (a) An authorized representative of the State agency or agencies 
responsible for administering the plan shall submit the plan with 10 
copies to the appropriate Assistant Regional Director of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor. 
The State plan shall include (1) Supporting papers conforming to the 
requirements specified in subpart B of this part, and (2) the State 
occupational safety and health standards to be included in the plan, 
including copies of any specific or enabling State laws and regulations 
relating to such standards. If any of the representations concerning the 
requirements of subpart B of this part are dependent upon any judicial 
or administrative interpretations of the State standards or enforcement 
provisions, the State shall furnish citations to any pertinent judicial 
decisions and the text of any pertinent administrative decisions.
    (b) Upon receipt of the State plan the Assistant Regional Director 
shall make a preliminary examination of the plan. If his examination 
reveals any defect in the plan, the Assistant Regional Director shall 
offer assistance to the State agency and shall provide the agency an 
opportunity to cure such defect. After his preliminary examination, and 
after affording the State agency such opportunity to cure defects, the 
Assistant Regional Director shall submit the plan to the Assistant 
Secretary.
    (c) Upon receipt of the plan from the Assistant Regional Director, 
the Assistant Secretary shall examine the plan and supporting materials. 
If the

[[Page 15]]

examination discloses no cause for rejecting the plan, the Assistant 
Secretary shall follow the procedure prescribed in Sec. 1902.11. If the 
examination discloses cause for rejection of the plan, the Assistant 
Secretary shall follow the procedure prescribed in Sec. 1902.17.

           Procedure for Proposed or Possible Approval of Plan


<R05>
Sec. 1902.11  General notice.

    (a) Upon receipt of a State plan submitted by an Assistant Regional 
Director under Sec. 1902.10 whenever the Assistant Secretary proposes to 
approve the plan, or to give notice that such approval is an issue 
before him, he shall publish in the Federal Register a notice meeting 
the requirements of the remaining paragraphs of this section. No later 
than 5 days following the publication of the notice in the Federal 
Register, the applying State agency shall publish, or cause to be 
published, within the State reasonable notice containing the same 
information.
    (b) The notice shall indicate the submission of the plan and its 
contents, and any proposals, subjects, or issues involved.
    (c) The notice shall provide that the plan, or copies thereof, shall 
be available for inspection and copying at the office of the Director, 
Office of State Programs, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
1726 M Street NW., Washington, DC 20210, office of the Assistant 
Regional Director in whose region the State is located, and an office of 
the State which shall be designated by the State for this purpose.
    (d) The notice shall afford interested persons an opportunity to 
submit in writing, data, views, and arguments on the proposal, subjects, 
or issues involved within 30 days after publication of the notice in the 
Federal Register. Thereafter the written comments received or copies 
thereof shall be available for public inspection and copying at the 
office of the Director, Office of State Programs, Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration, 1726 M Street NW., Washington, DC 20210, 
office of the Assistant Regional Director in whose region the State is 
located, and an office of the State which shall be designated by the 
State for this purpose.
    (e) Upon his own initiative, the Assistant Secretary may give notice 
of an informal or formal hearing affording an opportunity for oral 
comments concerning the plan.
    (f) In the event no notice of hearing is provided under paragraph 
(e) of this section it shall be provided that any interested person may 
request an informal hearing concerning the proposed plan, or any part 
thereof, whenever particularized written objections thereto are filed 
within 30 days following publication of the notice in the Federal 
Register. If the Assistant Secretary finds that substantial objections 
have been filed, he shall afford a formal or informal hearing on the 
subjects and issues involved under Sec. 1902.13 or Sec. 1902.14, or 
shall commence a proceeding under Sec. 1902.17.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.12  Opportunity for modifications and clarifications.

    The Assistant Secretary may afford the State an opportunity to 
modify or clarify its plan on the basis of any comments received under 
Sec. 1902.11 or Sec. 1902.13, before commencing a proceeding to reject 
the plan. In this connection, the State may informally discuss any 
issues raised by such comments with the staff of the Office of Federal 
and State Operations. The Assistant Secretary may afford an additional 
opportunity for public comment, particularly when such an opportunity 
would not unduly delay final action on the plan and when the comments 
could be expected to elicit new relevant matter.
[38 FR 12605, May 14, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.13  Informal hearing.

    Any informal hearing shall be legislative in type. The procedures 
for informal hearings may take a variety of forms. The appropriateness 
of any particular form will turn largely upon the proposals, subjects, 
or issues involved. The rules of procedure for each hearing shall be 
published with the notice thereof.

[[Page 16]]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.14  Formal hearing.

    Any formal hearing provided for under Sec. 1902.11 (e) and (f) shall 
be commenced upon the publication of reasonable notice in the Federal 
Register and similar notice by the State. The hearing shall conform with 
the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 556 and 557. The terms for filing proposed 
findings and conclusions and exceptions to any tentative decision, or 
objections to a tentative decision, shall be set forth in the notice.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.15  Certification of the record of a hearing.

    Upon completion of any formal or informal hearing, the transcript 
thereof, together with written submissions, exhibits filed during the 
hearing, and any post-hearing presentations shall be certified by the 
officer presiding at the hearing to the Assistant Secretary.

          Procedure for Proposed or Possible Rejection of Plan


<R05>
Sec. 1902.17  The proceeding.

    Whenever as a result of (a) an initial examination of a plan, or (b) 
written or oral comments concerning a plan submitted in an informal 
rulemaking proceeding concerning a proposed approval of a plan or any 
subject or issue concerning the plan, the Assistant Secretary proposes 
to reject a plan or rejection remains in issue for any reason, he shall 
follow the procedures prescribed in the remaining sections of this 
subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.18  Previous hearing or other opportunity for comment on plan.

    (a) Whenever an informal hearing has been held under Secs. 1902.11 
and 1902.13, any evidence submitted in such a hearing shall be 
considered and may be relied upon whenever it is found that no party 
will be prejudiced thereby because
    (1) Of a lack of an opportunity for cross-examination afforded in 
the informal hearing on the issues involved, or
    (2) The veracity and demeanor of witnesses are not important with 
respect to the type of evidence involved (e.g., extensive technical or 
statistical data), or
    (3) For any other reason.
    (b) Any written comments received in response to a notice issued 
under Sec. 1902.11 shall be a part of the record of the proceeding.
    (c) Whenever a formal hearing has been held under Sec. 1902.14 the 
Assistant Secretary shall hold no additional hearing, and shall proceed 
to issue a tentative decision under Sec. 1902.21.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.19  Notice of hearing.

    (a) Whenever the Assistant Secretary has issued no previous notice 
concerning the plan, or only informal rule making proceedings have been 
conducted concerning the plan, the Assistant Secretary shall publish in 
the Federal Register an appropriate notice concerning the plan and 
provide an opportunity for formal hearing and decision on the possible 
rejection of the plan and on any subsidiary issues. The notice also 
shall set forth such rules as may be necessary so as to assure 
compliance with 5 U.S.C. 556 and 557 in the conduct of the proceeding. 
The time for filing proposed findings and conclusions and exceptions to 
any tentative decision shall be set forth in the notice.
    (b) Not later than 5 days following the publication of the notice in 
the Federal Register, required by paragraph (a) of this section, the 
applying State agency shall publish, or cause to be published, within 
the State reasonable notice containing the same information.

                                Decisions


<R05>
Sec. 1902.20  Decision following informal proceeding.

    (a) This section deals with a situation where the Assistant 
Secretary has
    (1) Afforded interested persons an opportunity to submit written 
data, views, or arguments concerning a proposal, subject, or issue 
concerning a plan; or
    (2) Has in addition provided an informal hearing concerning a 
proposal, subject, or issue concerning a plan.
    (b)(1)(i) After consideration of all relevant information which has 
been presented, if the Assistant Secretary approves a plan he shall 
issue a decision to that effect.

[[Page 17]]

    (ii) In the event the plan is approved under Sec. 1902.2(b), the 
decision shall state that the plan does not fully meet the criteria set 
forth in Sec. 1902.3, and shall summarize the schedule and any other 
measures for bringing the plan up to the level of such criteria.
    (iii) The decision shall also reflect the Assistant Secretary's 
intention as to continued Federal enforcement of Federal standards in 
areas covered by the plan. Provisions for continued Federal enforcement 
shall take into consideration:
    (a) Whether the plan is approved under Sec. 1902.2(a) or 
Sec. 1902.2(b);
    (b) The schedule for coming up to Federal standards in any 
Sec. 1902.2(b) plan; and
    (c) Any other relevant matters.
    (2) After consideration of all relevant information contained in any 
written or oral comments received in any informal proceeding, if the 
Assistant Secretary proposes to disapprove a plan, or the disposition of 
a subject or issue permits the possible disapproval of a plan, he shall 
publish a notice to that effect, and commence a proceeding meeting the 
requirements of Sec. 1902.19.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.21  Tentative decision following formal proceeding.

    (a) On the basis of the whole record of any hearing held under 
Sec. 1902.14 or Sec. 1902.19, the Assistant Secretary shall issue a 
tentative decision either approving or disapproving the plan. The 
tentative decision shall include a statement of the findings and 
conclusions and reasons or bases therefor on all material issues of 
fact, law, or discretion which have been presented. The tentative 
decision shall be published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The State agency and other interested persons participating in 
the hearing may waive the tentative decision. In such event the 
Assistant Secretary shall issue a final decision under Sec. 1902.22.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.22  Final decision following formal proceeding.

    (a) Except when interested persons participating in the hearing have 
waived the tentative decision under Sec. 1902.21(b) interested persons 
participating in the hearing shall have an opportunity to file 
exceptions to a tentative decision and objections to such exceptions 
within periods of time to be specified in the tentative decision. An 
original and four copies of any exception or objections shall be filed.
    (b)(1) Thereafter the Assistant Secretary shall issue a final 
decision ruling upon each exception and objection filed. The final 
decision shall be published in the Federal Register.
    (2) Any final decision approving a plan shall contain the provisions 
prescribed in Sec. 1902.20(b)(1)(iii) concerning Federal enforcement in 
areas covered by the plan.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.23  Publication of decisions.

    All decisions approving or disapproving a plan shall be published in 
the Federal Register.


<R04>
 Subpart D--Procedures for Determinations Under Section 18(e) of the Act

    Source: 40 FR 54782, Nov. 26, 1975, unless otherwise noted.

                                 General


<R05>
Sec. 1902.30  Purpose and scope.

    This subpart contains procedures and criteria under which the 
Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health 
(hereinafter referred to as the Assistant Secretary) under a delegation 
of authority from the Secretary of Labor (Secretary's Order 12-71, 36 FR 
8754) will make his determination on whether to grant final approval to 
State plans in accordance with the provisions of section 18(e) of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 667) (hereinafter 
referred to as the Act).


<R05>
Sec. 1902.31  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, unless the context clearly indicates 
otherwise:
    Act means the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 
651 et seq.)
    Affirmative 18(e) determination means an affirmative determination 
under section 18(e) of the Act that the State plan or any modification 
thereof, is in actual operation meeting the criteria

[[Page 18]]

and indices of section 18(c) of the Act and subpart B of this part so as 
to warrant the withdrawal of the application of discretionary Federal 
enforcement and standards authority from issues covered by the plan, or 
by any modification thereof.
    Assistant Regional Director means the Assistant Regional Director 
for Occupational Safety and Health for the region in which a State is 
located.
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary of Labor for 
Occupational Safety and Health.
    Commencement of a case under section 18(e) of the Act means, for the 
purpose of retaining Federal jurisdiction despite an affirmative 18(e) 
determination, the issuance of a citation, and in the case of an 
imminent danger, the initiation of enforcement proceedings under section 
13 of the Act.
    Commencement of plan operations means the beginning of operations 
under a plan following the approval of the plan by the Assistant 
Secretary and in no case may be later than the effective date of the 
initial funding grant provided under section 23(g) of the Act.
    Development step includes, but is not limited to, those items listed 
in the published developmental schedule, or any revisions thereof, for 
each plan contained in 29 CFR part 1952. A developmental step also 
includes those items specified in the plan as approved under section 
18(c) of the Act for completion by the State, as well as those items 
which under the approval decision were subject to evaluations. (See 
e.g., approval of Colorado and Michigan plans, 38 FR 25172, 38 FR 27388, 
respectively), and changes deemed necessary as a result thereof to make 
the State program at least as effective as the Federal program within 
the 3 years developmental period. (See 29 CFR 1953.10(a)).
    Initial approval means approval of a State plan, or any modification 
thereof, under section 18(c) of the Act and subpart C of this part.
    Person means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, 
business trust, legal representative, organized group of individuals, or 
any agency, authority or instrumentality of the United States or of a 
State.
    Separable portion of a plan for purposes of an 18(e) determination 
generally means more than one industrial, occupational or hazard 
grouping as defined in Sec. 1902.2(c)(1) which is administratively 
practicable and reasonably separable from the remainder of the plan. 
(See 29 CFR 1952.6(a).)


<R05>
Sec. 1902.32  General policies.

    (a) Sections 18 (e) and (f) of the Act provide for the continuing 
evaluation and monitoring of State plans approved under section 18(c) of 
the Act. The Assistant Secretary's decision whether to grant an 
affirmative 18(e) determination will be based, in part, on the results 
of these evaluations. Section 18(e) provides that a period of not less 
than 3 years shall have passed before the Assistant Secretary may make a 
determination that the State program in actual operations is applying 
the criteria of section 18(c) of the Act. In the case of a developmental 
plan, Sec. 1902.2(b) of this part requires that the Assistant Secretary 
must have at least one year in which to evaluate the plan's actual 
operations following the completion of all developmental steps specified 
in the plan. Thus, to be considered for an 18(e) determination, at least 
three years shall have passed following commencement of operations after 
the initial approval of a State's occupational safety and health plan by 
the Assistant Secretary. In the case of a developmental plan, at least 
one year shall have passed following the completion of all developmental 
steps, but, in any event, at least three years must have passed 
following initial approval of the plan before discretionary Federal 
enforcement authority and standards may be withdrawn from issues covered 
by an approved plan.
    (b) In making an 18(e) determination, the Assistant Secretary will 
determine if actual operations under a State's plan, or under a 
separable portion of the plan, indicate that the State is applying the 
criteria of section 18(c) of the Act and the indices of effectiveness of 
subpart B of this part in a manner which renders operations under the 
plan ``at least as effective as'' operations under the Federal program 
in providing safe and healthful employment and places of employment 
within

[[Page 19]]

the State. In making this determination, the Assistant Secretary may 
consider such information which he deems appropriate for an informed 
decision.
    (c) If the Assistant Secretary makes an affirmative 18(e) 
determination, the Federal enforcement provisions of sections 5(a) (2), 
8 (except for the purposes of continuing evaluations under section 18(f) 
of the Act), 9, 10, 13 and 17 and standards promulgated under section 6 
of the Act shall not apply with respect to those occupational safety and 
health issues covered under the plan which have been given an 
affirmative 18(e) determination. However, the Assistant Secretary may 
retain jurisdiction over proceedings commenced under sections 9, 10 and 
13 of the Act before the date of his determination. In addition, the 
Assistant Secretary shall retain his jurisdiction under the anti-
discrimination provisions of section 11(c) of the Act.
    (d) If the Assistant Secretary determines that a State plan, or any 
portion thereof, has not met the criteria for an 18(e) determination, he 
shall retain his authority under the enforcement provisions of sections 
5(a) (2), 8, 9, 10, 13, and 17 and his standards authority under section 
6 of the Act in the issues found ineligible for an 18(e) determination. 
In addition, his decision may result in the commencement of proceedings 
for withdrawal of approval of the plan, or any separable portion 
thereof, under 29 CFR part 1955.
    (e) Once a State's plan, or any modification thereof, has been given 
an affirmative 18(e) determination, the State is required to maintain a 
program which will meet the requirements of section 18 (c) and will 
continue to be ``at least as effective as'' the Federal program 
operations in the issues covered by the determination. As the Federal 
program changes and thereby becomes more effective, the State is 
correspondingly required to adjust its program at a level which would 
provide a program for workplace safety and health which would be ``at 
least as effective as'' the improvements in the Federal program. A 
failure to comply with this requirement may result in the revocation of 
the affirmative 18(e) determination and the resumption of Federal 
enforcement and standards authority and/or in the commencement of 
proceedings for the withdrawal of approval of the plan, or any portion 
thereof, pursuant to 29 CFR part 1955.
    (f) The Assistant Secretary may reconsider and, if necessary, 
rescind or revoke all or a separable portion of an affirmative 18(e) 
determination and reinstate concurrent Federal enforcement authority if 
he finds that a State does not maintain its commitment to provide a 
program for employee safety and health protection meeting the 
requirements of section 18(c) of the Act. This authority is designed to 
be used in instances where operations under a State program are found to 
be less effective than under the Federal program because of unusual 
circumstances which are temporary in nature. The Assistant Secretary may 
also use this procedure to reinstate Federal enforcement authority in 
conjunction with plan withdrawal proceedings in order to ensure that 
there is no serious gap in his commitment to assure safe and healthful 
working conditions so far as possible for every employee.

            Completion of Developmental Steps--Certification


<R05>
Sec. 1902.33  Developmental period.

    Upon the commencement of plan operations after the initial approval 
of a State's plan by the Assistant Secretary, a State has three years in 
which to complete all of the developmental steps specified in the plan 
as approved. Section 1953.11 of this chapter sets forth the procedures 
for the submission and consideration of developmental changes by the 
Assistant Secretary. Generally, whenever a State completes a 
developmental step, it must submit the resulting change as a supplement 
to its plan together with relevant documentation to the Assistant 
Secretary for his approval. The Assistant Secretary's approval of such 
changes is then published in the Federal Register and the pertinent 
subparts of part 1952 of this chapter are amended to reflect the 
completion of a developmental step.

[[Page 20]]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.34  Certification of completion of developmental steps.

    (a) Upon the completion of all of the developmental steps in a 
State's plan, which is to be accomplished not later than three years 
following commencement of plan operations after approval of the plan by 
the Assistant Secretary under section 18(c), the Assistant Regional 
Director shall certify, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, 
that all developmental steps in the plan have been met and that the 
State's program is to be evaluated on the basis of its eligibility for 
an 18(e) determination after at least one year of evaluations of the 
plan.
    (b) Upon determining that a State has completed all of its 
developmental steps, the Assistant Regional Director shall prepare a 
certification which he shall promptly forward to the Assistant 
Secretary. The certification shall include, but shall not be limited to, 
the following;
    (1) A list of all developmental steps or revisions thereof, plan 
amendments or changes which result in the completion of the steps or 
revisions thereof, and the dates the Assistant Secretary's or the 
Assistant Regional Director's approval of each change was published in 
the Federal Register;
    (2) Substantive changes, if any, in the State program which were 
approved by the Assistant Secretary and their dates of publication in 
the Federal Register;
    (3) Documentation that the legal basis for the applicable State 
merit system has been approved by the U.S. Civil Service Commission and 
that the actual operations of the State merit system has been found 
acceptable by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration with the 
advice of the U.S. Civil Service Commission; and
    (4) A description of the issues which are covered by the State plan. 
Where applicable, the certification shall include a description of those 
separable portions of the plan which have been certified for 18(e) 
evaluation purposes as well as those portions of the plan which were not 
certified by the Assistant Regional Director.
    (c) After a review of the certification and the State's plan, if the 
Assistant Secretary finds that the State has completed all the 
developmental steps specified in the plan, he shall publish the 
certification in the Federal Register and amend the appropriate subpart 
of part 1952 of this chapter to reflect this finding.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.35  Effect of certification.

    Publication of the certification acknowledging the completion of all 
of the developmental steps in a State's plan will automatically initiate 
the evaluation of a State's plan for the purposes of an 18(e) 
determination. Evaluation for the purposes of an 18(e) determination 
will continue for at least one year after the publication of the 
certification in the Federal Register. Federal enforcement authority 
under sections 5(a)(2), 8, 9, 10, 11(c), 13, and 17 of the Act and 
Federal standards authority under section 6 of the Act will not be 
relinquished during the evaluation period. Evaluation conducted for 
18(e) determination purposes will be based on the criteria set forth in 
Secs. 1902.37 and 1902.38.

                     Basis for 18(e) Determinations


<R05>
Sec. 1902.36  General provisions.

    (a) In making his evaluation of the actual operations of a State's 
plan for the purposes of an 18(e) determination, the Assistant Secretary 
shall consider all relevant data which will aid him in making an 
effective determination. In his evaluation he shall consider whether the 
requirements of section 18(c) of the Act and the criteria for State 
plans outlined in subpart B of this part as well as those in 
Sec. 1902.37 are being applied in actual operations for a reasonable 
period of time in a manner which warrants the termination of concurrent 
Federal enforcement authority and standards in issues covered under the 
plan.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary's evaluation for an 18(e) determination 
will be addressed to consideration of whether the criteria and indices 
in Sec. 1902.37(a) are being applied by the State in such a manner as to 
render its program in operation at least as effective as operations 
under the Federal program. In considering the question of such 
application, the Assistant Secretary shall also consider the factors 
provided

[[Page 21]]

under Sec. 1902.37(b). The Assistant Secretary's evaluation may include 
such other information on the application of the criteria and indices in 
Sec. 1902.37 such as information developed from comments received from 
the public and the results of any hearings which may have been held 
under Sec. 1902.40 concerning the proposed 18(e) determination.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.37  Factors for determination.

    (a) The Assistant Secretary shall determine if the State has applied 
and implemented all the specific criteria and indices of effectiveness 
of Secs. 1902.3 and 1902.4 of this part.
    (b) In determining whether a State has applied the criteria and 
indices of effectiveness in paragraph (a) of this section in actual 
operations, the Assistant Secretary will, among other things related to 
the application of the criteria and indices, consider whether:
    (1) The State has a sufficient number of adequately trained and 
competent personnel to discharge its responsibilities under the plan.
    (2) The State has adhered to the procedures which it has adopted and 
which have been approved either under the State plan or in State plan 
changes or under any other procedures for approval authorized by the 
Assistant Secretary.
    (3) The State has timely adopted all Federal standards, and 
amendments thereto, for issues covered under the plan or has timely 
developed and promulgated standards which are at least as effective as 
the comparable Federal standards and amendments thereto.
    (4) If the State has adopted Federal standards, the State's 
interpretation and application of such standards have been consistent 
with the applicable Federal interpretation and application. Where the 
State has developed and promulgated its own standards, such standards 
have been interpreted and applied in a manner which is at least as 
effective as the interpretation and application of comparable Federal 
standards. This requirement acknowledges that State standards may have 
been approved by the Assistant Regional Director, but emphasizes the 
requirement that the standards are to be at least as effective as the 
comparable Federal standards in actual operations.
    (5) If any State standard, whether it is an adopted Federal standard 
or a standard developed by a State, has been subject to administrative 
or judicial challenge, the State has taken the necessary administrative, 
judicial or legislative action to correct any deficiencies in its 
program resulting from such challenge.
    (6) In granting permanent variances from a standard the State has 
assured that the employer provides conditions of employment which are as 
safe and healthful as those which would prevail if he complied with the 
standard.
    (7) In granting temporary variances from a standard, the State has 
ensured that the recipient of the variance has come into compliance with 
the standard as early as possible.
    (8) The State inspection program is being implemented in a manner 
which allows a sufficient allocation of resources to be directed toward 
target industries and target health hazards as designated by the State 
while providing adequate attention to all other workplaces covered under 
the plan, or any modification thereof.
    (9) The State exercises the authority through appropriate means, to 
enforce its right of entry and inspection wherever such right of entry 
or inspection is refused.
    (10) Inspections of workplaces are conducted by State inspectors in 
a competent manner, following approved enforcement procedures. This 
includes a requirement that the inspectors obtain adequate information 
to support any citations which may be issued.
    (11) The State issues citations, proposed penalties and notices for 
failure to abate in a timely manner.
    (12) The State proposes penalties in a manner at least as effective 
as under the Federal program, including the proposing of penalties for 
first instance violations and the consideration of factors comparable to 
those required to be considered under the Federal program.
    (13) The State ensures the abatement of hazards for which a citation 
has been issued, including the issuance of notices of failure to abate 
and appropriate penalties.
    (14) Wherever appropriate, the State agency has sought 
administrative and

[[Page 22]]

judicial review of adverse adjudications. This factor also addresses 
whether the State has taken the appropriate and necessary 
administrative, legislative or judicial action to correct any 
deficiencies in its enforcement program resulting from an adverse 
administrative or judicial determination.
    (15) Insofar as it is available, analysis of the annual occupational 
safety and health survey by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, as well as 
of other available Federal and State measurements of program impact on 
worker safety and health, which analysis also takes into consideration 
various local factors, indicates that trends in worker safety and health 
injury and illness rates under the State program compare favorably to 
those under the Federal program.
[40 FR 54782, Nov. 26, 1975; 40 FR 58143, Dec. 15, 1975]

                   Procedures for 18(e) Determination


<R05>
Sec. 1902.38  Evaluation of plan following certification.

    (a) Following the publication in the Federal Register under 
Sec. 1902.34 of the certification acknowledging the completion of all 
developmental steps specified in the plan, or any portion thereof, the 
Assistant Secretary will evaluate and monitor the actual operations 
under the State plan for at least 1 year before determining whether the 
State is eligible for an 18(e) determination. The evaluation will assess 
the actual operation of the State's fully implemented program in 
accordance with the criteria in Sec. 1902.37 and take into account any 
information available to the Assistant Secretary affecting the State's 
program.
    (b) The Assistant Regional Director shall prepare a semi-annual 
report of his evaluation of the actual operations under the State plan 
or any portion thereof in narrative form. The Assistant Regional 
Director's evaluation report will be transmitted to the Assistant 
Secretary who will then transmit the report to the State. The State 
shall be afforded an opportunity to respond to each evaluation report.
[40 FR 54782, Nov. 26, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 58746, Nov. 11, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.39  Completion of evaluation.

    (a) After evaluating the actual operations of the State plan, or any 
portion thereof, for at least 1 year following publication of the 
certification in the Federal Register under Sec. 1902.34, the Assistant 
Secretary shall notify the State whenever he determines that the State 
will be eligible for an 18(e) determination. In addition, a State may 
request an 18(e) determination following the evaluation period noted 
above. In no case shall this determination of eligibility be later than 
2 years following the publication of the certification of the completion 
of developmental steps in the Federal Register under Sec. 1902.34. In 
the case of a plan which was not developmental, the determination of 
eligibility shall not be sooner than 3 years following the date of 
commencement of operations under the plan.
    (b) After it has been determined that a State will be eligible for 
an 18(e) determination, the Assistant Regional Director shall prepare a 
final report of his evaluation of the actual operations under a State's 
plan or portion thereof which may be subject to the 18(e) determination. 
The Assistant Regional Director's report shall be transmitted to the 
Assistant Secretary. The Assistant Secretary shall transmit such report 
to the State and the State shall have an opportunity to respond to the 
report.
    (c) Whenever it has been determined that a State's plan, or 
separable portion thereof, is eligible for an 18(e) determination, the 
Assistant Secretary shall publish a notice in the Federal Register. The 
notice shall meet the requirements of the remaining paragraphs of this 
section. No later than 10 days following the publication of the notice 
in the Federal Register, the affected State agency shall publish, or 
cause to be published, within the State, reasonable notice containing 
the same information.
    (d) The notice shall indicate that the plan, or any separable 
portion thereof, is in issue before the Assistant Secretary for a 
determination as to whether the criteria in section 18(c) of the Act are 
being applied in actual operation, and indicate the particular 
substantive issues, if any, for consideration in making such 
determination.

[[Page 23]]

Where a portion of a plan is in issue for such a determination, the 
notice shall specify such portions of the plan as well as those portions 
of the plan which are not in issue for the determination.
    (e) The notice shall afford interested persons an opportunity to 
submit in writing, data, views, and arguments on the proposed 18(e) 
determination, and the affected State an opportunity to respond to such 
submissions.
    (f) The notice shall also state that any interested person or the 
affected State may request an informal hearing concerning the proposed 
18(e) determination whenever particularized written objections thereto 
are filed within 35 days following publication of the notice in the 
Federal Register.
    (g) If the Assistant Secretary finds that substantial objections are 
filed which relate to the proposed 18(e) determination, the Assistant 
Secretary shall, and in any other case may, publish a notice of informal 
hearing in the Federal Register not later than 30 days after the last 
day for filing written views or comments. The notice shall include:
    (1) A statement of the time, place and nature of the proceeding;
    (2) A specification of the substantial issues which have been raised 
and on which an informal hearing has been requested;
    (3) The requirement for the filing of an intention to appear at the 
hearing, together with a statement of the position to be taken with 
regard to the issues specified, and of the evidence to be adduced in 
support of the position;
    (4) The designation of a presiding officer to conduct the hearing; 
and
    (5) Any other appropriate provisions with regard to the proceeding.
    (h) Not later than 10 days following the publication of the notice 
in the Federal Register, required by paragraph (g) of this section, the 
affected agency shall publish, or cause to be published, within the 
State reasonable notice containing the same information.

    Effective Date Note: At 43 FR 11196, Mar. 17, 1978, Sec. 1902.39(a) 
was suspended indefinitely, effective January 20, 1978.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.40  Informal hearing.

    (a) Any hearing conducted under this section shall be legislative in 
type. However, fairness may require an opportunity for cross-examination 
on pertinent issues. The presiding officer is empowered to permit cross-
examination under such circumstances. The essential intent is to provide 
an opportunity for participation and comment by interested persons which 
can be carried out expeditiously and without rigid procedures which 
might unduly impede or protract the 18(e) determination process.
    (b) Although the hearing shall be informal and legislative in type, 
this section is intended to provide more than the bare essentials of 
informal proceedings under 5 U.S.C. 553. The additional requirements are 
the following:
    (1) The presiding officer shall be a hearing examiner appointed 
under 5 U.S.C. 3105.
    (2) The presiding officer shall provide an opportunity for cross-
examination on pertinent issues.
    (3) The hearing shall be reported verbatim, and a transcript shall 
be available to any interested person on such terms as the presiding 
officer may provide.
    (c) The officer presiding at a hearing shall have all the power 
necessary or appropriate to conduct a fair and full hearing, including 
the powers:
    (1) To regulate the course of the proceedings;
    (2) To dispose of procedural requests, objections, and comparable 
matters;
    (3) To confine the presentation to the issues specified in the 
notice of hearing, or, where appropriate, to matters pertinent to the 
issue before the Assistant Secretary;
    (4) To regulate the conduct of those present at the hearing by 
appropriate means;
    (5) To take official notice of material facts not appearing in the 
evidence in the record, as long as the parties are afforded an 
opportunity to show evidence to the contrary;
    (6) In his discretion, to keep the record open for a reasonable and 
specified time to receive additional written recommendations with 
supporting reasons and any additional data, views,

[[Page 24]]

and arguments from any person who has participated in the oral 
proceeding.
    (d) Upon the completion of the oral presentations, the transcripts 
thereof, together with written submissions on the proceedings, exhibits 
filed during the hearing, and all posthearing comments, recommendations, 
and supporting reasons shall be certified by the officer presiding at 
the hearing to the Assistant Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.41  Decision.

    (a) Within a reasonable time generally within 120 days after the 
expiration of the period provided for the submission of written data, 
views, and arguments on the issues on which no hearing is held, or 
within a reasonable time, generally not to exceed 120 days after the 
certification of the record of a hearing, the Assistant Secretary shall 
publish his decision in the Federal Register. His decision shall state 
whether or not an affirmative 18(e) determination has been made for the 
State plan or any separable portion thereof, or whether he intends to 
withdraw approval of the plan or any portion thereof pursuant to part 
1955 of this chapter. The action of the Assistant Secretary shall be 
taken after consideration of all information, including his evaluations 
of the actual operations of the plan, and information presented in 
written submissions and in any hearings held under this subpart.
    (b) Any decision under this section shall incorporate a concise 
statement of its grounds and purpose and shall respond to any 
substantial issues which may have been raised in written submissions or 
at the hearing.
    (c) All decisions resulting in an affirmative 18(e) determination 
shall contain provisions amending the appropriate subparts of part 1952 
of this chapter.
    (d) All decisions concerning the Assistant Secretary's determination 
under section 18(e) of the Act shall be published in the Federal 
Register.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.42  Effect of affirmative 18(e) determination.

    (a) In making an affirmative 18(e) determination, the Assistant 
Secretary determines that a State has applied the provisions of its 
plan, or any modification thereof, in accordance with the criteria of 
section 18(c) of the Act and that the State has applied the provisions 
of this part in a manner which renders the actual operations of the 
State program ``at least as effective as'' operations under the Federal 
program.
    (b) In the case of an affirmative 18(e) determination of a separable 
portion(s) of a plan, the Assistant Secretary determines that the State 
has applied the separable portion(s) of the plan in accordance with the 
criteria of section 18(c) of the Act in a manner comparable to Federal 
operations covering such portions and that the criteria of this part are 
being applied in a manner which renders the actual operations of such 
separable portion(s) of the State program ``at least as effective as'' 
operations of such portions under the Federal program.
    (c) Upon making an affirmative 18(e) determination, the standards 
promulgated under section 6 of the Act and the enforcement provisions of 
section 5(a)(2), 8 (except for the purpose of continuing evaluations 
under section 18(f) of the Act), 9, 10, 13 and 17 of the Act shall not 
apply with respect to those occupational safety and health issues 
covered under the plan for which an affirmative 18(e) determination has 
been granted. The Assistant Secretary shall retain his authority under 
the above sections for those issues covered in the plan which have not 
been granted an affirmative 18(e) determination.
    (d) The Assistant Secretary will retain jurisdiction under the 
citation and contest provisions of sections 9 and 10 of the Act and the 
imminent-danger provisions of section 13 where such proceedings have 
been commenced prior to the date of his determination.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.43  Affirmative 18(e) decision.

    (a) In publishing his affirmative 18(e) decision in the Federal 
Register the Assistant Secretary's notice shall include, but shall not 
be limited to the following:
    (1) Those issues under the plan over which the Assistant Secretary 
is withdrawing his standards and enforcement authority;
    (2) A statement that the Assistant Secretary retains his authority 
under

[[Page 25]]

section 11(c) of the Act with regard to complaints alleging 
discrimination against employees because of the exercise of any right 
afforded to the employee by the Act;
    (3) Amendments to the appropriate subpart of part 1952 of this 
chapter;
    (4) A statement that the Assistant Secretary is not precluded from 
revoking his determination and reinstating his standards and enforcement 
authority under Sec. 1902.47 et seq., if his continuing evaluations 
under section 18(f) of the Act show that the State has substantially 
failed to maintain a program which is at least as effective as 
operations under the Federal program, or if the State does not submit 
program change supplements to its plan to the Assistant Secretary as 
required by 29 CFR part 1953.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.44  Requirements applicable to State plans granted affirmative 18(e) determinations.

    (a) A State whose plan, or modification thereof, has been granted an 
affirmative 18(e) determination will be required to maintain a program 
within the scope of such determination which will be ``at least as 
effective as'' operations under the Federal program in providing 
employee safety and health protection at covered workplaces within the 
comparable scope of the Federal program. This requirement includes 
submitting all required reports to the Assistant Secretary, as well as 
submitting supplements to the Assistant Secretary for his approval 
whenever there is a change in the State's program, whenever the results 
of evaluations conducted under section 18(f) show that some portion of a 
State plan has an adverse impact on the operations of the State plan or 
whenever the Assistant Secretary determines that any alteration in the 
Federal program could have an adverse impact on the ``at least as 
effective as'' status of the State program. See part 1953 of this 
chapter.
    (b) A substantial failure to comply with the requirements of this 
section may result in the revocation of the affirmative 18(e) 
determination and the resumption of Federal enforcement authority, and 
may also result in proceedings for the withdrawal of approval of the 
plan or any portion thereof pursuant to part 1955 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.45  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.46  Negative 18(e) determination.

    (a) This section sets out the procedures which shall be followed 
whenever the Assistant Secretary determines that a State's plan, or any 
separate portion thereof, has not met the criteria for an affirmative 
18(e) determination.
    (b) If the Assistant Secretary determines that a State plan, or a 
separable portion thereof, has not met the criteria of section 18(c) of 
the Act and that actual operations under the plan, or portion thereof, 
have not met the criteria for an affirmative determination set forth in 
Sec. 1902.37, he shall retain his standards authority under section 6 of 
the Act and his enforcement authority under sections 5(a)(2), 8, 9, 10, 
13, and 17 of the Act for those issues covered under the plan or such 
portions of the plan which were subject to his negative determination.
    (c) A decision under this section may result in the commencement of 
proceedings for withdrawal of approval of the plan or any separable 
portion thereof pursuant to part 1955 of this chapter.
    (d) Where the Assistant Secretary determines that operations under a 
State plan or any separable portion thereof have not met the criteria 
for an affirmative 18(e) determination, but are not of such a nature as 
to warrant the initiation of withdrawal proceedings, the Assistant 
Secretary may, at his discretion, afford the State a reasonable time to 
meet the criteria for an affirmative 18(e) determination after which 
time he may initiate proceedings for withdrawal of plan approval. This 
discretionary authority will be applied in the following manner:
    (1) Upon determining that a State shall be subject to a final 18(e) 
determination, the Assistant Secretary shall notify the agency 
designated by the State to administer its program, within the State of 
his decision that the State's program, or a separable portion thereof, 
shall be subject to a final 18(e) determination. The Assistant Secretary 
shall give the State a

[[Page 26]]

reasonable time, generally not less than 1 year, in which to meet the 
criteria for an affirmative 18(e) determination.
    (2) The Assistant Secretary shall also publish a notice in the 
Federal Register outlining his reasons for not making an affirmative 
18(e) determination at the time. The notice will also set forth the 
reasonable time the State was granted to meet the criteria for an 
affirmative 18(e) determination and set forth such conditions as the 
Assistant Secretary deems proper for the continuation of the State's 
plan or such portions subject to this action.
    (3) The State shall be afforded an opportunity to agree to the 
conditions of the Assistant Secretary's decision.
    (4) Upon the expiration of the time granted to a State to meet the 
criteria for an affirmative 18(e) determination under paragraph (d)(2) 
of this section, the Assistant Secretary may initiate proceedings to 
determine whether a State shall be granted an affirmative 18(e) 
determination. The procedures outlined in this subpart shall be 
applicable to any proceedings initiated under this paragraph.

  Procedure for Reconsideration and Revocation of an Affirmative 18(e) 
                              Determination


<R05>
Sec. 1902.47  Reconsideration of an affirmative 18(e) determination.

    (a) The Assistant Secretary may at any time reconsider on his own 
initiative or on petition of an interested person his decision granting 
an affirmative 18(e) determination.
    (b) Such reconsideration shall be based on results of his continuing 
evaluation of a State plan after it has been granted an affirmative 
18(e) determination.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.48  The proceeding.

    Whenever, as a result of his reconsideration, the Assistant 
Secretary proposes to revoke his affirmative 18(e) determination, he 
shall follow the procedures in the remaining sections of this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.49  General notice.

    (a) Whenever the Assistant Secretary proposes to revoke an 
affirmative 18(e) determination, he shall publish a notice in the 
Federal Register meeting the requirements of the remaining paragraphs of 
this section. No later than 10 days following the publication of the 
notice in the Federal Register, the affected State agency shall publish, 
or cause to be published, reasonable notice within the State containing 
the same information.
    (b) The notice shall indicate the reasons for the proposed action.
    (c) The notice shall afford interested persons including the 
affected State, an opportunity to submit in writing, data, views, and 
arguments on the proposal within 35 days after publication of the notice 
in the Federal Register. The notice shall also provide that any 
interested person may request an informal hearing concerning the 
proposed revocation whenever particularized written objections thereto 
are filed within 35 days following publication of the notice in the 
Federal Register. If the Assistant Secretary finds that substantial 
objections have been filed, he shall afford an informal hearing on the 
proposed revocation under Sec. 1902.50.
    (d) The Assistant Secretary may, upon his own initiative, give 
notice of an informal hearing affording an opportunity for oral comments 
concerning the proposed revocation.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.50  Informal hearing.

    Any informal hearing shall be legislative in type. The rules of 
procedure for each hearing shall be those contained in Sec. 1902.40 and 
will be published with the notice thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.51  Certification of the records of a hearing.

    Upon completion of an informal hearing, the transcript thereof, 
together with written submissions, exhibits filed during the hearing, 
and any post-hearing presentations shall be certified by the officer 
presiding at the hearing to the Assistant Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.52  Decision.

    (a) After consideration of all relevant information which has been 
presented, the Assistant Secretary shall issue a decision on the 
continuation or revocation of the affirmative 18(e) determination.

[[Page 27]]

    (b) The decision revoking the determination shall also reflect the 
Assistant Secretary's determination that concurrent Federal enforcement 
and standards authority will be reinstated within the State for a 
reasonable time until he has withdrawn his approval of the plan, or any 
separable portion thereof, pursuant to part 1955 of this chapter or he 
has determined that the State has met the criteria for an 18(e) 
determination pursuant to the applicable procedures of this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.53  Publication of decisions.

    All decisions on the reconsideration of an affirmative 18(e) 
determination shall be published in the Federal Register.


<R03>
PART 1903--INSPECTIONS, CITATIONS AND PROPOSED PENALTIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
1903.1  Purpose and scope.
1903.2  Posting of notice; availability of the Act, regulations and 
          applicable standards.
1903.3  Authority for inspection.
1903.4  Objection to inspection.
1903.5  Entry not a waiver.
1903.6  Advance notice of inspections.
1903.7  Conduct of inspections.
1903.8  Representatives of employers and employees.
1903.9  Trade secrets.
1903.10  Consultation with employees.
1903.11  Complaints by employees.
1903.12  Inspection not warranted; informal review.
1903.13  Imminent danger.
1903.14  Citations; notices of de minimis violations; policy regarding 
          employee rescue activities.
1903.14a  Petitions for modification of abatement date.
1903.15  Proposed penalties.
1903.16  Posting of citations.
1903.17  Employer and employee contests before the Review Commission.
1903.18  Failure to correct a violation for which a citation has been 
          issued.
1903.19  Abatement verification.
1903.20  Informal conferences.
1903.21  State administration.
1903.22  Definitions.

    Authority: Sections 8 and 9 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 657, 658); 5 U.S.C. 553; Secretary of Labor's 
Order No. 1-90 (55 FR 9033) or 6-96 (62 FR 111), as applicable.
    Section 1903.7 also issued under 5 U.S.C. 553.

    Source: 36 FR 17850, Sept. 4, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.1  Purpose and scope.

    The Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (84 
Stat. 1590 et seq., 29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) requires, in part, that every 
employer covered under the Act furnish to his employees employment and a 
place of employment which are free from recognized hazards that are 
causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to his 
employees. The Act also requires that employers comply with occupational 
safety and health standards promulgated under the Act, and that 
employees comply with standards, rules, regulations and orders issued 
under the Act which are applicable to their own actions and conduct. The 
Act authorizes the Department of Labor to conduct inspections, and to 
issue citations and proposed penalties for alleged violations. The Act, 
under section 20(b), also authorizes the Secretary of Health, Education, 
and Welfare to conduct inspections and to question employers and 
employees in connection with research and other related activities. The 
Act contains provisions for adjudication of violations, periods 
prescribed for the abatement of violations, and proposed penalties by 
the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission, if contested by an 
employer or by an employee or authorized representative of employees, 
and for judicial review. The purpose of this part 1903 is to prescribe 
rules and to set forth general policies for enforcement of the 
inspection, citation, and proposed penalty provisions of the Act. In 
situations where this part 1903 sets forth general enforcement policies 
rather than substantive or procedural rules, such policies may be 
modified in specific circumstances where the Secretary or his designee 
determines that an alternative course of action would better serve the 
objectives of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.2  Posting of notice; availability of the Act, regulations and applicable standards.

    (a)(1) Each employer shall post and keep posted a notice or notices, 
to be

[[Page 28]]

furnished by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. 
Department of Labor, informing employees of the protections and 
obligations provided for in the Act, and that for assistance and 
information, including copies of the Act and of specific safety and 
health standards, employees should contact the employer or the nearest 
office of the Department of Labor. Such notice or notices shall be 
posted by the employer in each establishment in a conspicuous place or 
places where notices to employees are customarily posted. Each employer 
shall take steps to insure that such notices are not altered, defaced, 
or covered by other material.
    (2) Where a State has an approved poster informing employees of 
their protections and obligations as defined in Sec. 1952.10 of this 
chapter, such poster, when posted by employers covered by the State 
plan, shall constitute compliance with the posting requirements of 
section 8(c)(1) of the Act. Employers whose operations are not within 
the issues covered by the State plan must comply with paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section.
    (3) Reproductions or facsimiles of such Federal or State posters 
shall constitute compliance with the posting requirements of section 
8(c)(1) of the Act where such reproductions or facsimiles are at least 
8\1/2\ inches by 14 inches, and the printing size is at least 10 pt. 
Whenever the size of the poster increases, the size of the print shall 
also increase accordingly. The caption or heading on the poster shall be 
in large type, generally not less than 36 pt.
    (b) Establishment means a single physical location where business is 
conducted or where services or industrial operations are performed. (For 
example: A factory, mill, store, hotel, restaurant, movie theatre, farm, 
ranch, bank, sales office, warehouse, or central administrative office.) 
Where distinctly separate activities are performed at a single physical 
location (such as contract construction activities from the same 
physical location as a lumber yard), each activity shall be treated as a 
separate physical establishment, and a separate notice or notices shall 
be posted in each such establishment, to the extent that such notices 
have been furnished by the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, U.S. Department of Labor. Where employers are engaged in 
activities which are physically dispersed, such as agriculture, 
construction, transportation, communications, and electric, gas and 
sanitary services, the notice or notices required by this section shall 
be posted at the location to which employees report each day. Where 
employees do not usually work at, or report to, a single establishment, 
such as longshoremen, traveling salesmen, technicians, engineers, etc., 
such notice or notices shall be posted at the location from which the 
employees operate to carry out their activities. In all cases, such 
notice or notices shall be posted in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Copies of the Act, all regulations published in this chapter and 
all applicable standards will be available at all Area Offices of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor. 
If an employer has obtained copies of these materials, he shall make 
them available upon request to any employee or his authorized 
representative for review in the establishment where the employee is 
employed on the same day the request is made or at the earliest time 
mutually convenient to the employee or his authorized representative and 
the employer.
    (d) Any employer failing to comply with the provisions of this 
section shall be subject to citation and penalty in accordance with the 
provisions of section 17 of the Act.
[36 FR 17850, Sept. 4, 1971, as amended at 39 FR 39036, Nov. 5, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.3  Authority for inspection.

    (a) Compliance Safety and Health Officers of the Department of Labor 
are authorized to enter without delay and at reasonable times any 
factory, plant, establishment, construction site, or other area, 
workplace or environment where work is performed by an employee of an 
employer; to inspect and investigate during regular working hours and at 
other reasonable times, and within reasonable limits and in a

[[Page 29]]

reasonable manner, any such place of employment, and all pertinent 
conditions, structures, machines, apparatus, devices, equipment and 
materials therein; to question privately any employer, owner, operator, 
agent or employee; and to review records required by the Act and 
regulations published in this chapter, and other records which are 
directly related to the purpose of the inspection. Representatives of 
the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare are authorized to make 
inspections and to question employers and employees in order to carry 
out the functions of the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare 
under the Act. Inspections conducted by Department of Labor Compliance 
Safety and Health Officers and representatives of the Secretary of 
Health, Education, and Welfare under section 8 of the Act and pursuant 
to this part 1903 shall not affect the authority of any State to conduct 
inspections in accordance with agreements and plans under section 18 of 
the Act.
    (b) Prior to inspecting areas containing information which is 
classified by an agency of the United States Government in the interest 
of national security, Compliance Safety and Health Officers shall have 
obtained the appropriate security clearance.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.4  Objection to inspection.

    (a) Upon a refusal to permit the Compliance Safety and Health 
Officer, in exercise of his official duties, to enter without delay and 
at reasonable times any place of employment or any place therein, to 
inspect, to review records, or to question any employer, owner, 
operator, agent, or employee, in accordance with Sec. 1903.3 or to 
permit a representative of employees to accompany the Compliance Safety 
and Health Officer during the physical inspection of any workplace in 
accordance with Sec. 1903.8, the Safety and Health Officer shall 
terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to other areas, 
conditions, structures, machines, apparatus, devices, equipment, 
materials, records, or interviews concerning which no objection is 
raised. The Compliance Safety and Health Officer shall endeavor to 
ascertain the reason for such refusal, and shall immediately report the 
refusal and the reason therefor to the Area Director. The Area Director 
shall consult with the Regional Solicitor, who shall take appropriate 
action, including compulsory process, if necessary.
    (b) Compulsory process shall be sought in advance of an attempted 
inspection or investigation if, in the judgment of the Area Director and 
the Regional Solicitor, circumstances exist which make such 
preinspection process desirable or necessary. Some examples of 
circumstances in which it may be desirable or necessary to seek 
compulsory process in advance of an attempt to inspect or investigate 
include (but are not limited to):
    (1) When the employer's past practice either implicitly or 
explicitly puts the Secretary on notice that a warrantless inspection 
will not be allowed;
    (2) When an inspection is scheduled far from the local office and 
procuring a warrant prior to leaving to conduct the inspection would 
avoid, in case of refusal of entry, the expenditure of significant time 
and resources to return to the office, obtain a warrant and return to 
the worksite;
    (3) When an inspection includes the use of special equipment or when 
the presence of an expert or experts is needed in order to properly 
conduct the inspection, and procuring a warrant prior to an attempt to 
inspect would alleviate the difficulties or costs encountered in 
coordinating the availability of such equipment or expert.
    (c) With the approval of the Regional Administrator and the Regional 
Solicitor, compulsory process may also be obtained by the Area Director 
or his designee.
    (d) For purposes of this section, the term compulsory process shall 
mean the institution of any appropriate action, including ex parte 
application for an inspection warrant or its equivalent. Ex parte 
inspection warrants shall be the preferred form of compulsory process in 
all circumstances where compulsory process is relied upon to seek entry 
to a workplace under this section.
[45 FR 65923, Oct. 3, 1980]

[[Page 30]]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.5  Entry not a waiver.

    Any permission to enter, inspect, review records, or question any 
person, shal not imply or be conditioned upon a waiver of any cause of 
action, citation, or penalty under the Act. Compliance Safety and Health 
Officers are not authorized to grant any such waiver.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.6  Advance notice of inspections.

    (a) Advance notice of inspections may not be given, except in the 
following situations:
    (1) In cases of apparent imminent danger, to enable the employer to 
abate the danger as quickly as possible;
    (2) In circumstances where the inspection can most effectively be 
conducted after regular business hours or where special preparations are 
necessary for an inspection;
    (3) Where necessary to assure the presence of representatives of the 
employer and employees or the appropriate personnel needed to aid in the 
inspection; and
    (4) In other circumstances where the Area Director determines that 
the giving of advance notice would enhance the probability of an 
effective and thorough inspection.
    (b) In the situations described in paragraph (a) of this section, 
advance notice of inspections may be given only if authorized by the 
Area Director, except that in cases of apparent imminent danger, advance 
notice may be given by the Compliance Safety and Health Officer without 
such authorization if the Area Director is not immediately available. 
When advance notice is given, it shall be the employer's responsibility 
promptly to notify the authorized representative of employees of the 
inspection, if the identity of such representative is known to the 
employer. (See Sec. 1903.8(b) as to situations where there is no 
authorized representative of employees.) Upon the request of the 
employer, the Compliance Safety and Health Officer will inform the 
authorized representative of employees of the inspection, provided that 
the employer furnishes the Compliance Safety and Health Officer with the 
identity of such representative and with such other information as is 
necessary to enable him promptly to inform such representative of the 
inspection. An employer who fails to comply with his obligation under 
this paragraph promptly to inform the authorized representative of 
employees of the inspection or to furnish such information as is 
necessary to enable the Compliance Safety and Health Officer promptly to 
inform such representative of the inspection, may be subject to citation 
and penalty under section 17(c) of the Act. Advance notice in any of the 
situations described in paragraph (a) of this section shall not be given 
more than 24 hours before the inspection is scheduled to be conducted, 
except in apparent imminent danger situations and in other unusual 
circumstances.
    (c) The Act provides in section 17(f) that any person who gives 
advance notice of any inspection to be conducted under the Act, without 
authority from the Secretary or his designees, shall, upon conviction, 
be punished by fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not 
more than 6 months, or by both.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.7  Conduct of inspections.

    (a) Subject to the provisions of Sec. 1903.3, inspections shall take 
place at such times and in such places of employment as the Area 
Director or the Compliance Safety and Health Officer may direct. At the 
beginning of an inspection, Compliance Safety and Health Officers shall 
present their credentials to the owner, operator, or agent in charge at 
the establishment; explain the nature and purpose of the inspection; and 
indicate generally the scope of the inspection and the records specified 
in Sec. 1903.3 which they wish to review. However, such designation of 
records shall not preclude access to additional records specified in 
Sec. 1903.3.
    (b) Compliance Safety and Health Officers shall have authority to 
take environmental samples and to take or obtain photographs related to 
the purpose of the inspection, employ other reasonable investigative 
techniques, and question privately any employer, owner, operator, agent 
or employee of an establishment. (See Sec. 1903.9 on trade secrets.) As 
used herein, the term employ other reasonable investigative techniques 
includes, but is not limited to, the use of devices to measure employee

[[Page 31]]

exposures and the attachment of personal sampling equipment such as 
dosimeters, pumps, badges and other similar devices to employees in 
order to monitor their exposures.
    (c) In taking photographs and samples, Compliance Safety and Health 
Officers shall take reasonable precautions to insure that such actions 
with flash, spark-producing, or other equipment would not be hazardous. 
Compliance Safety and Health Officers shall comply with all employer 
safety and health rules and practices at the establishment being 
inspected, and they shall wear and use appropriate protective clothing 
and equipment.
    (d) The conduct of inspections shall be such as to preclude 
unreasonable disruption of the operations of the employer's 
establishment.
    (e) At the conclusion of an inspection, the Compliance Safety and 
Health Officer shall confer with the employer or his representative and 
informally advise him of any apparent safety or health violations 
disclosed by the inspection. During such conference, the employer shall 
be afforded an opportunity to bring to the attention of the Compliance 
Safety and Health Officer any pertinent information regarding conditions 
in the workplace.
    (f) Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the 
requirements of this part.
[36 FR 17850, Sept. 14, 1971, as amended at 47 FR 6533, Feb. 12, 1982; 
47 FR 55481, Dec. 10, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.8  Representatives of employers and employees.

    (a) Compliance Safety and Health Officers shall be in charge of 
inspections and questioning of persons. A representative of the employer 
and a representative authorized by his employees shall be given an 
opportunity to accompany the Compliance Safety and Health Officer during 
the physical inspection of any workplace for the purpose of aiding such 
inspection. A Compliance Safety and Health Officer may permit additional 
employer representatives and additional representatives authorized by 
employees to accompany him where he determines that such additional 
representatives will further aid the inspection. A different employer 
and employee representative may accompany the Compliance Safety and 
Health Officer during each different phase of an inspection if this will 
not interfere with the conduct of the inspection.
    (b) Compliance Safety and Health Officers shall have authority to 
resolve all disputes as to who is the representative authorized by the 
employer and employees for the purpose of this section. If there is no 
authorized representative of employees, or if the Compliance Safety and 
Health Officer is unable to determine with reasonable certainty who is 
such representative, he shall consult with a reasonable number of 
employees concerning matters of safety and health in the workplace.
    (c) The representative(s) authorized by employees shall be an 
employee(s) of the employer. However, if in the judgment of the 
Compliance Safety and Health Officer, good cause has been shown why 
accompaniment by a third party who is not an employee of the employer 
(such as an industrial hygienist or a safety engineer) is reasonably 
necessary to the conduct of an effective and thorough physical 
inspection of the workplace, such third party may accompany the 
Compliance Safety and Health Officer during the inspection.
    (d) Compliance Safety and Health Officers are authorized to deny the 
right of accompaniment under this section to any person whose conduct 
interferes with a fair and orderly inspection. The right of 
accompaniment in areas containing trade secrets shall be subject to the 
provisions of Sec. 1903.9(d). With regard to information classified by 
an agency of the U.S. Government in the interest of national security, 
only persons authorized to have access to such information may accompany 
a Compliance Safety and Health Officer in areas containing such 
information.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.9  Trade secrets.

    (a) Section 15 of the Act provides: ``All information reported to or 
otherwise obtained by the Secretary or his representative in connection 
with any inspection or proceeding under this Act which contains or which 
might reveal a trade secret referred to in section 1905 of title 18 of 
the United States Code

[[Page 32]]

shall be considered confidential for the purpose of that section, except 
that such information may be disclosed to other officers or employees 
concerned with carrying out this Act or when relevant in any proceeding 
under this Act. In any such proceeding the Secretary, the Commission, or 
the court shall issue such orders as may be appropriate to protect the 
confidentiality of trade secrets.'' Section 15 of the Act is considered 
a statute within the meaning of section 552(b)(3) of title 5 of the 
United States Code, which exempts from the disclosure requirements 
matters that are ``specifically exempted from disclosure by statute.''
    (b) Section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code provides: 
``Whoever, being an officer or employee of the United States or of any 
department or agency thereof, publishes, divulges, discloses, or makes 
known in any manner or to any extent not authorized by law any 
information coming to him in the course of his employment or official 
duties or by reason of any examination or investigation made by, or 
return, report or record made to or filed with, such department or 
agency or officer or employee thereof, which information concerns or 
relates to the trade secrets, processes, operations, style of work, or 
apparatus, or to the identity, confidential statistical data, amount or 
source of any income, profits, losses, or expenditures of any person, 
firm, partnership, corporation, or association; or permits any income 
return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or 
particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person except as 
provided by law; shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned not 
more than 1 year, or both; and shall be removed from office or 
employment.''
    (c) At the commencement of an inspection, the employer may identify 
areas in the establishment which contain or which might reveal a trade 
secret. If the Compliance Safety and Health Officer has no clear reason 
to question such identification, information obtained in such areas, 
including all negatives and prints of photographs, and environmental 
samples, shall be labeled ``confidential--trade secret'' and shall not 
be disclosed except in accordance with the provisions of section 15 of 
the Act.
    (d) Upon the request of an employer, any authorized representative 
of employees under Sec. 1903.8 in an area containing trade secrets shall 
be an employee in that area or an employee authorized by the employer to 
enter that area. Where there is no such representative or employee, the 
Compliance Safety and Health Officer shall consult with a reasonable 
number of employees who work in that area concerning matters of safety 
and health.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.10  Consultation with employees.

    Compliance Safety and Health Officers may consult with employees 
concerning matters of occupational safety and health to the extent they 
deem necessary for the conduct of an effective and thorough inspection. 
During the course of an inspection, any employee shall be afforded an 
opportunity to bring any violation of the Act which he has reason to 
believe exists in the workplace to the attention of the Compliance 
Safety and Health Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.11  Complaints by employees.

    (a) Any employee or representative of employees who believe that a 
violation of the Act exists in any workplace where such employee is 
employed may request an inspection of such workplace by giving notice of 
the alleged violation to the Area Director or to a Compliance Safety and 
Health Officer. Any such notice shall be reduced to writing, shall set 
forth with reasonable particularity the grounds for the notice, and 
shall be signed by the employee or representative of employees. A copy 
shall be provided the employer or his agent by the Area Director or 
Compliance Safety and Health Officer no later than at the time of 
inspection, except that, upon the request of the person giving such 
notice, his name and the names of individual employees referred to 
therein shall not appear in such copy or on any record published, 
released, or made available by the Department of Labor.
    (b) If upon receipt of such notification the Area Director 
determines that the complaint meets the requirements set forth in 
paragraph (a) of this section, and that there are reasonable

[[Page 33]]

grounds to believe that the alleged violation exists, he shall cause an 
inspection to be made as soon as practicable, to determine if such 
alleged violation exists. Inspections under this section shall not be 
limited to matters referred to in the complaint.
    (c) Prior to or during any inspection of a workplace, any employee 
or representative of employees employed in such workplace may notify the 
Compliance Safety and Health Officer, in writing, of any violation of 
the Act which they have reason to believe exists in such workplace. Any 
such notice shall comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (d) Section 11(c)(1) of the Act provides: ``No person shall 
discharge or in any manner discriminate against any employee because 
such employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be 
instituted any proceeding under or related to this Act or has testified 
or is about to testify in any such proceeding or because of the exercise 
by such employee on behalf of himself or others of any right afforded by 
this Act.''

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
1218-0064)

[36 FR 17850, Sept. 4, 1973, as amended at 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.12  Inspection not warranted; informal review.

    (a) If the Area Director determines that an inspection is not 
warranted because there are no reasonable grounds to believe that a 
violation or danger exists with respect to a complaint under 
Sec. 1903.11, he shall notify the complaining party in writing of such 
determination. The complaining party may obtain review of such 
determination by submitting a written statement of position with the 
Assistant Regional Director and, at the same time, providing the 
employer with a copy of such statement by certified mail. The employer 
may submit an opposing written statement of position with the Assistant 
Regional Director and, at the same time, provide the complaining party 
with a copy of such statement by certified mail. Upon the request of the 
complaining party or the employer, the Assistant Regional Director, at 
his discretion, may hold an informal conference in which the complaining 
party and the employer may orally present their views. After considering 
all written and oral views presented, the Assistant Regional Director 
shall affirm, modify, or reverse the determination of the Area Director 
and furnish the complaining party and the employer and written 
notification of this decision and the reasons therefor. The decision of 
the Assistant Regional Director shall be final and not subject to 
further review.
    (b) If the Area Director determines that an inspection is not 
warranted because the requirements of Sec. 1903.11(a) have not been met, 
he shall notify the complaining party in writing of such determination. 
Such determination shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new 
complaint meeting the requirements of Sec. 1903.11(a).


<R05>
Sec. 1903.13  Imminent danger.

    Whenever and as soon as a Compliance Safety and Health Officer 
concludes on the basis of an inspection that conditions or practices 
exist in any place of employment which could reasonably be expected to 
cause death or serious physical harm immediately or before the imminence 
of such danger can be eliminated through the enforcement procedures 
otherwise provided by the Act, he shall inform the affected employees 
and employers of the danger and that he is recommending a civil action 
to restrain such conditions or practices and for other appropriate 
relief in accordance with the provisions of section 13(a) of the Act. 
Appropriate citations and notices of proposed penalties may be issued 
with respect to an imminent danger even though, after being informed of 
such danger by the Compliance Safety and Health Officer, the employer 
immediately eliminates the imminence of the danger and initiates steps 
to abate such danger.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.14  Citations; notices of de minimis violations; policy regarding employee rescue activities.

    (a) The Area Director shall review the inspection report of the 
Compliance Safety and Health Officer. If, on

[[Page 34]]

the basis of the report the Area Director believes that the employer has 
violated a requirement of section 5 of the Act, of any standard, rule or 
order promulgated pursuant to section 6 of the Act, or of any 
substantive rule published in this chapter, he shall, if appropriate, 
consult with the Regional Solicitor, and he shall issue to the employer 
either a citation or a notice of de minimis violations which have no 
direct or immediate relationship to safety or health. An appropriate 
citation or notice of de minimis violations shall be issued even though 
after being informed of an alleged violation by the Compliance Safety 
and Health Officer, the employer immediately abates, or initiates steps 
to abate, such alleged violation. Any citation or notice of de minimis 
violations shall be issued with reasonable promptness after termination 
of the inspection. No citation may be issued under this section after 
the expiration of 6 months following the occurrence of any alleged 
violation.
    (b) Any citation shall describe with particularity the nature of the 
alleged violation, including a reference to the provision(s) of the Act, 
standard, rule, regulation, or order alleged to have been violated. Any 
citation shall also fix a reasonable time or times for the abatement of 
the alleged violation.
    (c) If a citation or notice of de minimis violations is issued for a 
violation alleged in a request for inspection under Sec. 1903.11(a) or a 
notification of violation under Sec. 1903.11(c), a copy of the citation 
or notice of de minimis violations shall also be sent to the employee or 
representative of employees who made such request or notification.
    (d) After an inspection, if the Area Director determines that a 
citation is not warranted with respect to a danger or violation alleged 
to exist in a request for inspection under Sec. 1903.11(a) or a 
notification of violation under Sec. 1903.11(c), the informal review 
procedures prescribed in Sec. 1903.12(a) shall be applicable. After 
considering all views presented, the Assistant Regional Director shall 
affirm the determination of the Area Director, order a reinspection, or 
issue a citation if he believes that the inspection disclosed a 
violation. The Assistant Regional Director shall furnish the complaining 
party and the employer with written notification of his determination 
and the reasons therefor. The determination of the Assistant Regional 
Director shall be final and not subject to review.
    (e) Every citation shall state that the issuance of a citation does 
not constitute a finding that a violation of the Act has occurred unless 
there is a failure to contest as provided for in the Act or, if 
contested, unless the citation is affirmed by the Review Commission.
    (f) No citation may be issued to an employer because of a rescue 
activity undertaken by an employee of that employer with respect to an 
individual in imminent danger unless:
    (1)(i) Such employee is designated or assigned by the employer to 
have responsibility to perform or assist in rescue operations, and
    (ii) The employer fails to provide protection of the safety and 
health of such employee, including failing to provide appropriate 
training and rescue equipment; or
    (2)(i) Such employee is directed by the employer to perform rescue 
activities in the course of carrying out the employee's job duties, and
    (ii) The employer fails to provide protection of the safety and 
health of such employee, including failing to provide appropriate 
training and rescue equipment; or
    (3)(i) Such employee is employed in a workplace that requires the 
employee to carry out duties that are directly related to a workplace 
operation where the likelihood of life-threatening accidents is 
foreseeable, such as a workplace operation where employees are located 
in confined spaces or trenches, handle hazardous waste, respond to 
emergency situations, perform excavations, or perform construction over 
water; and
    (ii) Such employee has not been designated or assigned to perform or 
assist in rescue operations and voluntarily elects to rescue such an 
individual; and
    (iii) The employer has failed to instruct employees not designated 
or assigned to perform or assist in rescue operations of the 
arrangements for rescue, not to attempt rescue, and of the hazards of 
attempting rescue without adequate training or equipment.

[[Page 35]]

    (4) For purposes of this policy, the term ``imminent danger'' means 
the existence of any condition or practice that could reasonably be 
expected to cause death or serious physical harm before such condition 
or practice can be abated.
[36 FR 17850, Sept. 4, 1971, as amended at 59 FR 66613, Dec. 27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.14a  Petitions for modification of abatement date.

    (a) An employer may file a petition for modification of abatement 
date when he has made a good faith effort to comply with the abatement 
requirements of a citation, but such abatement has not been completed 
because of factors beyond his reasonable control.
    (b) A petition for modification of abatement date shall be in 
writing and shall include the following information:
    (1) All steps taken by the employer, and the dates of such action, 
in an effort to achieve compliance during the prescribed abatement 
period.
    (2) The specific additional abatement time necessary in order to 
achieve compliance.
    (3) The reasons such additional time is necessary, including the 
unavailability of professional or technical personnel or of materials 
and equipment, or because necessary construction or alteration of 
facilities cannot be completed by the original abatement date.
    (4) All available interim steps being taken to safeguard the 
employees against the cited hazard during the abatement period.
    (5) A certification that a copy of the petition has been posted and, 
if appropriate, served on the authorized representative of affected 
employees, in accordance with paragraph (c)(1) of this section and a 
certification of the date upon which such posting and service was made.
    (c) A petition for modification of abatement date shall be filed 
with the Area Director of the United States Department of Labor who 
issued the citation no later than the close of the next working day 
following the date on which abatement was originally required. A later-
filed petition shall be accompanied by the employer's statement of 
exceptional circumstances explaining the delay.
    (1) A copy of such petition shall be posted in a conspicuous place 
where all affected employees will have notice thereof or near such 
location where the violation occurred. The petition shall remain posted 
for a period of ten (10) working days. Where affected employees are 
represented by an authorized representative, said representative shall 
be served with a copy of such petition.
    (2) Affected employees or their representatives may file an 
objection in writing to such petition with the aforesaid Area Director. 
Failure to file such objection within ten (10) working days of the date 
of posting of such petition or of service upon an authorized 
representative shall constitute a waiver of any further right to object 
to said petition.
    (3) The Secretary or his duly authorized agent shall have the 
authority to approve any petition for modification of abatement date 
filed pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. Such 
uncontested petitions shall become final orders pursuant to sections 10 
(a) and (c) of the Act.
    (4) The Secretary or his authorized representative shall not 
exercise his approval power until the expiration of fifteen (15) working 
days from the date the petition was posted or served pursuant to 
paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section by the employer.
    (d) Where any petition is objected to by the Secretary or affected 
employees, the petition, citation, and any objections shall be forwarded 
to the Commission within three (3) working days after the expiration of 
the fifteen (15) day period set out in paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
[40 FR 6334, Feb. 11, 1975; 40 FR 11351, Mar. 11, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.15  Proposed penalties.

    (a) After, or concurrent with, the issuance of a citation, and 
within a reasonable time after the termination of the inspection, the 
Area Director shall notify the employer by certified mail or by personal 
service by the Compliance Safety and Health Officer of the proposed 
penalty under section 17 of the Act, or that no penalty is

[[Page 36]]

being proposed. Any notice of proposed penalty shall state that the 
proposed penalty shall be deemed to be the final order of the Review 
Commission and not subject to review by any court or agency unless, 
within 15 working days from the date of receipt of such notice, the 
employer notifies the Area Director in writing that he intends to 
contest the citation or the notification of proposed penalty before the 
Review Commission.
    (b) The Area Director shall determine the amount of any proposed 
penalty, giving due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty 
with respect to the size of the business of the employer being charged, 
the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the employer, and the 
history of previous violations, in accordance with the provisions of 
section 17 of the Act.
    (c) Appropriate penalties may be proposed with respect to an alleged 
violation even though after being informed of such alleged violation by 
the Compliance Safety and Health Officer, the employer immediately 
abates, or initiates steps to abate, such alleged violation. Penalties 
shall not be proposed for de minimis violations which have no direct or 
immediate relationship to safety or health.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.16  Posting of citations.

    (a) Upon receipt of any citation under the Act, the employer shall 
immediately post such citation, or a copy thereof, unedited, at or near 
each place an alleged violation referred to in the citation occurred, 
except as provided below. Where, because of the nature of the employer's 
operations, it is not practicable to post the citation at or near each 
place of alleged violation, such citation shall be posted, unedited, in 
a prominent place where it will be readily observable by all affected 
employees. For example, where employers are engaged in activities which 
are physically dispersed (see Sec. 1903.2(b)), the citation may be 
posted at the location to which employees report each day. Where 
employees do not primarily work at or report to a single location (see 
Sec. 1903.2(b)), the citation may be posted at the location from which 
the employees operate to carry out their activities. The employer shall 
take steps to ensure that the citation is not altered, defaced, or 
covered by other material. Notices of de minimis violations need not be 
posted.
    (b) Each citation, or a copy thereof, shall remain posted until the 
violation has been abated, or for 3 working days, whichever is later. 
The filing by the employer of a notice of intention to contest under 
Sec. 1903.17 shall not affect his posting responsibility under this 
section unless and until the Review Commission issues a final order 
vacating the citation.
    (c) An employer to whom a citation has been issued may post a notice 
in the same location where such citation is posted indicating that the 
citation is being contested before the Review Commission, and such 
notice may explain the reasons for such contest. The employer may also 
indicate that specified steps have been taken to abate the violation.
    (d) Any employer failing to comply with the provisions of paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of this section shall be subject to citation and penalty in 
accordance with the provisions of section 17 of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.17  Employer and employee contests before the Review Commission.

    (a) Any employer to whom a citation or notice of proposed penalty 
has been issued may, under section 10(a) of the Act, notify the Area 
Director in writing that he intends to contest such citation or proposed 
penalty before the Review Commission. Such notice of intention to 
contest shall be postmarked within 15 working days of the receipt by the 
employer of the notice of proposed penalty. Every notice of intention to 
contest shall specify whether it is directed to the citation or to the 
proposed penalty, or both. The Area Director shall immediately transmit 
such notice to the Review Commission in accordance with the rules of 
procedure prescribed by the Commission.
    (b) Any employee or representative of employees of an employer to 
whom a citation has been issued may, under section 10(c) of the Act, 
file a written notice with the Area Director alleging

[[Page 37]]

that the period of time fixed in the citation for the abatement of the 
violation is unreasonable. Such notice shall be postmarked within 15 
working days of the receipt by the employer of the notice of proposed 
penalty or notice that no penalty is being proposed. The Area Director 
shall immediately transmit such notice to the Review Commission in 
accordance with the rules of procedure prescribed by the Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.18  Failure to correct a violation for which a citation has been issued.

    (a) If an inspection discloses that an employer has failed to 
correct an alleged violation for which a citation has been issued within 
the period permitted for its correction, the Area Director shall, if 
appropriate, consult with the Regional Solicitor, and he shall notify 
the employer by certified mail or by personal service by the Compliance 
Safety and Health Officer of such failure and of the additional penalty 
proposed under section 17(d) of the Act by reason of such failure. The 
period for the correction of a violation for which a citation has been 
issued shall not begin to run until the entry of a final order of the 
Review Commission in the case of any review proceedings initiated by the 
employer in good faith and not solely for delay or avoidance of 
penalties.
    (b) Any employer receiving a notification of failure to correct a 
violation and of proposed additional penalty may, under section 10(b) of 
the Act, notify the Area Director in writing that he intends to contest 
such notification or proposed additional penalty before the Review 
Commission. Such notice of intention to contest shall be postmarked 
within 15 working days of the receipt by the employer of the 
notification of failure to correct a violation and of proposed 
additional penalty. The Area Director shall immediately transmit such 
notice to the Review Commission in accordance with the rules of 
procedure prescribed by the Commission.
    (c) Each notification of failure to correct a violation and of 
proposed additional penalty shall state that it shall be deemed to be 
the final order of the Review Commission and not subject to review by 
any court or agency unless, within 15 working days from the date of 
receipt of such notification, the employer notifies the Area Director in 
writing that he intends to contest the notification or the proposed 
additional penalty before the Review Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 1903.19  Abatement verification.

    Purpose. OSHA's inspections are intended to result in the abatement 
of violations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (the OSH 
Act). This section sets forth the procedures OSHA will use to ensure 
abatement. These procedures are tailored to the nature of the violation 
and the employer's abatement actions.
    (a) Scope and application. This section applies to employers who 
receive a citation for a violation of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act.
    (b) Definitions. (1) Abatement means action by an employer to comply 
with a cited standard or regulation or to eliminate a recognized hazard 
identified by OSHA during an inspection.
    (2) Abatement date means:
    (i) For an uncontested citation item, the later of:
    (A) The date in the citation for abatement of the violation;
    (B) The date approved by OSHA or established in litigation as a 
result of a petition for modification of the abatement date (PMA); or
    (C) The date established in a citation by an informal settlement 
agreement.
    (ii) For a contested citation item for which the Occupational Safety 
and Health Review Commission (OSHRC) has issued a final order affirming 
the violation, the later of:
    (A) The date identified in the final order for abatement; or
    (B) The date computed by adding the period allowed in the citation 
for abatement to the final order date;
    (C) The date established by a formal settlement agreement.
    (3) Affected employees means those employees who are exposed to the 
hazard(s) identified as violation(s) in a citation.
    (4) Final order date means:

[[Page 38]]

    (i) For an uncontested citation item, the fifteenth working day 
after the employer's receipt of the citation;
    (ii) For a contested citation item:
    (A) The thirtieth day after the date on which a decision or order of 
a commission administrative law judge has been docketed with the 
commission, unless a member of the commission has directed review; or
    (B) Where review has been directed, the thirtieth day after the date 
on which the Commission issues its decision or order disposing of all or 
pertinent part of a case; or
    (C) The date on which a federal appeals court issues a decision 
affirming the violation in a case in which a final order of OSHRC has 
been stayed.
    (5) Movable equipment means a hand-held or non-hand-held machine or 
device, powered or unpowered, that is used to do work and is moved 
within or between worksites.
    (c) Abatement certification. (1) Within 10 calendar days after the 
abatement date, the employer must certify to OSHA (the Agency) that each 
cited violation has been abated, except as provided in paragraph (c)(2) 
of this section.
    (2) The employer is not required to certify abatement if the OSHA 
Compliance Officer, during the on-site portion of the inspection:
    (i) Observes, within 24 hours after a violation is identified, that 
abatement has occurred; and
    (ii) Notes in the citation that abatement has occurred.
    (3) The employer's certification that abatement is complete must 
include, for each cited violation, in addition to the information 
required by paragraph (h) of this section, the date and method of 
abatement and a statement that affected employees and their 
representatives have been informed of the abatement.


    Note to paragraph (c): Appendix A contains a sample Abatement 
Certification Letter.


    (d) Abatement documentation. (1) The employer must submit to the 
Agency, along with the information on abatement certification required 
by paragraph (c)(3) of this section, documents demonstrating that 
abatement is complete for each willful or repeat violation and for any 
serious violation for which the Agency indicates in the citation that 
such abatement documentation is required.
    (2) Documents demonstrating that abatement is complete may include, 
but are not limited to, evidence of the purchase or repair of equipment, 
photographic or video evidence of abatement, or other written records.
    (e) Abatement plans. (1) The Agency may require an employer to 
submit an abatement plan for each cited violation (except an other-than-
serious violation) when the time permitted for abatement is more than 90 
calendar days. If an abatement plan is required, the citation must so 
indicate.
    (2) The employer must submit an abatement plan for each cited 
violation within 25 calendar days from the final order date when the 
citation indicates that such a plan is required. The abatement plan must 
identify the violation and the steps to be taken to achieve abatement, 
including a schedule for completing abatement and, where necessary, how 
employees will be protected from exposure to the violative condition in 
the interim until abatement is complete.


    Note to paragraph (e): Appendix B contains a Sample Abatement Plan 
form.


    (f) Progress reports. (1) An employer who is required to submit an 
abatement plan may also be required to submit periodic progress reports 
for each cited violation. The citation must indicate:
    (i) That periodic progress reports are required and the citation 
items for which they are required;
    (ii) The date on which an initial progress report must be submitted, 
which may be no sooner than 30 calendar days after submission of an 
abatement plan;
    (iii) Whether additional progress reports are required; and
    (iv) The date(s) on which additional progress reports must be 
submitted.
    (2) For each violation, the progress report must identify, in a 
single sentence if possible, the action taken to achieve abatement and 
the date the action was taken.



[[Page 39]]


    Note to paragraph (f): Appendix B contains a Sample Progress Report 
form.


    (g) Employee notification. (1) The employer must inform affected 
employees and their representative(s) about abatement activities covered 
by this section by posting a copy of each document submitted to the 
Agency or a summary of the document near the place where the violation 
occurred.
    (2) Where such posting does not effectively inform employees and 
their representatives about abatement activities (for example, for 
employers who have mobile work operations), the employer must:
    (i) Post each document or a summary of the document in a location 
where it will be readily observable by affected employees and their 
representatives; or
    (ii) Take other steps to communicate fully to affected employees and 
their representatives about abatement activities.
    (3) The employer must inform employees and their representatives of 
their right to examine and copy all abatement documents submitted to the 
Agency.
    (i) An employee or an employee representative must submit a request 
to examine and copy abatement documents within 3 working days of 
receiving notice that the documents have been submitted.
    (ii) The employer must comply with an employee's or employee 
representative's request to examine and copy abatement documents within 
5 working days of receiving the request.
    (4) The employer must ensure that notice to employees and employee 
representatives is provided at the same time or before the information 
is provided to the Agency and that abatement documents are:
    (i) Not altered, defaced, or covered by other material; and
    (ii) Remain posted for three working days after submission to the 
Agency.
    (h) Transmitting abatement documents. (1) The employer must include, 
in each submission required by this section, the following information:
    (i) The employer's name and address;
    (ii) The inspection number to which the submission relates;
    (iii) The citation and item numbers to which the submission relates;
    (iv) A statement that the information submitted is accurate; and
    (v) The signature of the employer or the employer's authorized 
representative.
    (2) The date of postmark is the date of submission for mailed 
documents. For documents transmitted by other means, the date the Agency 
receives the document is the date of submission.
    (i) Movable equipment. (1) For serious, repeat, and willful 
violations involving movable equipment, the employer must attach a 
warning tag or a copy of the citation to the operating controls or to 
the cited component of equipment that is moved within the worksite or 
between worksites.


    Note to paragraph (i)(1): Attaching a copy of the citation to the 
equipment is deemed by OSHA to meet the tagging requirement of paragraph 
(i)(1) of this section as well as the posting requirement of 29 CFR 
1903.16.


    (2) The employer must use a warning tag that properly warns 
employees about the nature of the violation involving the equipment and 
identifies the location of the citation issued.


    Note to paragraph (i)(2): Non-Mandatory Appendix C contains a sample 
tag that employers may use to meet this requirement.


    (3) If the violation has not already been abated, a warning tag or 
copy of the citation must be attached to the equipment:
    (i) For hand-held equipment, immediately after the employer receives 
the citation; or
    (ii) For non-hand-held equipment, prior to moving the equipment 
within or between worksites.
    (4) For the construction industry, a tag that is designed and used 
in accordance with 29 CFR 1926.20(b)(3) and 29 CFR 1926.200(h) is deemed 
by OSHA to meet the requirements of this section when the information 
required by paragraph (i)(2) is included on the tag.
    (5) The employer must assure that the tag or copy of the citation 
attached to movable equipment is not altered, defaced, or covered by 
other material.
    (6) The employer must assure that the tag or copy of the citation 
attached

[[Page 40]]

to movable equipment remains attached until:
    (i) The violation has been abated and all abatement verification 
documents required by this regulation have been submitted to the Agency;
    (ii) The cited equipment has been permanently removed from service 
or is no longer within the employer's control; or
    (iii) The Commission issues a final order vacating the citation.

           APPENDICES TO Sec. 1903.19--ABATEMENT VERIFICATION


    Note: Appendices A through C provide information and nonmandatory 
guidelines to assist employers and employees in complying with the 
appropriate requirements of this section.

  Appendix A to Section 1903.19--Sample Abatement-Certification Letter 
                             (Nonmandatory)

(Name), Area Director
U. S. Department of Labor--OSHA
Address of the Area Office (on the citation)

[Company's Name]
[Company's Address]

    The hazard referenced in Inspection Number [insert 9-digit --] for 
violation identified as:

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on [insert date] 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________
____________________.

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on [insert date] 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________

____________________.

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on [insert date] 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________

____________________.

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on [insert date] 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________
____________________.

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on [insert date] 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________
____________________.

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on [insert date] 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________
____________________.

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on insert date 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________
____________________.

Citation [insert --] and item [insert --] was corrected on [insert date] 
by:

 _______________________________________________________________________

____________________.

I attest that the information contained in this document is accurate.

 _______________________________________________________________________
    Signature

 _______________________________________________________________________
    Typed or Printed Name

Appendix B to Section 1903.19--Sample Abatement Plan or Progress Report 
                             (Nonmandatory)

(Name), Area Director
U. S. Department of Labor--OSHA
Address of Area Office (on the citation)

[Company's Name]
[Company's Address]

Check one:
    Abatement Plan  [  ]
    Progress Report  [  ]

 Inspection Number______________________________________________________

Page ________ of ________
 Citation Number(s)*____________________________________________________
 Item Number(s)*________________________________________________________

1.............................................  ...........  ...........
2.............................................  ...........  ...........
3.............................................  ...........  ...........
4.............................................  ...........  ...........
                                                ...........  ...........
5.............................................  ...........  ...........
                                                ...........  ...........
6.............................................  ...........  ...........
                                                ...........  ...........
7.............................................  ...........  ...........

 Date required for final abatement:_____________________________________
I attest that the information contained in this document is accurate.

 _______________________________________________________________________
    Signature

 _______________________________________________________________________
    Typed or Printed Name

Name of primary point of contact for questions: [optional]

[[Page 41]]

 Telephone number:______________________________________________________
    *Abatement plans or progress reports for more than one citation item 
may be combined in a single abatement plan or progress report if the 
abatement actions, proposed completion dates, and actual completion 
dates (for progress reports only) are the same for each of the citation 
items.
    Appendix C to Section 1903.19--Sample Warning Tag (Nonmandatory)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.000

[62 FR 15337, Mar. 31, 1997]

[[Page 42]]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.20  Informal conferences.

    At the request of an affected employer, employee, or representative 
of employees, the Assistant Regional Director may hold an informal 
conference for the purpose of discussing any issues raised by an 
inspection, citation, notice of proposed penalty, or notice of intention 
to contest. The settlement of any issue at such conference shall be 
subject to the rules of procedure prescribed by the Review Commission. 
If the conference is requested by the employer, an affected employee or 
his representative shall be afforded an opportunity to participate, at 
the discretion of the Assistant Regional Director. If the conference is 
requested by an employee or representative of employees, the employer 
shall be afforded an opportunity to participate, at the discretion of 
the Assistant Regional Director. Any party may be represented by counsel 
at such conference. No such conference or request for such conference 
shall operate as a stay of any 15-working-day period for filing a notice 
of intention to contest as prescribed in Sec. 1903.17.
[36 FR 17850, Sept. 4, 1971. Redesignated at 62 FR 15337, Mar. 31, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.21  State administration.

    Nothing in this part 1903 shall preempt the authority of any State 
to conduct inspections, to initiate enforcement proceedings or otherwise 
to implement the applicable provisions of State law with respect to 
State occupational safety and health standards in accordance with 
agreements and plans under section 18 of the Act and parts 1901 and 1902 
of this chapter.
[36 FR 17850, Sept. 4, 1971. Redesignated at 62 FR 15337, Mar. 31, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1903.22  Definitions.

    (a) Act means the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970. (84 Stat. 1590 et seq., 29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.)
    (b) The definitions and interpretations contained in section 3 of 
the Act shall be applicable to such terms when used in this part 1903.
    (c) Working days means Mondays through Fridays but shall not include 
Saturdays, Sundays, or Federal holidays. In computing 15 working days, 
the day of receipt of any notice shall not be included, and the last day 
of the 15 working days shall be included.
    (d) Compliance Safety and Health Officer means a person authorized 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of 
Labor, to conduct inspections.
    (e) Area Director means the employee or officer regularly or 
temporarily in charge of an Area Office of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, or any other person or 
persons who are authorized to act for such employee or officer. The 
latter authorizations may include general delegations of the authority 
of an Area Director under this part to a Compliance Safety and Health 
Officer or delegations to such an officer for more limited purposes, 
such as the exercise of the Area Director's duties under 
Sec. 1903.14(a). The term also includes any employee or officer 
exercising supervisory responsibilities over an Area Director. A 
supervisory employee or officer is considered to exercise concurrent 
authority with the Area Director.
    (f) Assistant Regional Director means the employee or officer 
regularly or temporarily in charge of a Region of the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, or any other 
person or persons who are specifically designated to act for such 
employee or officer in his absence. The term also includes any employee 
or officer in the Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
exercising supervisory responsibilities over the Assistant Regional 
Director. Such supervisory employee or officer is considered to exercise 
concurrent authority with the Assistant Regional Director. No delegation 
of authority under this paragraph shall adversely affect the procedures 
for independent informal review of investigative determinations 
prescribed under Sec. 1903.12 of this part.
    (g) Inspection means any inspection of an employer's factory, plant, 
establishment, construction site, or other area, workplace or 
environment where work

[[Page 43]]

is performed by an employee of an employer, and includes any inspection 
conducted pursuant to a complaint filed under Sec. 1903.11 (a) and (c), 
any reinspection, followup inspection, accident investigation or other 
inspection conducted under section 8(a) of the Act.
[36 FR 17850, Sept. 4, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 22624, Aug. 23, 1973. 
Redesignated at 62 FR 15337, Mar. 31, 1997]


<R03>
PART 1904--RECORDING AND REPORTING OCCUPATIONAL INJURIES AND ILLNESSES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
1904.1  Purpose and scope.
1904.2  Log and summary of occupational injuries and illnesses.
1904.3  Period covered.
1904.4  Supplementary record.
1904.5  Annual summary.
1904.6  Retention of records.
1904.7  Access to records.
1904.8  Reporting of fatality or multiple hospitalization incidents.
1904.9  Falsification, or failure to keep records or reports.
1904.10  Recordkeeping under approved State plans.
1904.11  Change of ownership.
1904.12  Definitions.
1904.13  Petitions for recordkeeping exceptions.
1904.14  Employees not in fixed establishments.
1904.15  Small employers.
1904.16  Establishments classified in Standard Industrial Classification 
          Codes (SIC) 52-89, (except 52-54, 70, 75, 76, 79 and 80).
1904.17  Annual OSHA injury and illness survey of ten or more employers.

      Statistical Reporting of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses

1904.20  Description of statistical program.
1904.21  Duties of employers.
1904.22  Effect of State plans.
1904.30  OMB control numbers under the Paperwork Reduction Act.

    Authority: Secs. 8, 24, Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 
(29 U.S.C. 657, 673), Secretary of Labor's Order No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 
8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), 1-90 (55 FR 9033) or 6-96 (62 FR 
111), as applicable.
    Sections 1904.7, 1904.8 and 1904.17 are also issued under 5 U.S.C. 
553.

    Source: 36 FR 12612, July 2, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1904.1  Purpose and scope.

    The regulations in this part implement sections 8(c) (1), (2), 
8(g)(2), and 24 (a) and (e) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
1970. These sections provide for recordkeeping and reporting by 
employers covered under the act as necessary or appropriate for 
enforcement of the act, for developing information regarding the causes 
and prevention of occupational accidents and illnesses, and for 
maintaining a program of collection, compilation, and analysis of 
occupational safety and health statistics. The regulations in this part 
were promulgated with the cooperation of the Secretary of Health, 
Education, and Welfare.


<R05>
Sec. 1904.2  Log and summary of occupational injuries and illnesses.

    (a) Each employer shall, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section, (1) maintain in each establishment a log and summary of all 
recordable occupational injuries and illnesses for that establishment; 
and (2) enter each recordable injury and illness on the log and summary 
as early as practicable but no later than 6 working days after receiving 
information that a recordable injury or illness has occurred. For this 
purpose form OSHA No. 200 or an equivalent which is as readable and 
comprehensible to a person not familiar with it shall be used. The log 
and summary shall be completed in the detail provided in the form and 
instructions on form OSHA No. 200.
    (b) Any employer may maintain the log of occupational injuries and 
illnesses at a place other than the establishment or by means of data-
processing equipment, or both, under the following circumstances:
    (1) There is available at the place where the log is maintained 
sufficient information to complete the log to a date within 6 working 
days after receiving information that a recordable case has occurred, as 
required by paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) At each of the employer's establishments, there is available a 
copy of the log which reflects separately the

[[Page 44]]

injury and illness experience of that establishment complete and current 
to a date within 45 calendar days.
[37 FR 736, Jan. 18, 1972, as amended at 42 FR 65165, Dec. 30, 1977; 47 
FR 145, Jan. 5, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.3  Period covered.

    Records shall be established on a calendar year basis.
[42 FR 65165, Dec. 30, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.4  Supplementary record.

    In addition to the log of occupational injuries and illnesses 
provided for under Sec. 1904.2, each employer shall have available for 
inspection at each establishment within 6 working days after receiving 
information that a recordable case has occurred, a supplementary record 
for each occupational injury or illness for that establishment. The 
record shall be completed in the detail prescribed in the instructions 
accompanying Occupational Safety and Health Administration Form OSHA No. 
101. Workmen's compensation, insurance, or other reports are acceptable 
alternative records if they contain the information required by Form 
OSHA No. 101. If no acceptable alternative record is maintained for 
other purposes, Form OSHA No. 101 shall be used or the necessary 
information shall be otherwise maintained.
[37 FR 736, Jan. 18, 1972, as amended at 47 FR 145, Jan. 5, 1982; 62 FR 
44552, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.5  Annual summary.

    (a) Each employer shall post an annual summary of occupational 
injuries and illnesses for each establishment. This summary shall 
consist of a copy of the year's totals from the form OSHA No. 200 and 
the following information from that form: Calendar year covered, company 
Name establishment name, establishment address, certification signature, 
title, and date. A form OSHA No. 200 shall be used in presenting the 
summary. If no injuries or illnesses occurred in the year, zeros must be 
entered on the totals line, and the form must be posted.
    (b) The summary shall be completed by February 1 beginning with 
calendar year 1979. The summary of 1977 calendar year's occupational 
injuries and illnesses shall be posted on form OSHA No. 102.
    (c) Each employer, or the officer or employee of the employer who 
supervises the preparation of the log and summary of occupational 
injuries and illnesses, shall certify that the annual summary of 
occupational injuries and illnesses is true and complete. The 
certification shall be accomplished by affixing the signature of the 
employer, or the officer or employer who supervises the preparation of 
the annual summary of occupational injuries and illnesses, at the bottom 
of the last page of the log and summary or by appending a separate 
statement to the log and summary certifying that the summary is true and 
complete.
    (d)(1) Each employer shall post a copy of the establishment's 
summary in each establishment in the same manner that notices are 
required to be posted under Sec. 1903.2(a)(1) of this chapter. The 
summary covering the previous calendar year shall be posted no later 
than February 1, and shall remain in place until March 1. For employees 
who do not primarily report or work at a single establishment, or who do 
not report to any fixed establishment on a regular basis, employers 
shall satisfy this posting requirement by presenting or mailing a copy 
of the summary during the month of February of the following year to 
each such employee who receives pay during that month. For multi-
establishment employers where operations have closed down in some 
establishments during the calendar year, it will not be necessary to 
post summaries for those establishments.
    (2) A failure to post a copy of the establishment's annual summary 
may result in the issuance of citations and assessment of penalties 
pursuant to sections 9 and 17 of the Act.
[37 FR 736, Jan. 18, 1972, as amended at 42 FR 65165, Dec. 30, 1977; 47 
FR 145, Jan. 5, 1982; 62 FR 44552, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.6  Retention of records.

    Records provided for in Secs. 1904.2, 1904.4, and 1904.5 (including 
form OSHA No. 200 and its predecessor forms OSHA No. 100 and OSHA No. 
102) shall be retained in each establishment for 5

[[Page 45]]

years following the end of the year to which they relate.
[42 FR 65166, Dec. 30, 1977, as amended at 47 FR 145, Jan. 5, 1982; 47 
FR 14706, Apr. 6, 1982; 62 FR 44552, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.7  Access to records.

    (a) Each employer shall provide, upon request, records provided for 
in Secs. 1904.2, 1904.4, and 1904.5, for inspection and copying by any 
representative of the Secretary of Labor for the purpose of carrying out 
the provisions of the act, and by representatives of the Secretary of 
Health, Education, and Welfare during any investigation under section 
20(b) of the act, or by any representative of a State accorded 
jurisdiction for occupational safety and health inspections or for 
statistical compilation under sections 18 and 24 of the act.
    (b)(1) The log and summary of all recordable occupational injuries 
and illnesses (OSHA No. 200) (the log) provided for in Sec. 1904.2 
shall, upon request, be made available by the employer to any employee, 
former employee, and to their representatives for examination and 
copying in a reasonable manner and at reasonable times. The employee, 
former employee, and their representatives shall have access to the log 
for any establishment in which the employee is or has been employed.
    (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude employees 
and employee representatives from collectively bargaining to obtain 
access to information relating to occupational injuries and illnesses in 
addition to the information made available under this section.
    (3) Access to the log provided under this section shall pertain to 
all logs retained under the requirements of Sec. 1904.6.
[43 FR 31329, July 21, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.8  Reporting of fatality or multiple hospitalization incidents.

    (a) Within 8 hours after the death of any employee from a work-
related incident or the in-patient hospitalization of three or more 
employees as a result of a work-related incident, the employer of any 
employees so affected shall orally report the fatality/multiple 
hospitalization by telephone or in person to the Area Office of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), U.S. Department of 
Labor, that is nearest to the site of the incident, or by using the OSHA 
toll-free central telephone number.
    (b) This requirement applies to each such fatality or 
hospitalization of three or more employees which occurs within thirty 
(30) days of an incident.
    (c) Exception: If the employer does not learn of a reportable 
incident at the time it occurs and the incident would otherwise be 
reportable under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, the employer 
shall make the report within 8 hours of the time the incident is 
reported to any agent or employee of the employer.
    (d) Each report required by this section shall relate the following 
information: Establishment name, location of incident, time of the 
incident, number of fatalities or hospitalized employees, contact 
person, phone number, and a brief description of the incident.
[59 FR 15600, Apr. 1, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.9  Falsification, or failure to keep records or reports.

    (a) Section 17(g) of the Act provides that ``Whoever knowingly makes 
any false statement, representation, or certification in any 
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to 
be maintained pursuant to this Act shall, upon conviction, be punished 
by a fine of not more than $10,000, or by imprisonment, for not more 
than 6 months or both.''
    (b) Failure to maintain records or file reports required by this 
part, or in the details required by forms and instructions issued under 
this part, may result in the issuance of citations and assessment of 
penalties as provided for in sections 9, 10, and 17 of the Act.
[37 FR 737, Jan. 18, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.10  Recordkeeping under approved State plans.

    Records maintained by an employer and reports submitted pursuant to, 
and in accordance with the requirements of an approved State plan under 
section 18 of the act shall be regarded as compliance with this part 
1904.

[[Page 46]]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.11  Change of ownership.

    Where an establishment has changed ownership, the employer shall be 
responsible for maintaining records and filing reports only for that 
period of the year during which he owned such establishment. However, in 
the case of any change in ownership, the employer shall preserve those 
records, if any, of the prior ownership which are required to be kept 
under this part. These records shall be retained at each establishment 
to which they relate, for the period, or remainder thereof, required 
under Sec. 1904.6.


<R05>
Sec. 1904.12  Definitions.

    (a) Act means the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (84 Stat. 1590 et seq., 29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).
    (b) The definitions and interpretations contained in section (2) of 
the Act shall be applicable to such terms when used in this part 1904.
    (c) Recordable occupational injuries or illnesses are any 
occupational injuries or illnesses which result in:
    (1) Fatalities, regardless of the time between the injury and death, 
or the length of the illness; or
    (2) Lost workday cases, other than fatalities, that result in lost 
workdays; or
    (3) Nonfatal cases without lost workdays which result in transfer to 
another job or termination of employment, or require medical treatment 
(other than first aid) or involve: loss of consciousness or restriction 
of work or motion. This category also includes any diagnosed 
occupational illnesses which are reported to the employer but are not 
classified as fatalities or lost workday cases.
    (d) Medical treatment includes treatment administered by a physician 
or by registered professional personnel under the standing orders of a 
physician. Medical treatment does not include first aid treatment even 
though provided by a physician or registered professional personnel.
    (e) First Aid is any one-time treatment, and any followup visit for 
the purpose of observation, of minor scratches, cuts, burns, splinters, 
and so forth, which do not ordinarily require medical care. Such one-
time treatment, and followup visit for the purpose of observation, is 
considered first aid even though provided by a physician or registered 
professional personnel.
    (f) Lost workdays: The number of days (consecutive or not) after, 
but not including, the day of injury or illness during which the 
employee would have worked but could not do so; that is, could not 
perform all or any part of his normal assignment during all or any part 
of the workday or shift, because of the occupational injury or illness.
    (g)(1) Establishment: A single physical location where business is 
conducted or where services or industrial operations are performed. (For 
example: A factory, mill, store, hotel, restaurant, movie theater, farm, 
ranch, bank, sales office, warehouse, or central administrative office.) 
Where distinctly separate activities are performed at a single physical 
location (such as contract construction activities operated from the 
same physical location as a lumber yard), each activity shall be treated 
as a separate establishment.
    (2) For firms engaged in activities such as agriculture, 
construction, transportation, communications, and electric, gas and 
sanitary services, which may be physically dispersed, records may be 
maintained at a place to which employees report each day.
    (3) Records for personnel who do not primarily report or work at a 
single establishment, and who are generally not supervised in their 
daily work, such as traveling salesmen, technicians, engineers, etc., 
shall be maintained at the location from which they are paid or the base 
from which personnel operate to carry out their activities.
    (h) Establishments Classified in Standard Industrial Classification 
Codes (SIC) 52-89. (1) Establishments whose primary activity constitutes 
retail trade; finance, insurance, real estate and services are 
classified in SIC's 52-89.
    (2) Retail trades are classified as SIC`s 52-59 and for the most 
part include establishments engaged in selling merchandise to the 
general public for personal or household consumption. Some of the retail 
trades are: automotive dealers, apparel and accessory stores, furniture 
and home furnishing stores, and eating and drinking places.

[[Page 47]]

    (3) Finance, insurance and real estate are classified as SIC's 60-67 
and include establishments which are engaged in banking, credit other 
than banking, security dealings, insurance, and real estate.
    (4) Services are classified as SIC's 70-89 and include 
establishments which provide a variety of services for individuals, 
businesses, government agencies, and other organizations. Some of the 
service industries are: Personal and business services, in addition to 
legal, education, social, and cultural; and membership organizations.
    (5) The primary activity of an establishment is determined as 
follows: For finance, insurance, real estate, and services 
establishments, the value of receipts or revenue for services rendered 
by an establishment determines its primary activity. In establishments 
with diversified activities, the activities determined to account for 
the largest share of production, sales or revenue will identify the 
primary activity. In some instances these criteria will not adequately 
represent the relative economic importance of each of the varied 
activities. In such cases, employment or payroll should be used in place 
of the normal basis for determining the primary activity.
[36 FR 12612, July 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 20822, Oct. 4, 1972; 47 
FR 57702, Dec. 28, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.13  Petitions for recordkeeping exceptions.

    (a) Submission of petition. Any employer who wishes to maintain 
records in a manner different from that required by this part may submit 
a petition containing the information specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section to the Regional Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics 
wherein the establishment involved is located.
    (b) Opportunity for comment. Affected employees or their 
representatives shall have an opportunity to submit written data, views, 
or arguments concerning the petition to the Regional Commissioner 
involved within 10 working days following the receipt of notice under 
paragraph (c)(5) of this section.
    (c) Contents of petition. A petition filed under paragraph (a) of 
this section shall include:
    (1) The name and address of the applicant;
    (2) The address of the place or places of employment involved;
    (3) Specifications of the reasons for seeking relief;
    (4) A description of the different recordkeeping procedures which 
are proposed by the applicant;
    (5) A statement that the applicant has informed his affected 
employees of the petition by giving a copy thereof to them or to their 
authorized representative and by posting a statement giving a summary of 
the petition and by other appropriate means. A statement posted pursuant 
to this subparagraph shall be posted in each establishment in the same 
manner that notices are required to be posted under Sec. 1903.2(a) of 
this chapter. The applicant shall also state that he has informed his 
affected employees of their rights under paragraph (b) of this section;
    (6) In the event an employer has more than one establishment he 
shall submit a list of the States in which such establishments are 
located and the number of establishments in each such State. In the 
further event that certain of the employer's establishments would not be 
affected by the petition, the employer shall identify every 
establishment which would be affected by the petition and give the State 
in which they are located.
    (d) Referrals to Assistant Commissioner. Whenever a Regional 
Commissioner receives a petition from an employer having one or more 
establishments beyond the geographic boundary of his region, or a 
petition from a class of employers having any establishment beyond the 
boundary of his region, he shall refer the petition to the Assistant 
Commissioner for action.
    (e) Additional Notice, Conferences. (1) In addition to the actual 
notice provided for in paragraph (c)(5) of this section, the Assistant 
Commissioner, or the Regional Commissioner, as the case may be, may 
provide, or cause to be provided, such additional notice of the petition 
as he may deem appropriate.
    (2) The Assistant Commissioner or the Regional Commissioner, as the 
case may be, may also afford an opportunity

[[Page 48]]

to interested parties for informal conference or hearing concerning the 
petition.
    (f) Action. After review of the petition, and of any comments 
submitted in regard thereto, and upon completion of any necessary 
appropriate investigation concerning the petition, if the Regional 
Commissioner or the Assistant Commissioner, as the case may be, finds 
that the alternative procedure proposed will not hamper or interfere 
with the purposes of the Act and will provide equivalent information, he 
may grant the petition subject to such conditions as he may determine 
appropriate, and subject to revocation for cause.
    (g) Publication. Whenever any relief is granted to an applicant 
under this Act, notice of such relief, and the reasons therefor, shall 
be published in the Federal Register.
    (h) Revocation. Whenever any relief under this section is sought to 
be revoked for any failure to comply with the conditions thereof, an 
opportunity be afforded to the employers and affected employees, or 
their representatives. Except in cases of willfulness or where public 
safety or health requires otherwise, before the commencement of any such 
informal proceeding, the employer shall:
    (1) Be notified in writing of the facts or conduct which may warrant 
the action; and
    (2) Be given an opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance.
    (i) Compliance after submission of petitions. The submission of a 
petition or any delay by the Regional Commissioner, or the Assistant 
Commissioner, as the case may be, in acting upon a petition shall not 
relieve any employer from any obligation to comply with this part. 
However, the Regional Commissioner or the Assistant Commissioner, as the 
case may be, shall give notice of the denial of any petition within a 
reasonable time.
    (j) Consultation. There shall be consultation between the 
appropriate representatives of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration and the Bureau of Labor Statistics in order to insure the 
effective implementation of this section.
[36 FR 12612, July 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 737, Jan. 18, 1972; 42 
FR 65166, Dec. 30, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.14  Employees not in fixed establishments.

    Employers of employees engaged in physically dispersed operations 
such as occur in construction, installation, repair or service 
activities who do not report to any fixed establishment on a regular 
basis but are subject to common supervision may satisfy the provisions 
of Secs. 1904.2, 1904.4, and 1904.6 with respect to such employees by:
    (a) Maintaining the required records for each operation or group of 
operations which is subject to common supervision (field superintendent, 
field supervisor, etc.) in an established central place;
    (b) Having the address and telephone number of the central place 
available at each worksite; and
    (c) Having personnel available at the central place during normal 
business hours to provide information from the records maintained there 
by telephone and by mail.
[37 FR 20822, Oct. 5, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.15  Small employers.

    An employer who had no more than ten (10) employees at any time 
during the calendar year immediately preceding the current calendar year 
need not comply with any of the requirements of this part except the 
following:
    (a) Obligation to report under Sec. 1904.8 concerning fatalities or 
multiple hospitalization accidents; and
    (b) Obligation to maintain a log of occupational injuries and 
illnesses under Sec. 1904.2 and to make reports under Sec. 1904.21 upon 
being notified in writing by the Bureau of Labor Statistics that the 
employer has been selected to participate in a statistical survey of 
occupational injuries and illnesses.
[42 FR 38568, July 29, 1977, as amended at 47 FR 145, Jan. 5, 1982; 47 
FR 14706, Apr. 6, 1982; 62 FR 44552, Aug. 22, 1997]

[[Page 49]]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.16  Establishments classified in Standard Industrial Classification Codes (SIC) 52-89, (except 52-54, 70, 75, 76, 79 and 80).

    An employer whose establishment is classified in SIC's 52-89, 
(excluding 52-54, 70, 75, 76, 79 and 80) need not comply, for such 
establishment, with any of the requirements of this part except the 
following:
    (a) Obligation to report under Sec. 1904.8 concerning fatalities or 
multiple hospitalization accidents; and
    (b) Obligation to maintain a log of occupational injuries and 
illnesses under Sec. 1904.21, upon being notified in writing by the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics that the employer has been selected to 
participate in a statistical survey of occupational injuries and 
illnesses.
[47 FR 57702, Dec. 28, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.17  Annual OSHA injury and illness survey of ten or more employers.

    (a) Each employer shall, upon receipt of OSHA's Annual Survey Form, 
report to OSHA or OSHA's designee the number of workers it employed and 
number of hours worked by its employees for periods designated in the 
Survey Form and such information as OSHA may request from records 
required to be created and maintained pursuant to 29 CFR part 1904.
    (b) Survey reports shall be sent to OSHA by mail or other means 
described in the Survey Form within 30 calendar days, or the time stated 
in the Survey Form, whichever is longer.
    (c) Employers exempted from keeping injury and illness records under 
Secs. 1904.15 and 1904.16 shall maintain injury and illness records 
required by Secs. 1904.2 and 1904.4, and make Survey Reports pursuant to 
this Section, upon being notified in writing by OSHA, in advance of the 
year for which injury and illness records will be required, that the 
employer has been selected to participate in an information collection.
    (d) Nothing in any State plan approved under Section 18 of the Act 
shall affect the duties of employers to comply with this section.
    (e) Nothing in this section shall affect OSHA's exercise of its 
statutory authorities to investigate conditions related to occupational 
safety and health.
[62 FR 6442, Feb. 11, 1997]

      Statistical Reporting of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses


<R05>
Sec. 1904.20  Description of statistical program.

    (a) Section 24 of the Act directs the Secretary of Labor, in 
consultation with the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, to 
develop and maintain a program of collection, compilation, and analysis 
of occupational safety and health statistics. The Commissioner of the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics has been delegated this authority by the 
Secretary of Labor. The program shall consist of periodic surveys of 
occupational injuries and illnesses.
    (b) The sample design encompasses probability procedures, detailed 
stratification by industry and size, and a systematic selection within 
strata. Stratification and sampling will be carried out by State and 
other jurisdictions in order to provide the most efficient sample for 
eventual State estimates. Some industries will be sampled more heavily 
than others depending on the injury rate level based on previous 
experience. Nationally, the survey should produce adequate estimates for 
most four-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) industries in 
manufacturing and for three-digit SIC classification in 
nonmanufacturing. In participating States where the sample size has been 
supplemented significantly, comparable estimates are possible.
[37 FR 2439, Feb. 1, 1972, as amended at 42 FR 65166, Dec. 30, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.21  Duties of employers.

    Upon receipt of an Occupational Injuries and Illnesses Survey Form, 
the employer shall promptly complete the form in accordance with the 
instructions contained therein, and return it in accordance with the 
aforesaid instructions.
[42 FR 65166, Dec. 30, 1977, as amended at 47 FR 145, Jan. 5, 1982; 47 
FR 14706, Apr. 6, 1982]

[[Page 50]]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.22  Effect of State plans.

    Nothing in any State plan approved under section 18(c) of the Act 
shall affect the duties of employers to submit statistical report forms 
under Sec. 1904.21.
[37 FR 2439, Feb. 1, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 1904.30  OMB control numbers under the Paperwork Reduction Act.

    The following sections each contain a collection of information 
requirement which has been approved by the Office of Management and 
Budget under the control number listed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             OMB control
                      29 CFR citation                            No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1904.2.....................................................    1218-0176
1904.4-7...................................................    1218-0176
1904.8.....................................................    1218-0007
1904.17....................................................    1218-0214
1904.21....................................................    1220-0045
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[62 FR 44552, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R03>
PART 1905--RULES OF PRACTICE FOR VARIANCES, LIMITATIONS, VARIATIONS, TOLERANCES, AND EXEMPTIONS UNDER THE WILLIAMS-STEIGER OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT OF 
1970--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
1905.1  Purpose and scope.
1905.2  Definitions.
1905.3  Petitions for amendments to this part.
1905.4  Amendments to this part.
1905.5  Effect of variances.
1905.6  Public notice of a granted variance, limitation, variation, 
          tolerance, or exemption.
1905.7  Form of documents; subscription; copies.

    Subpart B--Applications for Variances, Limitations, Variations, 
                 Tolerances, Exemptions and Other Relief

1905.10  Variances and other relief under section 6(b)(6)(A).
1905.11  Variances and other relief under section 6(d).
1905.12  Limitations, variations, tolerances, or exemptions under 
          section 16.
1905.13  Modification, revocation, and renewal of rules or orders.
1905.14  Action on applications.
1905.15  Requests for hearings on applications.
1905.16  Consolidation of proceedings.

                           Subpart C--Hearings

1905.20  Notice of hearing.
1905.21  Manner of service.
1905.22  Hearing examiners; powers and duties.
1905.23  Prehearing conferences.
1905.24  Consent findings and rules or orders.
1905.25  Discovery.
1905.26  Hearings.
1905.27  Decisions of hearing examiners.
1905.28  Exceptions.
1905.29  Transmission of record.
1905.30  Decision of the Assistant Secretary.

                      Subpart D--Summary Decisions

1905.40  Motion for summary decision.
1905.41  Summary decision.

                 Subpart E--Effect of Initial Decisions

1905.50  Effect of appeal of a hearing examiner's decision.
1905.51  Finality for purposes of judicial review.

    Authority: Secs. 6, 8, 16, Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
1970 (29 U.S.C. 655, 657, 665), Secretary of Labor's Order No. 12-71 (36 
FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), or 9-83 (48 FR 35736) as applicable.

    Source: 36 FR 12290, June 30, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 1905.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) This part contains rules of practice for administrative 
proceedings
    (1) To grant variances and other relief under sections 6(b)(6)(A) 
and 6(d) of the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
1970, and
    (2) To provide limitations, variations, tolerances, and exemptions 
under section 16 of the Act.
    (b) These rules shall be construed to secure a prompt and just 
conclusion of proceedings subject thereto.
    (c) The rules of practice in this part do not apply to the granting 
of variances under section 6(b)(6)(C). Whenever appropriate, the 
procedure for granting such a variance shall be published in the Federal 
Register.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part, unless the context clearly requires 
otherwise--

[[Page 51]]

    (a) Act means the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970.
    (b) Secretary means the Secretary of Labor.
    (c) Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary of Labor for 
Occupational Safety and Health.
    (d) Person means an individual, partnership, association, 
corporation, business trust, legal representative, and organized group 
of individuals, or an agency, authority, or instrumentality of the 
United States or of a State.
    (e) Party means a person admitted to participate in a hearing 
conducted in accordance with subpart C of this part. An applicant for 
relief and any affected employee shall be entitled to be named parties. 
The Department of Labor, represented by the Office of the Solicitor, 
shall be deemed to be a party without the necessity of being named.
    (f) Affected employee means an employee who would be affected by the 
grant or denial of a variance, limitation, variation, tolerance, or 
exemption, or any one of his authorized representatives, such as his 
collective bargaining agent.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.3  Petitions for amendments to this part.

    Any person may at any time petition the Assistant Secretary in 
writing to revise, amend, or revoke any provisions of this part. The 
petition should set forth either the terms or the substance of the rule 
desired, with a concise statement of the reasons therefor and the 
effects thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.4  Amendments to this part.

    The Assistant Secretary may at any time revise, amend, or revoke any 
provisions of this part, on his own motion or upon the written petition 
of any person.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.5  Effect of variances.

    All variances granted pursuant to this part shall have only future 
effect. In his discretion, the Assistant Secretary may decline to 
entertain an application for a variance on a subject or issue concerning 
which a citation has been issued to the employer involved and a 
proceeding on the citation or a related issue concerning a proposed 
penalty or period of abatement is pending before the Occupational Safety 
and Health Review Commission or appropriate State review authority until 
the completion of such proceeding.
[36 FR 12290, June 30, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 25449, June 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1905.6  Public notice of a granted variance, limitation, variation, tolerance, or exemption.

    Every final action granting a variance, limitation, variation, 
tolerance, or exemption under this part shall be published in the 
Federal Register. Every such final action shall specify the alternative 
to the standard involved which the particular variance permits.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.7  Form of documents; subscription; copies.

    (a) No particular form is prescribed for applications and other 
papers which may be filed in proceedings under this part. However, any 
applications and other papers shall be clearly legible. An original and 
six copies of any application or other papers shall be filed. The 
original shall be typewritten. Clear carbon copies, or printed or 
processed copies are acceptable copies.
    (b) Each application or other paper which is filed in proceedings 
under this part shall be subscribed by the person filing the same or by 
his attorney or other authorized representative.


<R04>
    Subpart B--Applications for Variances, Limitations, Variations, 
                 Tolerances, Exemptions and Other Relief


<R05>
Sec. 1905.10  Variances and other relief under section 6(b)(6)(A).

    (a) Application for variance. Any employer, or class of employers, 
desiring a variance from a standard, or portion thereof, authorized by 
section 6(b)(6)(A) of the Act may file a written application containing 
the information specified in paragraph (b) of this section with the 
Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health, U.S. Department 
of Labor, Washington, DC 20210.

[[Page 52]]

    (b) Contents. An application filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this 
section shall include:
    (1) The name and address of the applicant;
    (2) The address of the place or places of employment involved;
    (3) A specification of the standard or portion thereof from which 
the applicant seeks a variance;
    (4) A representation by the applicant, supported by representations 
from qualified persons having first-hand knowledge of the facts 
represented, that he is unable to comply with the standard or portion 
thereof by its effective date and a detailed statement of the reasons 
therefor;
    (5) A statement of the steps the applicant has taken and will take, 
with specific dates where appropriate, to protect employees against the 
hazard covered by the standard;
    (6) A statement of when the applicant expects to be able to comply 
with the standard and of what steps he has taken and will take, with 
specific dates where appropriate, to come into compliance with the 
standard;
    (7) A statement of the facts the applicant would show to establish 
that
    (i) The applicant is unable to comply with a standard by its 
effective date because of unavailability of professional or technical 
personnel or of materials and equipment needed to come into compliance 
with the standard or because necessary construction or alteration of 
facilities cannot be completed by the effective date;
    (ii) He is taking all available steps to safeguard his employees 
against the hazards covered by the standard; and
    (iii) He has an effective program for coming into compliance with 
the standard as quickly as practicable;
    (8) Any request for a hearing, as provided in this part;
    (9) A statement that the applicant has informed his affected 
employees of the application by giving a copy thereof to their 
authorized representative, posting a statement, giving a summary of the 
application and specifying where a copy may be examined, at the place or 
places where notices to employees are normally posted, and by other 
appropriate means; and
    (10) A description of how affected employees have been informed of 
the application and of their right to petition the Assistant Secretary 
for a hearing.
    (11) Where the requested variance would be applicable to employment 
or places of employment in more than one State, including at least one 
State with a State plan approved under section 18 of the Act, and 
involves a standard, or portion thereof, identical to a State standard 
effective under such plan:
    (i) A side-by-side comparison of the Federal standard, or portion 
thereof, involved with the State standard, or portion thereof, identical 
in substance and requirements;
    (ii) A certification that the employer or employers have not filed 
for such variance on the same material facts for the same employment or 
place of employment with any State authority having jurisdiction under 
an approval plan over any employment or place of employment covered in 
the application; and
    (iii) A statement as to whether, with an identification of, any 
citations for violations of the State standard, or portion thereof, 
involved have been issued to the employer or employers by any of the 
State authorities enforcing the standard under a plan, and are pending.
    (c) Interim order--(1) Application. An application may also be made 
for an interim order to be effective until a decision is rendered on the 
application for the variance filed previously or concurrently. An 
application for an interim order may include statements of fact and 
arguments as to why the order should be granted. The Assistant Secretary 
may rule ex parte upon the application.
    (2) Notice of denial of application. If an application filed 
pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section is denied, the applicant 
shall be given prompt notice of the denial, which shall include, or be 
accompanied by, a brief statement of the grounds therefor.
    (3) Notice of the grant of an interim order. If an interim order is 
granted, a copy of the order shall be served upon the applicant for the 
order and other parties and the terms of the order shall be published in 
the Federal Register.

[[Page 53]]

It shall be a condition of the order that the affected employer shall 
give notice thereof to affected employees by the same means to be used 
to inform them of an application for a variance.
[36 FR 12290, June 30, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 25449, June 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1905.11  Variances and other relief under section 6(d).

    (a) Application for variance. Any employer, or class of employers, 
desiring a variance authorized by section 6(d) of the Act may file a 
written application containing the information specified in paragraph 
(b) of this section, with the Assistant Secretary for Occupational 
Safety and Health, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210.
    (b) Contents. An application filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this 
section shall include:
    (1) The name and address of the applicant;
    (2) The address of the place or places of employment involved;
    (3) A description of the conditions, practices, means, methods, 
operations, or processes used or proposed to be used by the applicant:
    (4) A statement showing how the conditions, practices, means, 
methods, operations, or processes used or proposed to be used would 
provide employment and places of employment to employees which are as 
safe and healthful as those required by the standard from which a 
variance is sought:
    (5) A certification that the applicant has informed his employees of 
the application by
    (i) Giving a copy thereof to their authorized representative;
    (ii) Posting a statement giving a summary of the application and 
specifying where a copy may be examined, at the place or places where 
notices to employees are normally posted (or in lieu of such summary, 
the posting of the application itself); and
    (iii) By other appropriate means;
    (6) Any request for a hearing, as provided in this part; and
    (7) A description of how employees have been informed of the 
application and of their right to petition the Assistant Secretary for a 
hearing.
    (8) Where the requested variance would be applicable to employment 
or places of employment in more than one State, including at least one 
State with a State plan approved under section 18 of the Act, and 
involves a standard, or portion thereof, identical to a State standard 
effective under such plan:
    (i) A side-by-side comparison of the Federal standard, or portion 
thereof, involved with the State standard, or portion thereof, identical 
in substance and requirements;
    (ii) A certification that the employer or employers have not filed 
for such variance on the same material facts for the same employment or 
place of employment with any State authority having jurisdiction under 
an approved plan over any employment or place of employment covered in 
the application; and
    (iii) A statement as to whether, with an identification of, any 
citations for violations of the State standard, or portion thereof, 
involved have been issued to the employer or employers by any of the 
State authorities enforcing the standard under a plan, and are pending.
    (c) Interim order--(1) Application. An application may also be made 
for an interim order to be effective until a decision is rendered on the 
application for the variance filed previously or concurrently. An 
application for an interim order may include statements of fact and 
arguments as to why the order should be granted. The Assistant Secretary 
may rule ex parte upon the application.
    (2) Notice of denial of application. If an application filed 
pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section is denied, the applicant 
shall be given prompt notice of the denial, which shall include, or be 
accompanied by; a brief statement of the grounds therefor.
    (3) Notice of the grant of an interim order. If an interim order is 
granted, a copy of the order shall be served upon the applicant for the 
order and other parties, and the terms of the order shall be published 
in the Federal Register. It shall be a condition of the order that the 
affected employer shall

[[Page 54]]

give notice thereof to affected employees by the same means to be used 
to inform them of an application for a variance.
[36 FR 12290, June 30, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 25449, June 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1905.12  Limitations, variations, tolerances, or exemptions under section 16.

    (a) Application. Any person, or class of persons, desiring a 
limitation, variation, tolerance, or exemption authorized by section 16 
of the Act may file an application containing the information specified 
in paragraph (b) of this section, with the Assistant Secretary for 
Occupational Safety and Health, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, DC 
20210.
    (b) Contents. An application filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this 
section shall include:
    (1) The name and address of the applicant;
    (2) The address of the place or places of employment involved;
    (3) A specification of the provision of the Act to or from which the 
applicant seeks a limitation, variation, tolerance, or exemption;
    (4) A representation showing that the limitation, variation, 
tolerance, or exemption sought is necessary and proper to avoid serious 
impairment of the national defense;
    (5) Any request for a hearing, as provided in this part; and
    (6) A description of how employees have been informed of the 
application and of their right to petition the Assistant Secretary for a 
hearing.
    (c) Interim order--(1) Application. An application may also be made 
for an interim order to be effective until a decision is rendered on the 
application for the limitation, variation, tolerance, or exemption filed 
previously or concurrently. An application for an interim order may 
include statements of fact and arguments as to why the order should be 
granted. The Assistant Secretary may rule ex parte upon the application.
    (2) Notice of denial of application. If an application filed 
pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section is denied, the applicant 
shall be given prompt notice of the denial, which shall include, or be 
accompanied, by a brief statement of the grounds therefor.
    (3) Notice of the grant of an interim order. If an interim order is 
granted, a copy of the order shall be served upon the applicant for the 
order and other parties, and the terms of the order shall be published 
in the Federal Register. It shall be a condition of the order that the 
affected employer shall give notice thereof to affected employees by the 
same means to be used to inform them of an application for a variance.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.13  Modification, revocation, and renewal of rules or orders.

    (a) Modification or revocation. (1) An affected employer or an 
affected employee may apply in writing to the Assistant Secretary of 
Labor for Occupational Safety and Health for a modification or 
revocation of a rule or order issued under section 6(b) (6) (A), 6(d), 
or 16 of the Act. The application shall contain:
    (i) The name and address of the applicant;
    (ii) A description of the relief which is sought;
    (iii) A statement setting forth with particularity the grounds for 
relief;
    (iv) If the applicant is an employer, a certification that the 
applicant has informed his affected employees of the application by:
    (a) Giving a copy thereof to their authorized representative;
    (b) Posting at the place or places where notices to employees are 
normally posted, a statement giving a summary of the application and 
specifying where a copy of the full application may be examined (or, in 
lieu of the summary, posting the application itself); and
    (c) Other appropriate means.
    (v) If the applicant is an affected employee, a certification that a 
copy of the application has been furnished to the employer; and
    (vi) Any request for a hearing, as provided in this part.
    (2) The Assistant Secretary may on his own motion proceed to modify 
or revoke a rule or order issued under section 6(b) (6) (A), 6(d), or 16 
of the Act. In such event, the Assistant Secretary

[[Page 55]]

shall cause to be published in the Federal Register a notice of his 
intention, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit written 
data, views, or arguments regarding the proposal and informing the 
affected employer and employees of their right to request a hearing, and 
shall take such other action as may be appropriate to give actual notice 
to affected employees. Any request for a hearing shall include a short 
and plain statement of:
    (i) How the proposed modification or revocation would affect the 
requesting party; and
    (ii) What the requesting party would seek to show on the subjects or 
issues involved.
    (b) Renewal. Any final rule or order issued under section 6(b) (6) 
(A) or 16 of the Act may be renewed or extended as permitted by the 
applicable section and in the manner prescribed for its issuance.
    (c) Multi-state variances. Where a Federal variance has been granted 
with multi-state applicability, including applicability in a State 
operating under a State plan approved under section 18 of the Act, from 
a standard, or portion thereof, identical to a State standard, or 
portion thereof, without filing the information required in 
Sec. 1905.10(b)(11) or Sec. 1905.11(b)(8) of this chapter, such variance 
shall likewise be deemed an authoritative interpretation of the 
employer(s)' compliance obligations with regard to the State standard, 
or portion thereof, upon filing the information required under 
Sec. 1905.10(b)(11) or Sec. 1905.11(b)(8) of this chapter, provided no 
objections of substance are found to be interposed by the State 
authority under Sec. 1905.14 of this chapter.
[36 FR 12290, June 30, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 25449, June 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1905.14  Action on applications.

    (a) Defective applications. (1) If an application filed pursuant to 
Sec. 1905.10(a), Sec. 1905.11(a), Sec. 1905.12(a), or Sec. 1905.13 does 
not conform to the applicable section, the Assistant Secretary may deny 
the application.
    (2) Prompt notice of the denial of an application shall be given to 
the applicant.
    (3) A notice of denial shall include, or be accompanied by, a brief 
statement of the grounds for the denial.
    (4) A denial of an application pursuant to this paragraph shall be 
without prejudice to the filing of another application.
    (b) Adequate applications. (1) If an application has not been denied 
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, the Assistant Secretary shall 
cause to be published in the Federal Register a notice of the filing of 
the application.
    (2) A notice of the filing of an application shall include:
    (i) The terms, or an accurate summary, of the application;
    (ii) A reference to the section of the Act under which the 
application has been filed;
    (iii) An invitation to interested persons to submit within a stated 
period of time written data, views, or arguments regarding the 
application; and
    (iv) Information to affected employers, employees, and appropriate 
State authority having jurisdiction over employment or places of 
employment covered in the application of any right to request a hearing 
on the application.
    (3) Where the requested variance, or any proposed modification or 
extension thereof, involves a Federal standard, or any portion thereof, 
identical to a State standard, or any portion thereof, as provided in 
Secs. 1905.10(b)(11) and 1905.11(b)(8) of this chapter, the Assistant 
Secretary will promptly furnish a copy of the application to the 
appropriate State authority and provide an opportunity for comment, 
including the opportunity to participate as a party, on the application 
by such authority, which shall be taken into consideration in 
determining the merits of the proposed action.
    (4) A copy of each final decision of the Assistant Secretary with 
respect to an application filed under Sec. 1905.10, Sec. 1905.11, or 
Sec. 1905.13 shall be furnished, within 10 days of issuance, the State 
authorities having jurisdiction over the employment or place of 
employment covered in the application.
[36 FR 12290, June 30, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 25449, June 16, 1975]

[[Page 56]]


<R05>
Sec. 1905.15  Requests for hearings on applications.

    (a) Request for hearing. Within the time allowed by a notice of the 
filing of an application, any affected employer, employee, or 
appropriate State agency having jurisdiction over employment or places 
of employment covered in an application may file with the Assistant 
Secretary, in quadruplicate, a request for a hearing on the application.
    (b) Contents of a request for a hearing. A request for a hearing 
filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section shall include:
    (1) A concise statement of facts showing how the employer or 
employee would be affected by the relief applied for;
    (2) A specification of any statement or representation in the 
application which is denied, and a concise summary of the evidence that 
would be adduced in support of each denial; and
    (3) Any views or arguments on any issue of fact or law presented.
[36 FR 12290, June 30, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 25450, June 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1905.16  Consolidation of proceedings.

    The Assistant Secretary on his own motion or that of any party may 
consolidate or contemporaneously consider two or more proceedings which 
involve the same or closely related issues.


<R04>
                           Subpart C--Hearings


<R05>
Sec. 1905.20  Notice of hearing.

    (a) Service. Upon request for a hearing as provided in this part, or 
upon his own initiative, the Assistant Secretary shall serve, or cause 
to be served, a reasonable notice of hearing.
    (b) Contents. A notice of hearing served under paragraph (a) of this 
section shall include:
    (1) The time, place, and nature of the hearing;
    (2) The legal authority under which the hearing is to be held;
    (3) A specification of issues of fact and law; and
    (4) A designation of a hearing examiner appointed under 5 U.S.C. 
3105 to preside over the hearing.
    (c) Referral to hearing examiner. A copy of a notice of hearing 
served pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section shall be referred to 
the hearing examiner designated therein, together with the original 
application and any written request for a hearing thereon filed pursuant 
to this part.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.21  Manner of service.

    Service of any document upon any party may be made by personal 
delivery of, or by mailing, a copy of the document to the last known 
address of the party. The person serving the document shall certify to 
the manner and the date of the service.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.22  Hearing examiners; powers and duties.

    (a) Powers. A hearing examiner designated to preside over a hearing 
shall have all powers necessary or appropriate to conduct a fair, full, 
and impartial hearing, including the following:
    (1) To administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) To rule upon offers of proof and receive relevant evidence;
    (3) To provide for discovery and to determine its scope;
    (4) To regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of the 
parties and their counsel therein;
    (5) To consider and rule upon procedural requests;
    (6) To hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the 
issues by consent of the parties;
    (7) To make, or to cause to be made, an inspection of the employment 
or place of employment involved.
    (8) To make decisions in accordance with the Act, this part, and the 
Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. Ch. 5); and
    (9) To take any other appropriate action authorized by the Act, this 
part, or the Administrative Procedure Act.
    (b) Private consultation. Except to the extent required for the 
disposition of ex parte matters, a hearing examiner may not consult a 
person or a party on any fact at issue, unless upon notice and 
opportunity for all parties to participate.

[[Page 57]]

    (c) Disqualification. (1) When a hearing examiner deems himself 
disqualified to preside over a particular hearing, he shall withdraw 
therefrom by notice on the record directed to the Chief Hearing 
Examiner.
    (2) Any party who deems a hearing examiner for any reason to be 
disqualified to preside, or to continue to preside, over a particular 
hearing, may file with the Chief Hearing Examiner of the Department of 
Labor a motion to disqualify and remove the hearing examiner, such 
motion to be supported by affidavits setting forth the alleged grounds 
for disqualification. The Chief Hearing Examiner shall rule upon the 
motion.
    (d) Contumacious conduct; failure or refusal to appear or obey the 
rulings of a presiding hearing examiner. (1) Contumacious conduct at any 
hearing before the hearing examiner shall be grounds for exclusion from 
the hearing.
    (2) If a witness or a party refuses to answer a question after being 
directed to do so, or refuses to obey an order to provide or permit 
discovery, the hearing examiner may make such orders with regard to the 
refusal as are just and appropriate, including an order denying the 
application of an applicant or regulating the contents of the record of 
the hearing.
    (e) Referral to Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. On any procedural 
question not regulated by this part, the Act, or the Administrative 
Procedure Act, a hearing examiner shall be guided to the extent 
practicable by any pertinent provisions of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.23  Prehearing conferences.

    (a) Convening a conference. Upon his own motion or the motion of a 
party, the hearing examiner may direct the parties or their counsel to 
meet with him for a conference to consider:
    (1) Simplification of the issues;
    (2) Necessity or desirability of amendments to documents for 
purposes of clarification, simplification, or limitation;
    (3) Stipulations, admissions of fact, and of contents and 
authenticity of documents;
    (4) Limitation of the number of parties and of expert witnesses; and
    (5) Such other matters as may tend to expedite the disposition of 
the proceeding, and to assure a just conclusion thereof.
    (b) Record of conference. The hearing examiner shall make an order 
which recites the action taken at the conference, the amendments allowed 
to any documents which have been filed, and the agreements made between 
the parties as to any of the matters considered, and which limits the 
issues for hearing to those not disposed of by admissions or agreements; 
and such order when entered controls the subsequent course of the 
hearing, unless modified at the hearing, to prevent manifest injustice.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.24  Consent findings and rules or orders.

    (a) General. At any time before the reception of evidence in any 
hearing, or during any hearing a reasonable opportunity may be afforded 
to permit negotiation by the parties of an agreement containing consent 
findings and a rule or order disposing of the whole or any part of the 
proceeding. The allowance of such opportunity and the duration thereof 
shall be in the discretion of the presiding hearing examiner, after 
consideration of the nature of the proceeding, the requirements of the 
public interest, the representations of the parties, and the probability 
of an agreement which will result in a just disposition of the issues 
involved.
    (b) Contents. Any agreement containing consent findings and rule or 
order disposing of a proceeding shall also provide:
    (1) That the rule or order shall have the same force and effect as 
if made after a full hearing;
    (2) That the entire record on which any rule or order may be based 
shall consist solely of the application and the agreement;
    (3) A waiver of any further procedural steps before the hearing 
examiner and the Assistant Secretary; and
    (4) A waiver of any right to challenge or contest the validity of 
the findings and of the rule or order made in accordance with the 
agreement.
    (c) Submission. On or before the expiration of the time granted for 
negotiations, the parties or their counsel may:

[[Page 58]]

    (1) Submit the proposed agreement to the presiding hearing examiner 
for his consideration; or
    (2) Inform the presiding hearing examiner that agreement cannot be 
reached.
    (d) Disposition. In the event an agreement containing consent 
findings and rule or order is submitted within the time allowed 
therefor, the presiding hearing examiner may accept such agreement by 
issuing his decision based upon the agreed findings.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.25  Discovery.

    (a) Depositions. (1) For reasons of unavailability or for other good 
cause shown, the testimony of any witness may be taken by deposition. 
Depositions may be taken orally or upon written interrogatories before 
any person designated by the presiding hearing examiner and having power 
to administer oaths.
    (2) Application. Any party desiring to take the deposition of a 
witness may make application in writing to the presiding hearing 
examiner, setting forth:
    (i) The reasons why such deposition should be taken;
    (ii) The time when, the place where, and the name and post office 
address of the person before whom the deposition is to be taken;
    (iii) The name and address of each witness; and
    (iv) The subject matter concerning which each witness is expected to 
testify.
    (3) Notice. Such notice as the presiding hearings examiner may order 
shall be given by the party taking the deposition to every other party.
    (4) Taking and receiving in evidence. Each witness testifying upon 
deposition shall be sworn, and the parties not calling him shall have 
the right to cross-examine him. The questions propounded and the answers 
thereto, together with all objections made, shall be reduced to writing, 
read to the witness, subscribed by him, and certified by the officer 
before whom the deposition is taken. Thereafter, the officer shall seal 
the deposition, with two copies thereof, in an envelope and mail the 
same by registered mail to the presiding hearing examiner. Subject to 
such objections to the questions and answers as were noted at the time 
of taking the deposition and would be valid were the witness personally 
present and testifying, such deposition may be read and offered in 
evidence by the party taking it as against any party who was present, 
represented at the taking of the deposition, or who had due notice 
thereof. No part of a deposition shall be admitted in evidence unless 
there is a showing that the reasons for the taking of the deposition in 
the first instance exist at the time of hearing.
    (b) Other discovery. Whenever appropriate to a just disposition of 
any issue in a hearing, the presiding hearing examiner may allow 
discovery by any other appropriate procedure, such as by written 
interrogatories upon a party, production of documents by a party, or by 
entry for inspection of the employment or place of employment involved.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.26  Hearings.

    (a) Order of proceeding. Except as may be ordered otherwise by the 
presiding hearing examiner, the party applicant for relief shall proceed 
first at a hearing.
    (b) Burden of proof. The party applicant shall have the burden of 
proof.
    (c) Evidence--(1) Admissibility. A party shall be entitled to 
present his case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to submit 
rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such cross-examination as may be 
required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. Any oral or 
documentary evidence may be received, but a presiding hearing examiner 
shall exclude evidence which is irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly 
repetitious.
    (2) Testimony of witnesses. The testimony of a witness shall be upon 
oath or affirmation administered by the presiding hearing examiner.
    (3) Objections. If a party objects to the admission or rejection of 
any evidence, or to the limitation of the scope of any examination or 
cross-examination, or to the failure to limit such scope, he shall state 
briefly the grounds for such objection. Rulings on all objections shall 
appear in the record. Only objections made before the presiding hearing 
examiner may be relied upon subsequently in a proceeding.

[[Page 59]]

    (4) Exceptions. Formal exception to an adverse ruling is not 
required.
    (d) Official notice. Official notice may be taken of any material 
fact not appearing in evidence in the record, which is among the 
traditional matters of judicial notice or concerning which the 
Department of Labor by reason of its functions is presumed to be expert: 
Provided, That the parties shall be given adequate notice, at the 
hearing or by reference in the presiding hearing examiner's decision, of 
the matters so noticed, and shall be given adequate opportunity to show 
the contrary.
    (e) Transcript. Hearings shall be stenographically reported. Copies 
of the transcript may be obtained by the parties upon written 
application filed with the reporter, and upon the payment of fees at the 
rate provided in the agreement with the reporter.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.27  Decisions of hearing examiners.

    (a) Proposed findings of fact, conclusions, and rules or orders. 
Within 10 days after receipt of notice that the transcript of the 
testimony has been filed or such additional time as the presiding 
hearing examiner may allow, each party may file with the hearing 
examiner proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and rule or 
order, together with a supporting brief expressing the reasons for such 
proposals. Such proposals and brief shall be served on all other 
parties, and shall refer to all portions of the record and to all 
authorities relied upon in support of each proposal.
    (b) Decision of the hearing examiner. Within a reasonable time after 
the time allowed for the filing of proposed findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, and rule or order, the presiding hearing examiner 
shall make and serve upon each party his decision, which shall become 
final upon the 20th day after service thereof, unless exceptions are 
filed thereto, as provided in Sec. 1905.28. The decision of the hearing 
examiner shall include (1) a statement of findings and conclusions, with 
reasons and bases therefor, upon each material issue of fact, law, or 
discretion presented on the record, and (2) the appropriate rule, order, 
relief, or denial thereof. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be 
based upon a consideration of the whole record and shall state all facts 
officially noticed and relied upon. It shall be made on the basis of a 
preponderance of reliable and probative evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.28  Exceptions.

    Within 20 days after service of a decision of a presiding hearing 
examiner, any party may file with the hearing examiner written 
exceptions thereto with supporting reasons. Such exceptions shall refer 
to the specific findings of fact, conclusions of law, or terms of the 
rule or order excepted to, the specific pages of transcript relevant to 
the suggestions, and shall suggest corrected findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, or terms of the rule or order. Upon receipt of any 
exceptions, the hearing examiner shall fix a time for filing any 
objections to the exceptions and any supporting reasons.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.29  Transmission of record.

    If exceptions are filed, the hearing examiner shall transmit the 
record of the proceeding to the Assistant Secretary for review. The 
record shall include: The application, any request for hearing thereon, 
motions and requests filed in written form, rulings thereon, the 
transcript of the testimony taken at the hearing, together with the 
exhibits admitted in evidence, any documents or papers filed in 
connection with prehearing conferences, such proposed findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, rules or orders, and supporting reasons, as may have 
been filed, the hearing examiner's decision, and such exceptions, 
statements of objections, and briefs in support thereof, as may have 
been filed in the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.30  Decision of the Assistant Secretary.

    If exceptions to a decision of a hearing examiner are taken pursuant 
to Sec. 1905.28, the Assistant Secretary shall upon consideration 
thereof, together with the record references and authorities cited in 
support thereof, and any objections to exceptions and supporting 
reasons, make his decision. The decision may affirm, modify, or set 
aside, in whole or part, the findings, conclusions, and the rule or 
order contained

[[Page 60]]

in the decision of the presiding hearing examiner, and shall include a 
statement of reasons or bases for the actions taken on each exception 
presented.


<R04>
                      Subpart D--Summary Decisions


<R05>
Sec. 1905.40  Motion for summary decision.

    (a) Any party may, at least 20 days before the date fixed for any 
hearing under subpart C of this part, move with or without supporting 
affidavits for a summary decision in his favor on all or any part of the 
proceeding. Any other party may, within 10 days after service of the 
motion, serve opposing affidavits or countermove for summary decision. 
The presiding hearing examiner may, in his discretion, set the matter 
for argument and call for the submission of briefs.
    (b) The filing of any documents under paragraph (a) of this section 
shall be with the hearing examiner, and copies of any such documents 
shall be served in accordance with Sec. 1905.21.
    (c) The hearing examiner may grant such motion if the pleadings, 
affidavits, material obtained by discovery or otherwise obtained, or 
matters officially noticed show that there is no genuine issue as to any 
material fact and that a party is entitled to summary decision. The 
hearing examiner may deny such motion whenever the moving party denies 
access to information by means of discovery to a party opposing the 
motion.
    (d) Affidavits shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in 
evidence in a proceeding subject to 5 U.S.C. 556 and 557 and shall show 
affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters 
stated therein. When a motion for summary decision is made and supported 
as provided in this section, a party opposing the motion may not rest 
upon the mere allegations or denials of his pleading; his response must 
set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue of fact 
for the hearing.
    (e) Should it appear from the affidavits of a party opposing the 
motion that he cannot for reasons stated present by affidavit facts 
essential to justify his opposition, the hearing examiner may deny the 
motion for summary decision or may order a continuance to permit 
affidavits to be obtained or discovery to be had or may make such other 
order as is just.
    (f) The denial of all or any part of a motion for summary decision 
by the hearing examiner shall not be subject to interlocutory appeal to 
the Assistant Secretary unless the hearing examiner certifies in writing 
(1) that the ruling involves an important question of law or policy as 
to which there is substantial ground for difference of opinion, and (2) 
that an immediate appeal from the ruling may materially advance the 
ultimate termination of the proceeding. The allowance of such an 
interlocutory appeal shall not stay the proceeding before the hearing 
examiner unless the Assistant Secretary shall so order.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.41  Summary decision.

    (a) No genuine issue of material fact. (1) Where no genuine issue of 
a material fact is found to have been raised, the hearing examiner may 
issue an initial decision to become final 20 days after service thereof, 
unless, within such period of time any party has filed written 
exceptions to the decision. If any timely exception is filed, the 
hearing examiner shall fix a time for filing any objections to the 
exception and any supporting reasons. Thereafter, the Assistant 
Secretary, after consideration of the exceptions and any supporting 
briefs filed therewith and of any objections to the exceptions and any 
supporting reasons, may issue a final decision.
    (2) An initial decision and a final decision made under this 
paragraph shall include a statement of:
    (i) Findings and conclusions, and the reasons or bases therefor, on 
all issues presented; and
    (ii) The terms and conditions of the rule or order made.
    (3) A copy of an initial decision and a final decision under this 
paragraph shall be served on each party.
    (b) Hearings on issues of fact. Where a genuine material question of 
fact is raised, the hearing examiner shall, and in any other case he 
may, set the case for an evidentiary hearing in accordance with subpart 
C of this part.

[[Page 61]]


<R04>
                 Subpart E--Effect of Initial Decisions


<R05>
Sec. 1905.50  Effect of appeal of a hearing examiner's decision.

    A hearing examiner's decision under this part shall not be operative 
pending a decision on appeal by the Assistant Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 1905.51  Finality for purposes of judicial review.

    Only a decision by the Assistant Secretary shall be deemed final 
agency action for purposes of judicial review. A decision by a hearing 
examiner which becomes final for lack of appeal is not deemed final 
agency action for purposes of 5 U.S.C. 704.


<R03>
PART 1906--ADMINISTRATION WITNESSES AND DOCUMENTS IN PRIVATE LITIGATION [RESERVED]

<R05>



<R03>
PART 1908--CONSULTATION AGREEMENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
1908.1  Purpose and scope.
1908.2  Definitions.
1908.3  Eligibility and funding.
1908.4  Offsite consultation.
1908.5  Requests and scheduling for onsite consultation.
1908.6  Conduct of a visit.
1908.7  Relationship to enforcement.
1908.8  Consultant specifications.
1908.9  Monitoring and evaluation.
1908.10  Cooperative Agreements.
1908.11  Exclusions.

    Authority: Secs. 7, 21, Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 
(29 U.S.C. 656, 670); Secretary of Labor's Order No. 9-83 (48 FR 35736).

    Source: 49 FR 25094, June 19, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1908.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) This part contains requirements for Cooperative Agreements 
between States and the Federal Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration under sections 7(c)(1) and 21(c) of the Occupational 
Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) under which OSHA 
will utilize State personnel to provide consultative services to 
employers. The service will be made available at no cost to employers to 
assist them in establishing effective occupational safety and health 
programs for providing employment and places of employment which are 
safe and healthful. The overall goal is to prevent the occurrence of 
injuries and illnesses which may result from exposure to hazardous 
workplace conditions and from hazardous work practices. The principal 
assistance will be provided at the employer's worksite, but offsite 
assistance may also be provided by telephone and correspondence, and at 
locations other than the employer's worksite, such as the consultation 
project offices. At the worksite, the consultant will, within the scope 
of the employer's request, evaluate the employer's program for providing 
employment and a place of employment which is safe and healthful, as 
well as identify specific hazards in the workplace, and will provide 
appropriate advice and assistance in establishing or improving the 
employer's safety and health program and in correcting any hazardous 
conditions identified.
    (b) Assistance may include education and training of the employer, 
the employer's supervisors, and the employer's other employees as needed 
to make the employer self-sufficient in ensuring safe and healthful work 
and working conditions. Although onsite consultation will be conducted 
independent of any OSHA enforcement activity, and the discovery of 
hazards will not mandate citation or penalties, the employer remains 
under a statutory obligation to protect employees, and in certain 
instances will be required to take necessary protective action. Employer 
correction of hazards identified by the consultant during a 
comprehensive workplace survey, and implementation of certain core 
elements of an effective safety and health program and commitment to the 
completion of others may serve as the basis for employer exemption from 
certain OSHA enforcement activities. States entering into Agreements 
under this part will receive ninety percent Federal reimbursement for 
allowable costs, and will provide consultation to employers requesting 
the service, subject to scheduling priorities, available resources, and 
any other limitations established

[[Page 62]]

by the Assistant Secretary as part of the Cooperative Agreement.
    (c) In States operating approved Plans under section 18 of the Act, 
the provisions of this art which establish policies governing 
enforcement activities do not apply to safety and health issues covered 
by the State Plan. States operating such Plans shall, in accord with 
section 18(b), establish policies which are at least as effective as 
Federal policies.


<R05>
Sec. 1908.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Act means the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary of Labor for 
Occupational Safety and Health.
    Compliance Officer means a Federal compliance safety and health 
officer.
    Consultant means an employee under a Cooperative Agreement pursuant 
to this part who provides consultation.
    Consultation means all activities related to the provision of 
consultative assistance under this part, including offsite consultation 
and onsite consultation.
    Cooperative Agreement means the legal instrument which enables the 
States to collaborate with OSHA to provide consultation in accord with 
this part.
    Designee means the State official designated by the Governor to be 
responsible for entering into a Cooperative Agreement in accord with 
this part.
    Education means planned and organized activity by a consultant to 
impart information to employers and employees to enable them to 
establish and maintain employment and a place of employment which is 
safe and healthful.
    Employee means an employee of an employer who is employed in a 
business of that employer which affects commerce.
    Employer means a person engaged in a business who has employees, but 
does not include the United States, or any State or political 
subdivision of a State.
    Hazard correction means the elimination or control of a workplace 
hazard in accord with the requirements of applicable Federal or State 
statutes, regulations or standards.
    Imminent danger means any conditions or practices in a place of 
employment which are such that a danger exists which could reasonably be 
expected to cause death or serious physical harm immediately or before 
the imminence of such danger can be eliminated through the procedures 
set forth in Sec. 1908.6(e)(4), (f) (2) and (3), and (g).
    Offsite consultation means the provision of consultative assistance 
on occupational safety and health issues away from an employer's 
worksite by such means as telephone and correspondence, and at locations 
other than the employer's worksite, such as the consultation project 
offices. It may, under limited conditions specified by the Assistant 
Secretary, include training and education.
    Onsite consultation means the provision of consultative assistance 
on an employer's occupational safety and health program and on specific 
workplace hazards through a visit to an employer's worksite. It includes 
a written report to the employer on the findings and recommendations 
resulting from the visit. It may include training and education needed 
to address hazards, or potential hazards, at the worksite.
    OSHA means the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
or the State agency responsible under a Plan approved under section 18 
of the Act for the enforcement of occupational safety and health 
standards in that State.
    Other-than-serious hazard means any condition or practice which 
would be classified as an other-than-serious violation of applicable 
Federal or State statutes, regulations or standards, based on criteria 
contained in the current OSHA Field Operations Manual or an approved 
State Plan counterpart.
    RA means the Regional Administrator for Occupational Safety and 
Health of the Region in which the State concerned is located.
    Serious hazard means any condition or practice which would be 
classified as a serious violation of applicable Federal or State 
statutes, regulations or standards, based on criteria contained in the 
current OSHA Field Operations Manual or an approved State Plan

[[Page 63]]

counterpart, except that the element of employer knowledge shall not be 
considered.
    State includes a State of the United States, the District of 
Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the 
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
    Training means the planned and organized activity of a consultant to 
impart skills, techniques and methodologies to employers and their 
employees to assist them in establishing and maintaining employment and 
a place of employment which is safe and healthful.


<R05>
Sec. 1908.3  Eligibility and funding.

    (a) State eligibility. Any State may enter into an Agreement with 
the Assistant Secretary to perform consultation for private sector 
employers; except that a State having a Plan approved under section 18 
of the Act is eligible to participate in the program only if that Plan 
does not include provisions for federally funded consultation to private 
sector employers.
    (b) Reimbursement. (1) The Assistant Secretary will reimburse 90 
percent of the costs incurred under a Cooperative Agreement entered into 
pursuant to this part. Approved training of State staff operating under 
a Cooperative Agreement and specified out-of-State travel by such staff 
will be fully reimbursed.
    (2) Reimbursement to States under this part is limited to costs 
incurred in providing consultation to private sector employers only.
    (i) In all States with Plans approved under section 18 of the Act, 
consultation provided to State and local governments, as well as the 
remaining range of voluntary compliance activities referred to in 29 CFR 
1902.4(c)(2)(xiii), will not be affected by the provisions of this part. 
Federal reimbursement for these activities will be made in accordance 
with the provisions of section 23(g) of the Act.
    (ii) In States without Plans approved under section 18, no Federal 
reimbursement for consultation provided to State and local governments 
will be allowed, although this activity may be conducted independently 
by a State with 100 percent State funding.


<R05>
Sec. 1908.4  Offsite consultation.

    The State may provide consultative services to employers on 
occupational safety and health issues by telephone and correspondence, 
and at locations other than the employer's worksite, such as the 
consultation project offices. It may, under limited conditions specified 
by the Assistant Secretary, include training and education.


<R05>
Sec. 1908.5  Requests and scheduling for onsite consultation.

    (a) Encouraging requests--(1) State responsibility. The State shall 
be responsible for encouraging employers to request consultative 
assistance and shall publicize the availability of its consultative 
service and the scope of the service which will be provided. The 
Assistant Secretary will also engage in activities to publicize and 
promote the program.
    (2) Promotional methods. To inform employers of the availability of 
its consultative service and to encourage requests, the State may use 
methods such as the following:
    (i) Paid newspaper advertisements;
    (ii) Newspaper, magazine, and trade publication articles;
    (iii) Special direct mailings or telephone solicitations to 
establishments based on workers' compensation data or other appropriate 
listings;
    (iv) In-person visits to workplaces to explain the availability of 
the service, and participation at employer conferences and seminars;
    (v) Solicitation of support from State business and labor 
organizations and leaders, and public officials;
    (vi) Solicitation of publicizing by employers and employees who have 
received consultative services;
    (vii) Preparation and dissemination of publications, descriptive 
materials, and other appropriate items on consultative services;
    (viii) Free public service announcements on radio and television.
    (3) Scope of service. In its publicity for the program, in response 
to any inquiry, and before an employer's request for a consultative 
visit may be accepted, the State shall clearly explain that the service 
is provided at no cost to an employer through Federal and State funds 
for the purpose of assisting the

[[Page 64]]

employer in establishing and maintaining effective programs for 
providing safe and healthful places of employment for employees, in 
accord with the requirements of the applicable State or Federal laws and 
regulations. The State shall explain that while utilizing this service, 
an employer remains under a statutory obligation to provide safe and 
healthful work and working conditions for employees. In addition, while 
the identification of hazards by a consultant will not mandate the 
issuance of citations or penalties, the employer is required to take 
necessary action to eliminate employee exposure to a hazard which in the 
judgment of the consultant represents an imminent danger to employees, 
and to take action to correct within a reasonable time a hazard which 
would be classified as a serious hazard. The State shall emphasize, 
however, that the discovery of such a hazard will not initiate any 
enforcement activity, and that referral will not take place, unless the 
employer fails to eliminate the identified hazard within the established 
time frame. The State shall also explain that when an employer requests 
and receives a consultative visit covering all conditions and operations 
in the place of employment related to occupational safety and health and 
meets the other conditions set forth in Sec. 1908.7(b)(4), the employer 
may, upon request, be exempt from a general schedule OSHA enforcement 
inspection for a period of one year from the end of the closing 
conference of the consultative visit.
    (b) Employer requests. (1) An onsite consultative visit will be 
provided only at the request of the employer, and shall not result from 
the enforcement of any right of entry under State law.
    (2) When making a request, an employer in a small, high hazard 
establishment shall generally be encouraged to include within the scope 
of such request all working conditions at the worksite and the 
employer's entire safety and health program. However, a more limited 
scope may be encouraged in larger and less hazardous establishments. 
Moreover, any employer may specify a more limited scope for the visit by 
indicating working conditions, hazards, or situations on which onsite 
consultation will be focused. When such limited requests are at issue, 
the consultant will limit review and provide assistance only with 
respect to those working conditions, hazards, or situations specified; 
except that if the consultant observes, in the course of the onsite 
visit, hazards which are outside the scope of the request, the 
consultant must treat such hazards as though they were within the scope 
of the request.
    (3) Employers may request onsite consultation to assist in the 
abatement of hazards cited during an OSHA enforcement inspection. 
However, an onsite consultative visit may not take place after an 
inspection until the conditions set forth in Sec. 1908.7(b)(3) have been 
met.
    (c) Scheduling priority. Priority shall be assigned to requests from 
businesses with the most hazardous operations, with primary attention to 
smaller businesses. Preference shall be given to the smaller businesses 
which are in higher hazard industries or which have the most hazardous 
conditions at issue in the request.


<R05>
Sec. 1908.6  Conduct of a visit.

    (a) Preparation. (1) An onsite consultative visit shall be made only 
after appropriate preparation by the consultant. Prior to the visit, the 
consultant shall become familiar with as many factors concerning the 
establishment's operation as possible. The consultant shall review all 
applicable codes and standards. In addition, the consultant shall assure 
that all necessary technical and personal protective equipment is 
available and functioning properly.
    (2) At the time of any promotional visit conducted by a consultant 
to encourage the use of the onsite consultative services, a consultation 
may be performed without delay if the employer so requests and the 
consultant is otherwise prepared to conduct such consultation.
    (b) Structured format. An initial onsite consultative visit will 
consist of an opening conference, an examination of those aspects of the 
employer's safety and health program which relate to the scope of the 
visit, a walk through the workplace, and a closing conference. An 
initial visit may include training

[[Page 65]]

and education for employers and employees, if the need for such training 
and education is revealed by the walk through the workplace and the 
examination of the employer's safety and health program and if the 
employer so requests. The visit shall be followed by a written report to 
the employer. Additional visits may be conducted as the employer 
requests to provide needed education and training, assistance with the 
employer's safety and health program, or technical assistance in the 
correction of hazards, or as necessary to verify the correction of 
serious hazards identified during previous visits. A compliance 
inspection may, in some cases, be the basis for a visit limited to 
education and training, assistance with the employer's safety and health 
program, or technical assistance in the correction of hazards.
    (c) Employee participation. (1) The consultant shall retain the 
right to confer with individual employees during the course of the visit 
in order to identify and judge the nature and extent of particular 
hazards within the scope of the employer's request, and to evaluate the 
employer's safety and health program. The consultant shall explain the 
necessity for this contact to the employer during the opening 
conference, and an employer must agree to permit such contact before a 
visit can proceed.
    (2) In addition, employees, their representatives, and members of a 
workplace joint safety and health committee may participate in the 
onsite consultative visit to the extent desired by the employer. In the 
opening conference, the consultant shall encourage the employer to allow 
employee participation to the fullest extent practicable.
    (d) Opening conference. In addition to the requirements of 
Sec. 1908.6(c), the consultant shall, in the opening conference, explain 
to the employer the relationship between onsite consultation and OSHA 
enforcement activity and shall explain the obligation to protect 
employees in the event that certain hazardous conditions are identified.
    (e) Onsite activity. (1) Activity during the onsite consultative 
visit will focus primarily on those areas, conditions, or hazards 
regarding which the employer has requested assistance. An employer may 
expand or reduce the scope of the request at any time during the onsite 
visit. The consultant shall, if prepared and if scheduling priorities 
permit, expand the scope of the visit at the time of the request. If the 
employer's request for expansion necessitates further preparation by the 
consultant or the expertise of another consultant, or if other employer 
requests may merit higher priority, the consultant shall refer the 
request to the consultation manager for scheduling. In all cases in 
which the scope of the visit is reduced, the consultant remains 
obligated to work with the employer to ensure correction of those 
serious hazards which are identified during the visit.
    (2) The consultant shall advise the employer as to the employer's 
obligations and responsibilities under applicable Federal or State law 
and implementing regulations.
    (3) Within the scope of the employer's request, consultants shall 
review the employer's safety and health program and provide advice on 
modifications or additions to make such programs more effective.
    (4) Consultants shall identify and provide advice on correction of 
those hazards included in the employer's request and any other safety or 
health hazards observed in the workplace during the course of the onsite 
consultative visit. This advice shall include basic information 
indicating the possibility of a solution and describing the general form 
of the solution. The consultant shall conduct sampling and testing, with 
subsequent analyses. as may be necessary to confirm the existence of 
safety and health hazards.
    (5) Advice and technical assistance on the correction of identified 
safety and health hazards may be provided to employers during and after 
the onsite consultative visit. Descriptive materials may be provided on 
approaches, means, techniques, and other appropriate items commonly 
utilized for the elimination or control of such hazards. The consultants 
shall also advise the employers of additional sources of assistance, if 
known.
    (6) When a hazard is identified in the workplace, the consultant 
shall indicate to the employer the consultant's

[[Page 66]]

best judgment as to whether the situation would be classified as a 
``serious'' or ``other-than-serious'' hazard.
    (7) At the time the consultant determines that an identified serious 
hazard exists, the consultant shall assist the employer to develop a 
specific plan to correct the hazard, affording the employer a reasonable 
period of time to complete the necessary action. The State shall 
provide, upon request from the employer within 15 working days of 
receipt of the consultant's report, an opportunity for an expeditious 
informal discussion with the consultation manager regarding the period 
of time established for the correction of a hazard or any other 
substantive finding of the consultant.
    (8) The employer shall be encouraged to advise affected employees of 
the hazards when they are identified, and to notify them of their 
correction.
    (f) Employer obligations. (1) An employer must take immediate action 
to eliminate employee exposure to a hazard which, in the judgment of the 
consultant, presents an imminent danger to employees. If the employer 
fails to take the necessary action, the consultant must immediately 
notify the affected employees and the appropriate OSHA enforcement 
authority and provide the relevant information.
    (2) An employer must also take the necessary action in accordance 
with the plan developed under Sec. 1908.6(e)(7) to eliminate or control 
employee exposure to any identified serious hazard. In order to 
demonstrate that the necessary action is being taken, an employer may be 
required to submit periodic reports, permit a followup visit, or take 
similar action.
    (3) An employer may request, and the consultation manager may grant, 
an extension of the time frame established for correction of a serious 
hazard when the employer demonstrates having made a good faith effort to 
correct the hazard within the established time frame; shows evidence 
that correction has not been completed because of factors beyond the 
employer's reasonable control; and shows evidence that the employer is 
taking all available interim steps to safeguard the employees against 
the hazard during the correction period.
    (4) If the employer fails to take the action necessary to correct a 
serious hazard within the established time frame or any extensions 
thereof, the consultation manager shall immediately notify the 
appropriate OSHA enforcement authority and provide the relevant 
information. The OSHA enforcement authority will make a determination, 
based on a review of the facts, whether enforcement activity is 
warranted.
    (5) After correction of all serious hazards, the employer shall 
notify the consultation manager by written confirmation of the 
correction of the hazards, unless correction of the serious hazards is 
verified by direct observation by the consultant.
    (g) Written report. A written report shall be prepared for each 
visit which results in substantive findings or recommendations, and 
shall be sent to the employer. The timing and format of the report shall 
be approved by the Assistant Secretary. The report shall restate the 
employer's request and describe the working conditions examined by the 
consultant; shall, within the scope of the request, evaluate the 
employer's program for ensuring safe and healthful employment and 
provide recommendations for making such programs effective; shall 
identify specific hazards and describe their nature, including reference 
to applicable standards or codes; shall identify the seriousness of the 
hazards; and, to the extent possible, shall include suggested means or 
approaches to their correction. Additional sources of assistance shall 
also be indicated, if known, including the possible need to procure 
specific engineering consultation, medical advice and assistance, and 
other appropriate items. The report shall also include reference to the 
completion dates for the situations described in Sec. 1908.6(f) (1) and 
(2).
    (h) Confidentiality. The consultant shall preserve the 
confidentiality of information obtained as the result of a consultative 
visit which contains or

[[Page 67]]

might reveal a trade secret of the employer.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
1218-0110)

[49 FR 25094, June 19, 1984, as amended at 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1908.7  Relationship to enforcement.

    (a) Independence. (1) Consultative activity by a State shall be 
conducted independently of any OSHA enforcement activity.
    (2) The consultative activity shall have its own identifiable 
managerial staff. In States with Plans approved under section 18 of the 
Act, this staff will be separate from the managing of compliance 
inspections and scheduling.
    (3) The identity of employers requesting onsite consultation, as 
well as the file of the consultant's visit, shall not be forwarded or 
provided to OSHA for use in any compliance inspection or scheduling 
activity, except as provided for in Sec. 1908.6(f) (1) and (4) and 
Sec. 1908.7(b)(4).
    (b) Effect upon scheduling. (1) An onsite consultative visit already 
in progress will have priority over OSHA compliance inspections except 
as provided in Sec. 1908.7(b)(2). The consultant and the employer shall 
notify the compliance officer of the visit in progress and request delay 
of the inspection until after the visit is completed. An onsite 
consultative visit shall be considered in progress in relation to the 
working conditions, hazards, or situations covered by the request from 
the beginning of the opening conference through the end of the closing 
conference; except that for periods which exceed 30 days from the 
initiation of the opening conference, the RA may determine that the 
inspection will proceed. For working conditions, hazards, or situations 
not covered by the request, the onsite consultative visit shall be 
considered in progress only while the consultant is at the place of 
employment.
    (2) The consultant shall terminate an onsite consultative visit 
already in progress where one of the following kinds of OSHA compliance 
inspections is about to take place:
    (i) Imminent danger investigations;
    (ii) Fatality/catastrophe investigations;
    (iii) Complaint investigations;
    (iv) Other critical inspections as determined by the Assistant 
Secretary.
    (3) An onsite consultation visit may not take place while an OSHA 
enforcement inspection is in progress at the establishment. An 
enforcement inspection shall be deemed ``in progress'' from the time a 
compliance officer initially seeks entry to the workplace to the end of 
the closing conference. An enforcement inspection will also be 
considered ``in progress'' in cases where entry is refused, until such 
times as: the inspection is conducted; the RA determines that a warrant 
to require entry to the workplace will not be sought; or the RA 
determines that allowing a consultative visit to proceed is in the best 
interest of employee safety and health. An onsite consultative visit 
shall not take place subsequent to an OSHA enforcement inspection until 
a determination has been made that no citation will be issued, or if a 
citation is issued, onsite consultation shall only take place with 
regard to those citation items which have become final orders.
    (4) When an employer requests and undergoes a consultative visit at 
an establishment covering all conditions and operations in the place of 
employment related to occupational safety and health; corrects all 
hazards that have been identified during the course of the consultative 
visit within established time frames, and posts notice of their 
correction when such is completed; demonstrates to the consultant that 
certain core elements of an effective safety and health program are in 
effect, and that the remaining elements of an effective safety and 
health program will be implemented within a reasonable, established time 
frame; and agrees to request a consultative visit if major changes in 
working conditions or work processes occur which may introduce new 
hazards, the employer may, upon request, be exempt from a general 
schedule OSHA enforcement inspection for a period of one year from the 
end of the closing conference of the consultative visit. Between the 
time of election to participate in the process required to qualify

[[Page 68]]

for the exemption and the completion of the process, the employer must 
post a notice of such participation.
    (5) When an employer requests consideration for an inspection 
exemption under Sec. 1908.7(b)(4), the provisions of Sec. 1908.6 (e)(7), 
(f)(3) and (f)(5) shall apply to other-than-serious hazards as well as 
serious hazards.
    (c) Effect upon enforcement. (1) The advice of the consultant and 
the consultant's written report will not be binding on a compliance 
officer in a subsequent enforcement inspection. In a subsequent 
inspection, a compliance officer is not precluded from finding hazardous 
conditions, or violations of standards, rules or regulations, for which 
citations would be issued and penalties proposed.
    (2) The hazard identification and correction assistance given by a 
State consultant, or the failure of a consultant to point out a specific 
hazard, or other possible errors or omissions by the consultant, shall 
not be binding upon a compliance officer and need not affect the regular 
conduct of a compliance inspection or preclude the finding of alleged 
violations and the issuance of citations, or constitute a defense to any 
enforcement action.
    (3) In the event of a subsequent inspection, the employer is not 
required to inform the compliance officer of the prior visit. The 
employer is not required to provide a copy of the State consultant's 
written report to the compliance officer, except to the extent that 
disclosure of information contained in such a written report is required 
by 29 CFR 1910.20.
    (4) If, however, the employer chooses to provide a copy of the 
consultant's report to a compliance officer, it may be used as a factor 
in determining the extent to which an inspection is required and as a 
factor in determining proposed penalties. When, during the course of a 
compliance inspection, an OSHA compliance officer identifies the 
existence of serious hazards previously identified as a result of a 
consultative visit, the Area Director shall have authority to assess 
minimum penalties if the employer is in good faith complying with the 
recommendations of a consultant after such consultative visit.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
1218-0110)

[49 FR 25094, June 19, 1984, as amended at 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1908.8  Consultant specifications.

    (a) Number. (1) The number of consultant positions which will be 
funded under a Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this part for the 
purpose of providing consultation to private sector employers will be 
determined by the Assistant Secretary on the basis of program 
performance, demand for services, industrial mix, resources available, 
and the recommendation of the RA, and may be adjusted periodically.
    (2) States shall make efforts to utilize consultants with the safety 
and health expertise necessary to properly meet the demand for 
consultation by the various industries within a State. The RA will 
determine and negotiate a reasonable balance with the State on an annual 
basis.
    (b) Qualifications. (1) All consultants utilized under Cooperative 
Agreements pursuant to this part shall be employees of the State, 
qualified under State requirements for employment in occupational safety 
and health. They must demonstrate adequate education and experience to 
satisfy the RA before assignment to work under an Agreement, and 
annually thereafter, that they meet the requirements set out in 
Sec. 1908.8(b)(2), and that they have the ability to perform 
satisfactorily pursuant to the Cooperative Agreement. Persons who have 
the potential but do not yet demonstrate adequate education and 
experience to satisfy the RA that they have the ability to perform 
consultant duties independently may, with RA approval, be trained under 
a Cooperative Agreement to perform consultant duties. Such persons may 
not, however, perform consultant duties independently until it has been 
determined by the RA that they meet the requirements and have the 
ability indicated. All consultants shall be selected in accordance with 
the provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, as 
amended, entitled ``Equal Employment Opportunity.''

[[Page 69]]

    (2) Minimum requirements of consultants shall include the following:
    (i) The ability to identify hazards; the ability to assess employee 
exposure and risk; knowledge of OSHA standards; knowledge of hazard 
correction techniques and practices; knowledge of workplace safety and 
health program requirements; and the ability to effectively communicate, 
both orally and in writing.
    (ii) Consultants shall meet any additional degree and/or experience 
requirements as may be established by the Assistant Secretary.
    (c) Training. As necessary, the Assistant Secretary will specify 
immediate and continuing training requirements for consultants. Expenses 
for training which is required by the Assistant Secretary or approved by 
the RA will be reimbursed in full.


<R05>
Sec. 1908.9  Monitoring and evaluation.

    (a) Assistant Secretary responsibility. A State's performance under 
a Cooperative Agreement will be regularly monitored and evaluated by the 
Assistant Secretary as part of a systematic Federal plan for this 
activity. The Assistant Secretary may require changes as a result of 
these evaluations to foster conformance with consultation policy. If the 
State policies or practices which require change are such that the 
State's assurance of correction of serious hazards and of the 
effectiveness of employers' safety and health programs is in doubt, the 
Assistant Secretary may, pending the completion of the changes, suspend 
recognition of a State's consultative visits as a basis for exemption 
from compliance inspection as permitted under Sec. 1908.7(b)(4).
    (b) Consultant performance--(1) State activity. The State shall 
establish and maintain an organized consultant performance monitoring 
system under the Cooperative Agreement:
    (i) Operation of the system shall conform to all requirements 
established by the Assistant Secretary. The system shall be approved by 
the Assistant Secretary before it is placed in operation.
    (ii) A performance evaluation of each State consultant performing 
consultation services for employers shall be prepared annually. All 
aspects of a consultant's performance shall be reviewed at that time. 
Recommendation for remedial action shall be made and acted upon. The 
annual evaluation report shall be a confidential State personnel record 
and may be timed to coincide with regular personnel evaluations.
    (iii) Performance of individual consultants shall be measured in 
terms of their ability to identify hazards in the workplaces which they 
have visited; their ability to determine employee exposure and risk, and 
in particular their performance under Sec. 1908.6 (e) and (f); their 
knowledge and application of applicable Federal or State statutes, 
regulations or standards; their knowledge and application of appropriate 
hazard correction techniques and approaches; their knowledge and 
application of the requirements of an effective workplace safety and 
health program; and their ability to communicate effectively their 
findings and recommendations and the reasons for them to employers, and 
relevant information, skills and techniques to employers and employees.
    (iv) Accompanied visits to observe consultants during onsite 
consultative visits shall be conducted periodically in accord with a 
plan established in each annual Cooperative Agreement. The State may 
also conduct unaccompanied visits to workplaces which received onsite 
consultation, for the purpose of evaluating consultants. A written 
report of each visit shall be provided to the consultant. These visits 
shall be conducted only with the expressed permission of the employer 
who requests the onsite consultative visit.
    (v) The State will report quarterly to the RA on system operations, 
including copies of accompanied visit reports completed that quarter.
    (2) Federal activity. State consultant performance monitoring as set 
out in Sec. 1908.9(b)(1) shall not preclude Federal monitoring activity 
by methods determined to be appropriate by the Assistant Secretary.
    (c) State reporting. For Federal monitoring and evaluation purposes, 
the State shall compile and submit such factual and statistical data in 
the format and at the frequency required by the Assistant Secretary. The 
State shall prepare and submit to the RA any

[[Page 70]]

narrative reports, including copies of written reports to employers as 
may be required by the Assistant Secretary.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
1218-0110)

[49 FR 25094, June 19, 1984, as amended at 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1908.10  Cooperative Agreements.

    (a) Who may make Agreements. The Assistant Secretary may make a 
Cooperative Agreement under this part with the Governor of a State or 
with any State agency designated for that purpose by the Governor.
    (b) Negotiations. (1) Procedures for negotiations may be obtained 
through the RA who will negotiate for the Assistant Secretary and make 
final recommendations on each Agreement to the Assistant Secretary.
    (2) States with Plans approved under section 18 of the Act may 
initiate negotiations in anticipation of the withdrawal from the Plan of 
Federally funded onsite consultation services to private sector 
employers.
    (3) Renegotiation of existing Agreements funded under this part 
shall be initiated within 30 days of the effective date of these 
revisions.
    (c) Contents of Cooperative Agreement. (1) Any Agreement and 
subsequent modifications shall be in writing and signed by both parties.
    (2) Each Agreement shall provide that the State will conform its 
operations under the Agreement to:
    (i) The requirements contained in this part 1908;
    (ii) All related formal directives subsequently issued by the 
Assistant Secretary implementing this regulation.
    (3) Each Agreement shall contain such other explicit written 
commitments in conformance with the provisions of this part as may be 
required by the Assistant Secretary. Each Agreement shall also include a 
budget of the State's anticipated expenditures under the Agreement, in 
the detail and format required by the Assistant Secretary.
    (d) Location of sample Cooperative Agreement. A sample Agreement is 
available for inspection at all Regional Offices of the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor.
    (e) Action upon requests. The State will be notified within a 
reasonable period of time of any decision concerning its request for a 
Cooperative Agreement. If a request is denied, the State will be 
informed in writing of the reasons supporting the decision. If a 
Cooperative Agreement is negotiated, the initial finding will specify 
the period for the Agreement. Additional funds may be added at a later 
time provided the activity is satisfactorily carried out and 
appropriations are available. The State may also be required to amend 
the Agreement for continued support.
    (f) Termination. Either party may terminate a Cooperative Agreement 
under this part upon 30 days' written notice to the other party.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
1218-0110)

[49 FR 25094, June 19, 1984, as amended at 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1908.11  Exclusions.

    A Cooperative Agreement under this part will not restrict in any 
manner the authority and responsibility of the Assistant Secretary under 
sections 8, 9, 10, 13, and 17 of the Act, or any corresponding State 
authority.


<R03>
PART 1910--OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
1910.1  Purpose and scope.
1910.2  Definitions.
1910.3  Petitions for the issuance, amendment, or repeal of a standard.
1910.4  Amendments to this part.
1910.5  Applicability of standards.
1910.6  Incorporation by reference.
1910.7  Definition and requirements for a nationally recognized testing 
          laboratory.
1910.8  OMB control numbers under the Paperwork Reduction Act.

   Subpart B--Adoption and Extension of Established Federal Standards

1910.11  Scope and purpose.
1910.12  Construction work.
1910.15  Shipyard employment.
1910.16  Longshoring and marine terminals.
1910.17  Effective dates.

[[Page 71]]

1910.18  Changes in established Federal standards.
1910.19  Special provisions for air contaminants.

                          Subpart C [Reserved]

                   Subpart D--Walking-Working Surfaces

1910.21  Definitions.
1910.22  General requirements.
1910.23  Guarding floor and wall openings and holes.
1910.24  Fixed industrial stairs.
1910.25  Portable wood ladders.
1910.26  Portable metal ladders.
1910.27  Fixed ladders.
1910.28  Safety requirements for scaffolding.
1910.29  Manually propelled mobile ladder stands and scaffolds (towers).
1910.30  Other working surfaces.

                       Subpart E--Means of Egress

1910.35  Definitions.
1910.36  General requirements.
1910.37  Means of egress, general.
1910.38  Employee emergency plans and fire prevention plans.

Appendix to Subpart E to Part 1910--Means of Egress

    Subpart F--Powered Platforms, Manlifts, and Vehicle-Mounted Work 
                                Platforms

1910.66  Powered platforms for building maintenance.
1910.67  Vehicle-mounted elevating and rotating work platforms.
1910.68  Manlifts.

        Subpart G--Occupational Health and Environmental Control

1910.94  Ventilation.
1910.95  Occupational noise exposure.
1910.97  Nonionizing radiation.
1910.98  Effective dates.

                     Subpart H--Hazardous Materials

1910.101  Compressed gases (general requirements).
1910.102  Acetylene.
1910.103  Hydrogen.
1910.104  Oxygen.
1910.105  Nitrous oxide.
1910.106  Flammable and combustible liquids.
1910.107  Spray finishing using flammable and combustible materials.
1910.108  Dip tanks containing flammable or combustible liquids.
1910.109  Explosives and blasting agents.
1910.110  Storage and handling of liquified petroleum gases.
1910.111  Storage and handling of anhydrous ammonia.
1910.112--1910.113  [Reserved]
1910.119  Process safety management of highly hazardous chemicals.
1910.120  Hazardous waste operations and emergency response.

                Subpart I--Personal Protective Equipment

1910.132  General requirements.
1910.133  Eye and face protection.
1910.134  Respiratory protection.
1910.135  Head protection.
1910.136  Foot protection.
1910.137  Electrical protective equipment.
1910.138  Hand protection.
1910.139  Respiratory protection for M. tuberculosis.

Appendix A to Subpart I to Part 1910--References for Further Information 
          (Non-mandatory)
Appendix B to Subpart I to Part 1910--Non-mandatory Compliance 
          Guidelines for Hazard Assessment and Personal Protective 
          Equipment Selection

                Subpart J--General Environmental Controls

1910.141  Sanitation.
1910.142  Temporary labor camps.
1910.143  Nonwater carriage disposal systems. [Reserved]
1910.144  Safety color code for marking physical hazards.
1910.145  Specifications for accident prevention signs and tags.
1910.146  Permit-required confined spaces.
1910.147  The control of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout).

                    Subpart K--Medical and First Aid

1910.151  Medical services and first aid.
1910.152  [Reserved]

                       Subpart L--Fire Protection

1910.155  Scope, application and definitions applicable to this subpart.
1910.156  Fire brigades.

                   Portable Fire Suppression Equipment

1910.157  Portable fire extinguishers.
1910.158  Standpipe and hose systems.

                    Fixed Fire Suppression Equipment

1910.159  Automatic sprinkler systems.
1910.160  Fixed extinguishing systems, general.
1910.161  Fixed extinguishing systems, dry chemical.
1910.162  Fixed extinguishing systems, gaseous agent.
1910.163  Fixed extinguishing systems, water spray and foam.

                      Other Fire Protection Systems

1910.164  Fire detection systems.

[[Page 72]]

1910.165  Employee alarm systems.

                  APPENDICES TO SUBPART L TO PART 1910

Appendix A to Subpart L to Part 1910--Fire Protection
Appendix B to Subpart L to Part 1910--National Consensus Standards
Appendix C to Subpart L to Part 1910--Fire Protection References For 
          Further Information
Appendix D to Subpart L to Part 1910--Availability of Publications 
          Incorporated by Reference in Section 1910.156 Fire Brigades
Appendix E to Subpart L to Part 1910--Test Methods for Protective 
          Clothing

         Subpart M--Compressed Gas and Compressed Air Equipment

1910.166--1910.168  [Reserved]
1910.169  Air receivers.

                Subpart N--Materials Handling and Storage

1910.176  Handling materials--general.
1910.177  Servicing multi-piece and single piece rim wheels.
1910.178  Powered industrial trucks.
1910.179  Overhead and gantry cranes.
1910.180  Crawler locomotive and truck cranes.
1910.181  Derricks.
1910.183  Helicopters.
1910.184  Slings.

                Subpart O--Machinery and Machine Guarding

1910.211  Definitions.
1910.212  General requirements for all machines.
1910.213  Woodworking machinery requirements.
1910.214  Cooperage machinery. [Reserved]
1910.215  Abrasive wheel machinery.
1910.216  Mills and calenders in the rubber and plastics industries.
1910.217  Mechanical power presses.
1910.218  Forging machines.
1910.219  Mechanical power-transmission apparatus.

Subpart P--Hand and Portable Powered Tools and Other Hand-Held Equipment

1910.241  Definitions.
1910.242  Hand and portable powered tools and equipment, general.
1910.243  Guarding of portable powered tools.
1910.244  Other portable tools and equipment.

                 Subpart Q--Welding, Cutting and Brazing

1910.251  Definitions.
1910.252  General requirements.
1910.253  Oxygen-fuel gas welding and cutting.
1910.254  Arc welding and cutting.
1910.255  Resistance welding.

                      Subpart R--Special Industries

1910.261  Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills.
1910.262  Textiles.
1910.263  Bakery equipment.
1910.264  Laundry machinery and operations.
1910.265  Sawmills.
1910.266  Logging operations.
1910.267  Agricultural operations.
1910.268  Telecommunications.
1910.269  Electric power generation, transmission, and distribution.
1910.272  Grain handling facilities.

                          Subpart S--Electrical

                                 General

1910.301  Introduction.

             Design Safety Standards for Electrical Systems

1910.302  Electric utilization systems.
1910.303  General requirements.
1910.304  Wiring design and protection.
1910.305  Wiring methods, components, and equipment for general use.
1910.306  Specific purpose equipment and installations.
1910.307  Hazardous (classified) locations.
1910.308  Special systems.
1910.309--1910.330  [Reserved]

                      Safety-Related Work Practices

1910.331  Scope.
1910.332  Training.
1910.333  Selection and use of work practices.
1910.334  Use of equipment.
1910.335  Safeguards for personnel protection.
1910.336--1910.360  [Reserved]

                 Safety-Related Maintenance Requirements

1910.361--1910.380  [Reserved]

                Safety Requirements for Special Equipment

1910.381--1910.398  [Reserved]

                               Definitions

1910.399  Definitions applicable to this subpart.

Appendix A to Subpart S to Part 1910--Reference Documents
Appendix B to Subpart S to Part 1910--Explanatory Data [Reserved]

[[Page 73]]

Appendix C to Subpart S to Part 1910--Tables, Notes, and Charts 
          [Reserved]

                 Subpart T--Commercial Diving Operations

                                 General

1910.401  Scope and application.
1910.402  Definitions.

                         Personnel Requirements

1910.410  Qualifications of dive team.

                      General Operations Procedures

1910.420  Safe practices manual.
1910.421  Pre-dive procedures.
1910.422  Procedures during dive.
1910.423  Post-dive procedures.

                     Specific Operations Procedures

1910.424  SCUBA diving.
1910.425  Surface-supplied air diving.
1910.426  Mixed-gas diving.
1910.427  Liveboating.

                  Equipment Procedures and Requirements

1910.430  Equipment.

                              Recordkeeping

1910.440  Recordkeeping requirements.
1910.441  Effective date.

Appendix A to Subpart T to Part 1910--Examples of Conditions Which May 
          Restrict or Limit Exposure to Hyperbaric Conditions
Appendix B to Subpart T to Part 1910--Guidelines for Scientific Diving

                         Subparts U-Y [Reserved]

1910.442--1910.999  [Reserved]

    Source: 39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General

    Authority: Secs. 4, 6, 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act 
of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order No. 12-71 
(36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), 1-90 (55 FR 9033), 
or 6-96 (62 FR 111), as applicable.
    Sections 1910.7 and 1910.8 also issued under 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) Section 6(a) of the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (84 Stat. 1593) provides that ``without regard to 
chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, or to the other subsections of 
this section, the Secretary shall, as soon as practicable during the 
period beginning with the effective date of this Act and ending 2 years 
after such date, by rule promulgate as an occupational safety or health 
standard any national consensus standard, and any established Federal 
standard, unless he determines that the promulgation of such a standard 
would not result in improved safety or health for specifically 
designated employees.'' The legislative purpose of this provision is to 
establish, as rapidly as possible and without regard to the rule-making 
provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, standards with which 
industries are generally familiar, and on whose adoption interested and 
affected persons have already had an opportunity to express their views. 
Such standards are either (1) national concensus standards on whose 
adoption affected persons have reached substantial agreement, or (2) 
Federal standards already established by Federal statutes or 
regulations.
    (b) This part carries out the directive to the Secretary of Labor 
under section 6(a) of the Act. It contains occupational safety and 
health standards which have been found to be national consensus 
standards or established Federal standards.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
    (a) Act means the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (84 Stat. 1590).
    (b) Assistant Secretary of Labor means the Assistant Secretary of 
Labor for Occupational Safety and Health;
    (c) Employer means a person engaged in a business affecting commerce 
who has employees, but does not include the United States or any State 
or political subdivision of a State;
    (d) Employee means an employee of an employer who is employed in a 
business of his employer which affects commerce;
    (e) Commerce means trade, traffic, commerce, transportation, or 
communication among the several States, or between a State and any place 
outside thereof, or within the District of Columbia, or a possession of 
the United States (other than the Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands), or between

[[Page 74]]

points in the same State but through a point outside thereof;
    (f) Standard means a standard which requires conditions, or the 
adoption or use of one or more practices, means, methods, operations, or 
processes, reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or 
healthful employment and places of employment;
    (g) National consensus standard means any standard or modification 
thereof which (1) has been adopted and promulgated by a nationally 
recognized standards-producing organization under procedures whereby it 
can be determined by the Secretary of Labor or by the Assistant 
Secretary of Labor that persons interested and affected by the scope or 
provisions of the standard have reached substantial agreement on its 
adoption, (2) was formulated in a manner which afforded an opportunity 
for diverse views to be considered, and (3) has been designated as such 
a standard by the Secretary or the Assistant Secretary, after 
consultation with other appropriate Federal agencies; and
    (h) Established Federal standard means any operative standard 
established by any agency of the United States and in effect on April 
28, 1971, or contained in any Act of Congress in force on the date of 
enactment of the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and Health Act.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.3  Petitions for the issuance, amendment, or repeal of a standard.

    (a) Any interested person may petition in writing the Assistant 
Secretary of Labor to promulgate, modify, or revoke a standard. The 
petition should set forth the terms or the substance of the rule 
desired, the effects thereof if promulgated, and the reasons therefor.
    (b)(1) The relevant legislative history of the Act indicates 
congressional recognition of the American National Standards Institute 
and the National Fire Protection Association as the major sources of 
national consensus standards. National consensus standards adopted on 
May 29, 1971, pursuant to section 6(a) of the Act are from those two 
sources. However, any organization which deems itself a producer of 
national consensus standards, within the meaning of section 3(9) of the 
Act, is invited to submit in writing to the Assistant Secretary of Labor 
at any time prior to February 1, 1973, all relevant information which 
may enable the Assistant Secretary to determine whether any of its 
standards satisfy the requirements of the definition of ``national 
consensus standard'' in section 3(9) of the Act.
    (2) Within a reasonable time after the receipt of a submission 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the Assistant Secretary of 
Labor shall publish or cause to be published in the Federal Register a 
notice of such submission, and shall afford interested persons a 
reasonable opportunity to present written data, views, or arguments with 
regard to the question whether any standards of the organization making 
the submission are national consensus standards.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.4  Amendments to this part.

    (a) The Assistant Secretary of Labor shall have all of the authority 
of the Secretary of Labor under sections 3(9) and 6(a) of the Act.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary of Labor may at any time before April 
28, 1973, on his own motion or upon the written petition of any person, 
by rule promulgate as a standard any national consensus standard and any 
established Federal standard, pursuant to and in accordance with section 
6(a) of the Act, and, in addition, may modify or revoke any standard in 
this part 1910. In the event of conflict among any such standards, the 
Assistant Secretary of Labor shall take the action necessary to 
eliminate the conflict, including the revocation or modification of a 
standard in this part, so as to assure the greatest protection of the 
safety or health of the affected employees.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.5  Applicability of standards.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
standards contained in this part shall apply with respect to employments 
performed in a workplace in a State, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, 
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, Wake Island, Outer Continental 
Shelf lands defined in the

[[Page 75]]

Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, Johnston Island, and the Canal Zone.
    (b) None of the standards in this part shall apply to working 
conditions of employees with respect to which Federal agencies other 
than the Department of Labor, or State agencies acting under section 274 
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2021), exercise 
statutory authority to prescribe or enforce standards or regulations 
affecting occupational safety or health.
    (c)(1) If a particular standard is specifically applicable to a 
condition, practice, means, method, operation, or process, it shall 
prevail over any different general standard which might otherwise be 
applicable to the same condition, practice, means, method, operation, or 
process. For example, Sec. 1915.23(c)(3) of this title prescribes 
personal protective equipment for certain ship repairmen working in 
specified areas. Such a standard shall apply, and shall not be deemed 
modified nor superseded by any different general standard whose 
provisions might otherwise be applicable, to the ship repairmen working 
in the areas specified in Sec. 1915.23(c)(3).
    (2) On the other hand, any standard shall apply according to its 
terms to any employment and place of employment in any industry, even 
though particular standards are also prescribed for the industry, as in 
subpart B or subpart R of this part, to the extent that none of such 
particular standards applies. To illustrate, the general standard 
regarding noise exposure in Sec. 1910.95 applies to employments and 
places of employment in pulp, paper, and paperboard mills covered by 
Sec. 1910.261.
    (d) In the event a standard protects on its face a class of persons 
larger than employees, the standard shall be applicable under this part 
only to employees and their employment and places of employment.
    (e) [Reserved]
    (f) An employer who is in compliance with any standard in this part 
shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirement of section 
5(a)(1) of the Act, but only to the extent of the condition, practice, 
means, method, operation, or process covered by the standard.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 58 FR 35308, June 30, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.6  Incorporation by reference.

    (a)(1) The standards of agencies of the U.S. Government, and 
organizations which are not agencies of the U.S. Government which are 
incorporated by reference in this part, have the same force and effect 
as other standards in this part. Only the mandatory provisions (i.e., 
provisions containing the word ``shall'' or other mandatory language) of 
standards incorporated by reference are adopted as standards under the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act.
    (2) Any changes in the standards incorporated by reference in this 
part and an official historic file of such changes are available for 
inspection at the national office of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210.
    (3) The materials listed in paragraphs (b) through (w) of this 
section are incorporated by reference in the corresponding sections 
noted as they exist on the date of the approval, and a notice of any 
change in these materials will be published in the Federal Register. 
These incorporations by reference were approved by the Director of the 
Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.
    (4) Copies of the following standards that are issued by the 
respective private standards organizations may be obtained from the 
issuing organizations. The materials are available for purchase at the 
corresponding addresses of the private standards organizations noted 
below. In addition, all are available for inspection at the Office of 
the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, 
Washington DC, and through the OSHA Docket Office, room N2625, U.S. 
Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Ave., Washington, DC 20210, or any 
of its regional offices.
    (b) The following material is available for purchase from the 
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), 1014 
Broadway, Cincinnati OH 45202:

[[Page 76]]

    (1) ACGIH Manual ``Industrial Ventilation'' (1970), incorporation by 
reference (IBR) approved for Sec. 1910.94(d) (7)(iv) and (8)(i).
    (2) Threshold Limit Values and Biological Exposure Indices for 1986-
87 (1986), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.120, PEL definition.
    (c) The following material is available for purchase from the 
American Society of Agricultural Engineers (ASAE), 2950 Niles Road, Post 
Office Box 229, St. Joseph, MI 49085:
    (1) ASAE Emblem for Identifying Slow Moving Vehicles, ASAE S276.2 
(1968), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.145(d)(10).
    (2) [Reserved]
    (d) The following material is available for purchase from the 
Agriculture Ammonia Institute-Rubber Manufacturers (AAI-RMA) 
Association, 1400 K St. NW, Washington DC 20005:
    (1) AAI-RMA Specifications for Anhydrous Ammonia Hose, IBR approved 
for Sec. 1910.111(b)(8)(i).
    (2) [Reserved]
    (e) The following material is available for purchase from the 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 11 West 42nd St., New 
York, NY 10036:
    (1) ANSI A10.2-44 Safety Code for Building Construction, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.144(a)(1)(ii).
    (2) ANSI A10.3-70 Safety Requirements for Explosive-Actuated 
Fastening Tools, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.243(d)(1)(i).
    (3) ANSI A11.1-65 (R 70) Practice for Industrial Lighting, IBR 
approved for Secs. 1910.219(c)(5)(iii); 1910.261 (a)(3)(i), (c)(10), and 
(k)(21); and 1910.265(c)(2).
    (4) ANSI A11.1-65 Practice for Industrial Lighting, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.262(c)(6) and 1910.265(d)(2)(i)(a).
    (5) ANSI A12.1-67 Safety Requirements for Floor and Wall Openings, 
Railings, and Toe Boards, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.66 appendix D, 
(c)(4); 1910.68 (b)(4) and (b)(8)(ii); 1910.261 (a)(3)(ii), (b)(3), 
(c)(3)(i), (c)(15)(ii), (e)(4), (g)(13), (h)(1), (h)(3)(vi), (j)(4) (ii) 
and (iv), (j)(5)(i), (k)(6), (k)(13)(i), and (k)(15).
    (6) ANSI A13.1-56 Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems, 
IBR approved for Secs. 1910.253(d)(4)(ii); 1910.261(a)(3)(iii); 
1910.262(c)(7).
    (7) ANSI A14.1-68 Safety Code for Portable Wood Ladders, 
Supplemented by ANSI A14.1a-77, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261 
(a)(3)(iv) and (c)(3)(i).
    (8) ANSI A14.2-56 Safety Code for Portable Metal Ladders, 
Supplemented by ANSI A14.2a-77, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(v) 
and (c)(3)(i).
    (9) ANSI A14.3-56 Safety Code for Fixed Ladders, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.68(b) (4) and (12); 1910.179(c)(2); and 1910.261 (a)(3)(vi) 
and (c)(3)(i).
    (10) ANSI A17.1-65 Safety Code for Elevators, Dumbwaiters and Moving 
Walks, Including Supplements, A17.1a (1967); A17.1b (1968); A17.1c 
(1969); A17.1d (1970), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(vii), 
(g)(11)(i), and (l)(4).
    (11) ANSI A17.2-60 Practice for the Inspection of Elevators, 
Including Supplements, A17.2a (1965), A17.2b (1967), IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.261(a)(3)(viii).
    (12) ANSI A90.1-69 Safety Standard for Manlifts, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.68(b)(3).
    (13) ANSI A92.2-69 Standard for Vehicle Mounted Elevating and 
Rotating Work Platforms, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.67 (b)(1), (2), 
(c)(3), and (4) and 1910.268(s)(1)(v).
    (14) ANSI A120.1-70 Safety Code for Powered Platforms for Exterior 
Building Maintenance, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.66 app. D (b) through 
(d).
    (15) ANSI B7.1-70 Safety Code for the Use, Care and Protection of 
Abrasive Wheels, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.94(b)(5)(i)(a); 
1910.215(b)(12); and 1910.218(j)(5).
    (16) ANSI B15.1-53 (R 58) Safety Code for Mechanical Power 
Transmission Apparatus, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.68(b)(4) and 
1910.261 (a)(3)(ix), (b)(1), (e)(3), (e)(9), (f)(4), (j)(5)(iv), 
(k)(12), and (l)(3).
    (17) ANSI B20.1-57 Safety Code for Conveyors, Cableways, and Related 
Equipment, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.218(j)(3); 1910.261 (a)(3)(x), 
(b)(1), (c)(15)(iv), (f)(4), and (j)(2); 1910.265(c)(18)(i).
    (18) ANSI B30.2-43 (R 52) Safety Code for Cranes, Derricks, and 
Hoists, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(xi), (c)(2)(vi), and 
(c)(8) (i) and (iv).
    (19) ANSI B30.2.0-67 Safety Code for Overhead and Gantry Cranes, IBR 
approved for Secs. 1910.179(b)(2); 1910.261 (a)(3)(xii), (c)(2)(v), and 
(c)(8) (i) and (iv).

[[Page 77]]

    (20) ANSI B30.5-68 Safety Code for Crawler, Locomotive, and Truck 
Cranes, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.180(b)(2) and 1910.261(a)(3)(xiii).
    (21) ANSI B30.6-69 Safety Code for Derricks, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.181(b)(2) and 1910.268(j)(4)(iv) (E) and (H).
    (22) ANSI B31.1-55 Code for Pressure Piping, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.261(g)(18)(iii).
    (23) ANSI B31.1-67, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.253(d)(1)(i)(A)
    (24) ANSI B31.1a-63 Addenda to ANSI B31.1 (1955), IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.261(g)(18)(iii).
    (25) ANSI B31.1-67 and Addenda B31.1 (1969) Code for Pressure 
Piping, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.103(b)(1)(iii)(b); 
1910.104(b)(5)(ii); 1910.218 (d)(4) and (e)(1)(iv); and 1910.261 
(a)(3)(xiv) and (g)(18)(iii).
    (26) ANSI B31.2-68 Fuel Gas Piping, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.261(g)(18)(iii).
    (27) ANSI B31.3-66 Petroleum Refinery Piping, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.103(b)(3)(v)(b).
    (28) ANSI B31.5-66 Addenda B31.5a (1968) Refrigeration Piping, IB 
approved for Secs. 1910.103(b)(3)(v)(b) and 1910.111(b)(7)(iii).
    (29) ANSI B56.1-69 Safety Standard for Powered Industrial Trucks, 
IBR approved for Secs. 1910.178(a) (2) and (3) and 1910.261 (a)(3)(xv), 
(b)(6), (m)(2), and (m)(5)(iii).
    (30) ANSI B57.1-65 Compressed Gas Cylinder Valve Outlet and Inlet 
Connections, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.253(b)(1)(iii).
    (31) ANSI B71.1-68 Safety Specifications for Power Lawn Mowers, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.243(e)(1)(i).
    (32) ANSI B175.1-1991, Safety Requirements for Gasoline-Powered 
Chain Saws 1910.266(e)(2)(i).
    (33) ANSI C1-71 National Electrical Code, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.66 appendix D (c)(22) (i) and (vii).
    (34) ANSI C33.2-56 Safety Standard for Transformer-Type Arc Welding 
Machines, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.254(b)(1).
    (35) ANSI D8.1-67 Practices for Railroad Highway Grade Crossing 
Protection, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.265(c)(31)(i).
    (36) ANSI H23.1-70 Seamless Copper Water Tube Specification, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.110(b) (8)(ii) and (13)(ii)(b)(1).
    (37) ANSI H38.7-69 Specification for Aluminum Alloy Seamless Pipe 
and Seamless Extruded Tube, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.110(b)(8)(i).
    (38) ANSI J6.4-71 Standard Specification for Rubber Insulating 
Blankets, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.268 (f)(1) and (n)(11)(v).
    (39) ANSI J6.6-71 Standard Specification for Rubber Insulating 
Gloves, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.268 (f)(1) and (n)(11)(iv).
    (40) ANSI K13.1-67 Identification of Gas Mask Canisters, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(xvi) and (h)(2)(iii).
    (41) ANSI K61.1-60 Safety Requirements for the Storage and Handling 
of Anhydrous Ammonia, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.111(b)(11)(i).
    (42) ANSI K61.1-66 Safety Requirements for the Storage and Handling 
of Anhydrous Ammonia, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.111(b)(11)(i).
    (43) ANSI O1.1-54 (R 61) Safety Code for Woodworking Machinery, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(xvii), (e)(7), and (i)(2).
    (44) ANSI S1.4-71 (R 76) Specification for Sound Level Meters, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.95 appendixes D and I.
    (45) ANSI S1.11-71 (R 76) Specification for Octave, Half-Octave and 
Third-Octave Band Filter Sets, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.95 appendix D.
    (46) ANSI S3.6-69 Specifications for Audiometers, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.95(h)(2) and (5)(ii) and appendix D.
    (47) ANSI Z4.1-68 Requirements for Sanitation in Places of 
Employment, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(xviii) and 
(g)(15)(vi).
    (48) ANSI Z4.2-42 Standard Specifications for Drinking Fountains, 
IBR approved for Sec. 1910.142(c)(4).
    (49) ANSI Z9.1-51 Safety Code for Ventilation and Operation of Open 
Surface Tanks, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.94(c)(5)(iii)(e) and 1910.261 
(a)(3)(xix), (g)(18)(v), and (h)(2)(i).
    (50) ANSI Z9.2-60 Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of 
Local Exhaust Systems, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.94 (a)(4)(i) 
introductory text, (a)(6) introductory text, (b)(3)(ix), (b)(4) (i) and 
(ii), (c)(3)(i) introductory text, (c)(5)(iii)(b), (c)(7)(iv)(a), 
(d)(1)(ii), (d)(3), (d)(7)(iv), (d)(8)(i); 1910.261

[[Page 78]]

(a)(3)(xx), (g)(1) (i) and (iii), and (h)(2)(ii).
    (51) ANSI Z12.12-68 Standard for the Prevention of Sulfur Fires and 
Explosions, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(xxi), (d)(1)(i), 
(f)(2)(iv), and (g)(1)(i).
    (52) ANSI Z12.20-62 (R 69) Code for the Prevention of Dust 
Explosions in Woodworking and Wood Flour Manufacturing Plants, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.265(c)(20)(i).
    (53) ANSI Z21.30-64 Requirements for Gas Appliances and Gas Piping 
Installations, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.265(c)(15).
    (54) ANSI Z24.22-57 Method of Measurement of Real-Ear Attenuation of 
Ear Protectors at Threshold, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261(a)(3)(xxii).
    (55) ANSI Z33.1-61 Installation of Blower and Exhaust Systems for 
Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal or Conveying, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.94(a)(4)(i); 1910.261 (a)(3)(xxiii) and (f)(5); and 
1910.265(c)(20)(i).
    (56) ANSI Z33.1-66 Installation of Blower and Exhaust Systems for 
Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal or Conveying, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.94(a)(2)(ii).
    (57) ANSI Z35.1-68 Specifications for Accident Prevention Signs, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.261 (a)(3)(xxiv) and (c)(16).
    (58) ANSI Z41.1-67 Men's Safety Toe Footwear, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.94(a)(5)(v); 1910.136(b)(2) and 1910.261(i)(4).
    (59) ANSI Z41-91, Personal Protection-Protective Footwear, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.136(b)(1).
    (60) ANSI Z48.1-54 Method for Marking Portable Compressed Gas 
Containers to Identify the Material Contained, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.103(b)(1)(i)(c); 1910.110(b)(5)(iii); and 1910.253(b)(1)(ii).
    (61) ANSI Z48.1-54 (R 70) Method for Marking Portable Compressed Gas 
Containers To Identify the Material Contained, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.111(e)(1) and 1910.134(d)(4).
    (62) ANSI Z49.1-67 Safety in Welding and Cutting, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.252(c)(1)(iv) (A) and (B).
    (63) ANSI Z53.1-67 Safety Color Code for Marking Physical Hazards 
and the Identification of Certain Equipment, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.97(a)(3)(ii); 1910.145(d) (2), (4), and (6).
    (64) ANSI Z54.1-63 Safety Standard for Non-Medical X-Ray and Sealed 
Gamma Ray Sources, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.252(d) (1)(vii) and 
(2)(ii).
    (65) ANSI Z87.1-68 Practice of Occupational and Educational Eye and 
Face Protection, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.133(b)(2); 
1910.252(b)(2)(ii)(I); and 1910.261 (a)(3)(xxv), (d)(1)(ii), (f)(5), 
(g)(10), (g)(15)(v), (g)(18)(ii), and (i)(4).
    (66) ANSI Z87.1-89, Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye 
and Face Protection, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.133(b)(1).
    (67) ANSI Z88.2-69 Practices for Respiratory Protection, IBR 
approved for Secs. 1910.94(c)(6)(iii)(a); 1910.134(c); and 1910.261 
(a)(3)(xxvi), (b)(2), (f)(5), (g)(15)(v), (h)(2) (iii) and (iv), and 
(i)(4).
    (68) ANSI Z89.1-69 Safety Requirements for Industrial Head 
Protection, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.135(b)(2); and 1910.261 
(a)(3)(xxvii), (b)(2), (g)(15)(v), and (i)(4).
    (69) ANSI Z89.1-86, Protective Headwear for Industrial Workers 
Requirements, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.135(b)(1).
    (70) ANSI Z89.2-71 Safety Requirements for Industrial Protective 
Helmets for Electrical Workers, Class B, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.268(i)(1).
    (f) The following material is available for purchase from the 
American Petroleum Institute (API), 1220 L Street NW, Washington DC 
20005:
    (1) API 12A (Sept. 1951) Specification for Oil Storage Tanks With 
Riveted Shells, 7th Ed., IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(i)(a)(2).
    (2) API 12B (May 1958) Specification for Bolted Production Tanks, 
11th Ed., With Supplement No. 1, Mar. 1962, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(i)(a)(3).
    (3) API 12D (Aug. 1957) Specification for Large Welded Production 
Tanks, 7th Ed., IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(i)(a)(3).
    (4) API 12F (Mar. 1961) Specification for Small Welded Production 
Tanks, 5th Ed., IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(i)(a)(3).
    (5) API 620, Fourth Ed. (1970) Including appendix R, Recommended 
Rules for Design and Construction of Large Welded Low Pressure Storage 
Tanks, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.103(c)(1)(i)(a); 
1910.106(b)(1)(iv)(b)(1); and 1910.111(d)(1) (ii) and (iii).

[[Page 79]]

    (6) API 650 (1966) Welded Steel Tanks for Oil Storage, 3rd Ed., IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(iii)(a)(2).
    (7) API 1104 (1968) Standard for Welding Pipelines and Related 
Facilities, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.252(d)(1)(v).
    (8) API 2000 (1968) Venting Atmospheric and Low Pressure Storage 
Tanks, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(b)(2)(iv)(b)(1).
    (9) API 2201 (1963) Welding or Hot Tapping on Equipment Containing 
Flammables, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.252(d)(1)(vi).
    (g) The following material is available for purchase from the 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), United Engineering 
Center, 345 East 47th Street, New York, NY 10017:
    (1) ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII, 1949, 1950, 
1952, 1956, 1959, and 1962 Ed., IBR approved for Secs. 1910.110 
(b)(10)(iii) (Table H-26), (d)(2) (Table H-31); (e)(3)(i) (Table H-32), 
(h)(2) (Table H-34); and 1910.111(b)(2)(vi);
    (2) ASME Code for Pressure Vessels, 1968 Ed., IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.106(i)(3)(i); 1910.110(g)(2)(iii)(b)(2); and 1910.217(b)(12);
    (3) ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII, 1968, IBR 
approved for Secs. 1910.103; 1910.104(b)(4)(ii); 1910.106 
(b)(1)(iv)(b)(2) and (i)(3)(ii); 1910.107; 1910.110(b)(11) (i)(b) and 
(iii)(a)(1); 1910.111(b)(2) (i), (ii), and (iv); and 1910.169(a)(2) (i) 
and (ii);
    (4) ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII, Paragraph UG-
84, 1968, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.104 (b)(4)(ii) and (b)(5)(iii);
    (5) ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII, Unfired 
Pressure Vessels, Including Addenda (1969), IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.261; 1910.262; 1910.263(i)(24)(ii);
    (6) Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels for Petroleum Liquids and 
Gases of the API and the ASME, 1951 Ed., IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.110(b)(3)(iii); and
    (7) ASME B56.6-1992 (with addenda), Safety Standard for Rough 
Terrain Forklift Trucks, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.266(f)(4).
    (h) The following material is available for purchase from the 
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 1916 Race Street, 
Philadelphia, PA 19103:
    (1) ASTM A 47-68 Malleable Iron Castings, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.111(b)(7)(vi).
    (2) ASTM A 53-69 Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.110(b)(8)(i) (a) and (b) and 1910.111(b)(7)(iv).
    (3) ASTM A 126-66 Gray Iron Casting for Valves, Flanges and Pipe 
Fitting, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.111(b)(7)(vi).
    (4) ASTM A 391-65 (ANSI G61.1-1968) Alloy Steel Chain, IBR approved 
for Sec. 1910.184(e)(4).
    (5) ASTM A 395-68 Ductile Iron for Use at Elevated Temperatures, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.111(b)(7)(vi).
    (6) ASTM B 88-69 Seamless Copper Water Tube, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.110(b) (8)(i)(a) and (13)(ii)(b)(1).
    (7) ASTM B 88-66A Seamless Copper Water Tube, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.252(d)(1)(i)(A)(2).
    (8) ASTM B 117-64 Salt Spray (Fog) Test, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.268(g)(2)(i)(A).
    (9) ASTM B 210-68 Aluminum-Alloy Drawn Seamless Tubes, IBR approved 
for Sec. 1910.110(b)(8)(ii).
    (10) ASTM B 241-69, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.110(b)(8)(i) 
introductory text.
    (11) ASTM D 5-65 Test for Penetration by Bituminous Materials, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.106(a)(17).
    (12) ASTM D 56-70 Test for Flash Point by Tag Closed Tester, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.106(a)(14)(i).
    (13) ASTM D 86-62 Test for Distillation of Petroleum Products, IBR 
approved for Secs. 1910.106(a)(5) and 1910.119(b) ``Boiling point.''
    (14) ASTM D 88-56 Test for Saybolt Viscosity, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.106(a)(37).
    (15) ASTM D 93-71 Test for Flash Point by Pensky Martens, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.106(a)(14)(ii).
    (16) ASTM D 323-68, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(a)(30)
    (17) ASTM D 445-65 Test for Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque 
Liquids, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(a)(37).
    (18) ASTM D 1692-68 Test for Flammability of Plastic Sheeting and 
Cellular Plastics, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.103(c)(1)(v)(d).

[[Page 80]]

    (19) ASTM D 2161-66 Conversion Tables For SUS, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.106(a)(37).
    (i) The following material is available for purchase from the 
American Welding Society (AWS), 550 NW, LeJeune Road, P.O. Box 351040, 
Miami FL 33135:
    (1) AWS A3.0 (1969) Terms and Definitions, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.251(c).
    (2) AWS A6.1 (1966) Recommended Safe Practices for Gas Shielded Arc 
Welding, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.254(d)(1).
    (3) AWS B3.0-41 Standard Qualification Procedure, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.67(c)(5)(i).
    (4) AWS D1.0-1966 Code for Welding in Building Construction, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.27(b)(6).
    (5) AWS D2.0-69 Specifications for Welding Highway and Railway 
Bridges, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.67(c)(5)(iv).
    (6) AWS D8.4-61 Recommended Practices for Automotive Welding Design, 
IBR approved for Sec. 1910.67(c)(5)(ii).
    (7) AWS D10.9-69 Standard Qualification of Welding Procedures and 
Welders for Piping and Tubing, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.67(c)(5)(iii).
    (j) The following material is available for purchase from the 
Department of Commerce:
    (1) Commercial Standard, CS 202-56 (1961) ``Industrial Lifts and 
Hinged Loading Ramps,'' IBR approved for Sec. 1910.30(a)(3).
    (2) Publication ``Model Performance Criteria for Structural Fire 
Fighters' Helmets,'' IBR approved for Sec. 1910.156(e)(5)(i).
    (k) The following material is available for purchase from the 
Compressed Gas Association (CGA), 1235 Jefferson Davis Highway, 
Arlington, VA 22202:
    (1) CGA C-6 (1968) Standards for Visual Inspection of Compressed Gas 
Cylinders, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.101(a).
    (2) CGA C-8 (1962) Standard for Requalification of ICC-3HT 
Cylinders, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.101(a).
    (3) CGA G-1 (1966) Acetylene, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.102(a).
    (4) CGA G-1.3 (1959) Acetylene Transmission for Chemical Synthesis, 
IBR approved for Sec. 1910.102(b).
    (5) CGA G-1.4 (1966) Standard for Acetylene Cylinder Charging 
Plants, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.102(b).
    (6) CGA G-7.1 (1966) Commodity Specification, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.134(d)(1).
    (7) CGA G-8.1 (1964) Standard for the Installation of Nitrous Oxide 
Systems at Consumer Sites, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.105.
    (8) CGA P-1 (1965) Safe Handling of Compressed Gases, IBR approved 
for Sec. 1910.101(b).
    (9) CGA P-3 (1963) Specifications, Properties, and Recommendations 
for Packaging, Transportation, Storage and Use of Ammonium Nitrate, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.109(i)(1)(ii)(b).
    (10) CGA S-1.1 (1963) and 1965 Addenda. Safety Release Device 
Standards--Cylinders for Compressed Gases, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.101(c); 1910.103(c)(1)(iv)(a)(2).
    (11) CGA S-1.2 (1963) Safety Release Device Standards, Cargo and 
Portable Tanks for Compressed Gases, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.101(c); 
1910.103(c)(1)(iv)(a)(2).
    (12) CGA S-1.3 (1959) Safety Release Device Standards-Compressed Gas 
Storage Containers, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.103(c)(1)(iv)(a)(2); 
1910.104(b)(6)(iii); and 1910.111(d)(4)(ii)(b).
    (13) CGA 1957 Standard Hose Connection Standard, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.253(e) (4)(v) and (5)(iii).
    (14) CGA and RMA (Rubber Manufacturer's Association) Specification 
for Rubber Welding Hose (1958), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.253(e)(5)(i).
    (15) CGA 1958 Regulator Connection Standard, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.253(e) (4)(iv) and (6).
    (l) The following material is available for purchase from the Crane 
Manufacturer's Association of America, Inc. (CMAA), 1 Thomas Circle NW, 
Washington DC 20005:
    (1) CMAA Specification 1B61, Specifications for Electric Overhead 
Traveling Cranes, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.179(b)(6)(i).
    (2) [Reserved]
    (m) The following material is available for purchase from the 
General Services Administration:
    (1) GSA Pub. GG-B-0067b, Air Compressed for Breathing Purposes, or 
Interim Federal Specifications, Apr. 1965, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.134(d)(4).
    (2) [Reserved]

[[Page 81]]

    (n) The following material is available for purchase from the 
Department of Health and Human Services:
    (1) Publication No. 76-120 (1975), List of Personal Hearing 
Protectors and Attenuation Data, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.95 App. B.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (o) The following material is available for purchase from the 
Institute of Makers of Explosives (IME), 420 Lexington Avenue, New York, 
NY 10017:
    (1) IME Pamphlet No. 17, 1960, Safety in the Handling and Use of 
Explosives, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.261 (a)(4)(iii) and (c)(14)(ii).
    (2) [Reserved]
    (p) The following material is available for purchase from the 
National Electrical Manufacturer's Association (NEMA):
    (1) NEMA EW-1 (1962) Requirements for Electric Arc Welding 
Apparatus, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.254(b)(1).
    (2) [Reserved]
    (q) The following material is available for purchase from the 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Batterymarch Park, Quincy, 
MA 02269:
    (1) NFPA 30 (1969) Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.178(f)(1).
    (2) NFPA 32-1970 Standard for Dry Cleaning Plants, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.106(j)(6)(i).
    (3) NFPA 33-1969 Standard for Spray Finishing Using Flammable and 
Combustible Material, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.94(c) (1)(ii), (2), 
(3) (i) and (iii), and (5).
    (4) NFPA 34-1966 Standard for Dip Tanks Containing Flammable or 
Combustible Liquids, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.94(d)(2)(iv).
    (5) NFPA 35-1970 Standard for the Manufacture of Organic Coatings, 
IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(j)(6)(ii).
    (6) NFPA 36-1967 Standard for Solvent Extraction Plants, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.106(j)(6)(iii).
    (7) NFPA 37-1970 Standard for the Installation and Use of Stationary 
Combustion Engines and Gas Turbines, IBR approved for 
Secs. 1910.106(j)(6)(iv) and 1910.110 (b)(20)(iv)(c) and (e)(11).
    (8) NFPA 51B-1962 Standard for Fire Protection in Use of Cutting and 
Welding Processes, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.252(a)(1) introductory 
text.
    (9) NFPA 54-1969 Standard for the Installation of Gas Appliances and 
Gas Piping, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.110(b)(20)(iv)(a).
    (10) NFPA 54A-1969 Standard for the Installation of Gas Piping and 
Gas Equipment on Industrial Premises and Certain Other Premises, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.110(b)(20)(iv)(b).
    (11) NFPA 58-1969 Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied 
Petroleum Gases (ANSI Z106.1-1970), IBR approved for Secs. 1910.110 
(b)(3)(iv) and (i)(3) (i) and (ii); and 1910.178(f)(2).
    (12) NFPA 59-1968 Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied 
Petroleum Gases at Utility Gas Plants, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.110 
(b)(3)(iv) and (i)(2)(iv).
    (13) NFPA 62-1967 Standard for the Prevention of Dust Explosions in 
the Production, Packaging, and Handling of Pulverized Sugar and Cocoa, 
IBR approved for Sec. 1910.263(k)(2)(i).
    (14) NFPA 68-1954 Guide for Explosion Venting, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.94(a)(2)(iii).
    (15) NFPA 70-1971 National Electrical Code, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.66 App. D(c)(2).
    (16) NFPA 78-1968 Lightning Protection Code, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.109(i)(6)(ii).
    (17) NFPA 80-1968 Standard for Fire Doors and Windows, IBR approved 
for Sec. 1910.106(d)(4)(i).
    (18) NFPA 80-1970 Standard for the Installation of Fire Doors and 
Windows, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.253(f)(6)(i)(I).
    (19) NFPA 86A-1969 Standard for Oven and Furnaces Design, Location 
and Equipment, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.107 (j)(1) and (l)(3) and 
1910.108 (b)(2) and (d)(2).
    (20) NFPA 91-1961 Standard for the Installation of Blower and 
Exhaust Systems for Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal or Conveying (ANSI 
Z33.1-61), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.107(d)(1).
    (21) NFPA 91-1969 Standards for Blower and Exhaust Systems, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.108(b)(1).
    (22) NFPA 96-1970 Standard for the Installation of Equipment for the 
Removal of Smoke and Grease Laden Vapors from Commercial Cooking 
Equipment, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.110(b)(20)(iv)(d).

[[Page 82]]

    (23) NFPA 101-1970 Code for Life Safety From Fire in Buildings and 
Structures, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.261(a)(4)(ii).
    (24) NFPA 203M-1970 Manual on Roof Coverings, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.109(i)(1)(iii)(c).
    (25) NFPA 251-1969 Standard Methods of Fire Tests of Building 
Construction and Materials, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.106 (d)(3)(ii) 
introductory text and (d)(4)(i).
    (26) NFPA 302-1968 Fire Protection Standard for Motor-Craft 
(Pleasure and Commercial), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.265(d)(2)(iv) 
introductory text.
    (27) NFPA 385-1966 Recommended Regulatory Standard for Tank Vehicles 
for Flammable and Combustible Liquids, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.106(g)(1)(i)(e)(1).
    (28) NFPA 496-1967 Standard for Purged Enclosures for Electrical 
Equipment in Hazardous Locations, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.103(c)(1)(ix)(e)(1).
    (29) NFPA 505-1969 Standard for Type Designations, Areas of Use, 
Maintenence, and Operation of Powered Industrial Trucks, IBR approved 
for Sec. 1910.110(e)(2)(iv).
    (30) NFPA 566-1965 Standard for the Installation of Bulk Oxygen 
Systems at Consumer Sites, IBR approved for Secs. 1910.253 (b)(4)(iv) 
and (c)(2)(v).
    (31) NFPA 656-1959 Code for the Prevention of Dust Ignition in Spice 
Grinding Plants, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.263(k)(2)(i).
    (32) NFPA 1971-1975 Protective Clothing for Structural Fire 
Fighting, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.156(e)(3)(ii) introductory text.
    (r) The following material is available for purchase from the 
National Food Plant Institute, 1700 K St. NW., Washington, DC 20006:
    (1) Definition and Test Procedures for Ammonium Nitrate Fertilizer 
(Nov. 1964), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.109 Table H-22, ftn. 3.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (s) The following material is available for purchase from the 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH):
    (1) Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances, 1978, IBR 
approved for Sec. 1910.20(c)(13)(i) and appendix B.
    (2) Development of Criteria for Fire Fighters Gloves; Vol. II, Part 
II; Test Methods, 1976, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.156(e)(4)(i) 
introductory text.
    (3) NIOSH Recommendations for Occupational Safety and Health 
Standards (Sept. 1987), IBR approved for Sec. 1910.120 PEL definition.
    (t) The following material is available for purchase from the Public 
Health Service:
    (1) U.S. Pharmacopeia, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.134(d)(1).
    (2) Publication No. 934 (1962), Food Service Sanitation Ordinance 
and Code, Part V of the Food Service Sanitation Manual, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.142(i)(1).
    (u) The following material is available for purchase from the 
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), 485 Lexington Avenue, New York, 
NY 10017:
    (1) SAE J185, June 1988, Recommended Practice for Access Systems for 
Off-Road Machines, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.266(f)(5)(i).
    (2) SAE J231, January 1981, Minimum Performance Criteria for Falling 
Object Protective Structure (FOPS), IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.266(f)(3)(ii).
    (3) SAE J386, June 1985, Operator Restraint Systems for Off-Road 
Work Machines, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.266(d)(3)(iv).
    (4) SAE J397, April 1988, Deflection Limiting Volume-ROPS/FOPS 
Laboratory Evaluation, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.266(f)(3)(iv).
    (5) SAE 765 (1961) SAE Recommended Practice: Crane Loading Stability 
Test Code, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.180 (c)(1)(iii) and 
(e)(2)(iii)(a).
    (6) SAE J1040, April 1988, Performance Criteria for Rollover 
Protective Structures (ROPS) for Construction, Earthmoving, Forestry and 
Mining Machines, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.266(f)(3)(ii).
    (v) The following material is available for purchase from the 
Fertilizer Institute, 1015 18th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036:
    (1) Standard M-1 (1953, 1955, 1957, 1960, 1961, 1963, 1965, 1966, 
1967, 1968), Superseded by ANSI K61.1-1972, IBR approved for 
Sec. 1910.111(b)(1) (i) and (iii).
    (2) [Reserved]
    (w) The following material is available for purchase from 
Underwriters

[[Page 83]]

Laboratories (UL), 207 East Ohio Street, Chicago, IL 60611:
    (1) UL 58-61 Steel Underground Tanks for Flammable and Combustible 
Liquids, 5th Ed., IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(iii)(a)(1).
    (2) UL 80-63 Steel Inside Tanks for Oil-Burner Fuel, IBR approved 
for Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(iii)(a)(1).
    (3) UL 142-68 Steel Above Ground Tanks for Flammable and Combustible 
Liquids, IBR approved for Sec. 1910.106(b)(1)(iii)(a)(1).
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 5321, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 
FR 9231, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.7  Definition and requirements for a nationally recognized testing laboratory.

    (a) Application. This section shall apply only when the term 
nationally recognized testing laboratory is used in other sections of 
this part.
    (b) Laboratory requirements. The term nationally recognized testing 
laboratory (NRTL) means an organization which is recognized by OSHA in 
accordance with appendix A of this section and which tests for safety, 
and lists or labels or accepts, equipment or materials and which meets 
all of the following criteria:
    (1) For each specified item of equipment or material to be listed, 
labeled or accepted, the NRTL has the capability (including proper 
testing equipment and facilities, trained staff, written testing 
procedures, and calibration and quality control programs) to perform:
    (i) Testing and examining of equipment and materials for workplace 
safety purposes to determine conformance with appropriate test 
standards; or
    (ii) Experimental testing and examining of equipment and materials 
for workplace safety purposes to determine conformance with appropriate 
test standards or performance in a specified manner.
    (2) The NRTL shall provide, to the extent needed for the particular 
equipment or materials listed, labeled, or accepted, the following 
controls or services:
    (i) Implements control procedures for identifying the listed and 
labeled equipment or materials;
    (ii) Inspects the run of production of such items at factories for 
product evaluation purposes to assure conformance with the test 
standards; and
    (iii) Conducts field inspections to monitor and to assure the proper 
use of its identifying mark or labels on products;
    (3) The NRTL is completely independent of employers subject to the 
tested equipment requirements, and of any manufacturers or vendors of 
equipment or materials being tested for these purposes; and,
    (4) The NRTL maintains effective procedures for:
    (i) Producing creditable findings or reports that are objective and 
without bias; and
    (ii) Handling complaints and disputes under a fair and reasonable 
system.
    (c) Test standards. An appropriate test standard referred to in 
Sec. 1910.7(b)(1) (i) and (ii) is a document which specifies the safety 
requirements for specific equipment or class of equipment and is:
    (1) Recognized in the United States as a safety standard providing 
an adequate level of safety, and
    (2) Compatible with and maintained current with periodic revisions 
of applicable national codes and installation standards, and
    (3) Developed by a standards developing organization under a method 
providing for input and consideration of views of industry groups, 
experts, users, consumers, governmental authorities, and others having 
broad experience in the safety field involved, or
    (4) In lieu of paragraphs (c) (1), (2), and (3), the standard is 
currently designated as an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
safety-designated product standard or an American Society for Testing 
and Materials (ASTM) test standard used for evaluation of products or 
materials.
    (d) Alternative test standard. If a testing laboratory desires to 
use a test standard other than one allowed under paragraph (c) of this 
section, then the Assistant Secretary of Labor shall evaluate the 
proposed standard to determine that it provides an adequate level of 
safety before it is used.
    (e) Implementation. A testing organization desiring recognition by 
OSHA as an NRTL shall request that OSHA

[[Page 84]]

evaluate its testing and control programs against the requirements in 
this section for any equipment or material it may specify. The 
recognition procedure shall be conducted in accordance with appendix A 
to this section.

   Appendix A to Sec. 1910.7--OSHA Recognition Process for Nationally 
                     Recognized Testing Laboratories

                              Introduction

    This appendix provides requirements and criteria which OSHA will use 
to evaluate and recognize a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory 
(NRTL). This process will include the the evaluation of the product 
evaluation and control programs being operated by the NRTL, as well as 
the NRTL's testing facilities being used in its program. In the 
evaluation of the NRTLs, OSHA will use either consensus-based standards 
currently in use nationally, or other standards or criteria which may be 
considered appropriate. This appendix implements the definition of NRTL 
in 29 CFR 1910.7 which sets out the criteria that a laboratory must meet 
to be recognized by OSHA (initially and on a continuing basis). The 
appendix is broader in scope, providing procedures for renewal, 
expansion and revocation of OSHA recognition. Except as otherwise 
provided, the burden is on the applicant to establish by a preponderance 
of the evidence that it is entitled to recognition as an NRTL. If 
further detailing of these requirements and criteria will assist the 
NRTLs or OSHA in this activity, this detailing will be done through 
appropriate OSHA Program Directives.

               I. Procedures for Initial OSHA Recognition

                            A. Applications.

    1. Eligibility. a. Any testing agency or organization considering 
itself to meet the definition of nationally recognized testing 
laboratory as specified in Sec. 1910.7 may apply for OSHA recognition as 
an NRTL.
    b. However, in determining eligibility for a foreign-based testing 
agency or organization, OSHA shall take into consideration the policy of 
the foreign government regarding both the acceptance in that country of 
testing data, equipment acceptances, and listings, and labeling, which 
are provided through nationally recognized testing laboratories 
recognized by the Assistant Secretary, and the accessibility to 
government recognition or a similar system in that country by U.S.-based 
safety-related testing agencies, whether recognized by the Assistant 
Secretary or not, if such recognition or a similar system is required by 
that country.
    2. Content of application. a. The applicant shall provide sufficient 
information and detail demonstrating that it meets the requirements set 
forth in Sec. 1910.7, in order for an informed decision concerning 
recognition to be made by the Assistant Secretary.
    b. The applicant also shall identify the scope of the NRTL-related 
activity for which the applicant wishes to be recognized. This will 
include identifying the testing methods it will use to test or judge the 
specific equipment and materials for which recognition is being 
requested, unless such test methods are already specified in the test 
standard. If requested to do so by OSHA, the applicant shall provide 
documentation of the efficacy of these testing methods.
    c. The applicant may include whatever enclosures, attachments, or 
exhibits the applicant deems appropriate. The application need not be 
submitted on a Federal form.
    3. Filing office location. The application shall be filed with: NRTL 
Recognition Program, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. 
Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210.
    4. Amendments and withdrawals. a. An application may be revised by 
an applicant at any time prior to the completion of activity under 
paragraph I.B.4. of this appendix.
    b. An application may be withdrawn by an applicant, without 
prejudice, at any time prior to the final decision by the Assistant 
Secretary in paragraph I.B.7.c. of this appendix.

          B. Review and Decision Process; Issuance or Renewal.

    1. Acceptance and on-site review. a. Applications submitted by 
eligible testing agencies will be accepted by OSHA, and their receipt 
acknowledged in writing. After receipt of an application, OSHA may 
request additional information if it believes information relevant to 
the requirements for recognition has been omitted.
    b. OSHA shall, as necessary, conduct an on-site review of the 
testing facilities of the applicant, as well as the applicant's 
administrative and technical practices, and, if necessary, review any 
additional documentation underlying the application.
    c. These on-site reviews will be conducted by qualified individuals 
technically expert in these matters, including, as appropriate, non-
Federal consultants/contractors acceptable to OSHA. The protocol for 
each review will be based on appropriate national consensus standards or 
international guides, with such additions, changes, or deletions as may 
be considered necessary and appropriate in each case by OSHA. A written 
report shall be made of each on-site review and a copy shall be provided 
to the applicant.
    2. Positive finding by staff. If, after review of the application, 
and additional information, and the on-site review report, the applicant 
appears to have met the requirements for

[[Page 85]]

recognition, a written recommendation shall be submitted by the 
responsible OSHA personnel to the Assistant Secretary that the 
application be approved, accompanied by a supporting explanation.
    3. Negative finding by staff.--a. Notification to applicant. If, 
after review of the application, any additional information and the on-
site review report, the applicant does not appear to have met the 
requirements for recognition, the responsible OSHA personnel shall 
notify the applicant in writing, listing the specific requirements of 
Sec. 1910.7 and this appendix which the applicant has not met, and allow 
a reasonable period for response.
    b. Revision of application. (i) After receipt of a notification of 
negative finding (i.e., for intended disapproval of the application), 
and within the response period provided, the applicant may:
    (a) Submit a revised application for further review, which could 
result in a positive finding by the responsible OSHA personnel pursuant 
to subsection I.B.2. of this appendix; or
    (b) Request that the original application be submitted to the 
Assistant Secretary with an attached statement of reasons, supplied by 
the applicant of why the application should be approved.
    (ii) This procedure for applicant notification and potential 
revision shall be used only once during each recognition process.
    4. Preliminary finding by Assistant Secretary. a. The Assistant 
Secretary, or a special designee for this purpose, will make a 
preliminary finding as to whether the applicant has or has not met the 
requirements for recognition, based on the completed application file, 
the written staff recommendation, and the statement of reasons supplied 
by the applicant if there remains a staff recommendation of disapproval.
    b. Notification of this preliminary finding will be sent to the 
applicant and subsequently published in the Federal Register.
    c. This preliminary finding shall not be considered an official 
decision by the Assistant Secretary or OSHA, and does not confer any 
change in status or any interim or temporary recognition for the 
applicant.
    5. Public review and comment period.-- a. The Federal Register 
notice of preliminary finding will provide a period of not less than 60 
calendar days for written comments on the applicant's fulfillment of the 
requirements for recognition. The application, supporting documents, 
staff recommendation, statement of applicant's reasons, and any comments 
received, will be available for public inspection in the OSHA Docket 
Office.
    b. Any member of the public, including the applicant, may supply 
detailed reasons and evidence supporting or challenging the sufficiency 
of the applicant's having met the requirements of the definition in 29 
CFR Sec. 1910.7 and this appendix. Submission of pertinent documents and 
exhibits shall be made in writing by the close of the comment period.
    6. Action after public comment.-- a. Final decision by Assistant 
Secretary. Where the public review and comment record supports the 
Assistant Secretary's preliminary finding concerning the application, 
i.e., absent any serious objections or substantive claims contrary to 
the preliminary finding having been received in writing from the public 
during the comment period, the Assistant Secretary will proceed to final 
written decision on the application. The reasons supporting this 
decision shall be derived from the evidence available as a result of the 
full application, the supporting documentation, the staff finding, and 
the written comments and evidence presented during the public review and 
comment period.
    b. Public announcement. A copy of the Assistant Secretary's final 
decision will be provided to the applicant. Subsequently, a notification 
of the final decision shall be published in the Federal Register. The 
publication date will be the effective date of the recognition.
    c. Review of final decision. There will be no further review 
activity available within the Department of Labor from the final 
decision of the Assistant Secretary.
    7. Action after public objection.-- a. Review of negative 
information. At the discretion of the Assistant Secretary or his 
designee, OSHA may authorize Federal or contract personnel to initiate a 
special review of any information provided in the public comment record 
which appears to require resolution, before a final decision can be 
made.
    b. Supplementation of record. The contents and results of special 
reviews will be made part of this record by the Assistant Secretary by 
either:
    (i) Reopening the written comment period for public comments on 
these reviews; or
    (ii) Convening an informal hearing to accept public comments on 
these reviews, conducted under applicable OSHA procedures for similar 
hearings.
    c. Final decision by the Assistant Secretary. The Assistant 
Secretary shall issue a decision as to whether it has been demonstrated, 
based on a preponderance of the evidence, that the applicant meets the 
requirements for recognition. The reasons supporting this decision shall 
be derived from the evidence available as a result of the full 
application, the supporting documentation, the staff finding, the 
comments and evidence presented during the public review and comment 
period, and written to transcribed evidence received during any 
subsequent reopening of the written comment period or informal public 
hearing held.
    d. Public announcement. A copy of the Assistant Secretary's final 
decision will be provided to the applicant, and a notification

[[Page 86]]

will be published in the Federal Register subsequently announcing the 
decision.
    e. Review of final decision. There will be no further review 
activity available within the Department of Labor from the final 
decision of the Assistant Secretary.
    c. Terms and conditions of recognition. The following terms and 
conditions shall be part of every recognition:
    1. Letter of recognition. The recognition by OSHA of any NRTL will 
be evidenced by a letter of recognition from OSHA. The letter will 
provide the specific details of the scope of the OSHA recognition, 
including the specific equipment or materials for which OSHA recognition 
has been granted, as well as any specific conditions imposed by OSHA.
    2. Period of recognition. The recognition by OSHA of each NRTL will 
be valid for five years, unless terminated before the expiration of the 
period. The dates of the period of recognition will be stated in the 
recognition letter.
    3. Constancy in operations. The recognized NRTL shall continue to 
satisfy all the requirements or limitations in the letter of recognition 
during the period of recognition.
    4. Accurate publicity. The OSHA-recognized NRTL shall not engage in 
or permit others to engage in misrepresentation of the scope or 
conditions of its recognition.
    5. Temporary Recognition of Certain NRTLs. a. Notwithstanding all 
other requirements and provisions of Sec. 1910.7 and this appendix, the 
following two organizations are recognized temporarily as nationally 
recognized testing laboratories by the Assistant Secretary for a period 
of five years beginning June 13, 1988 and ending on July 13, 1993:
    (i) Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, 
Illinois 60062.
    (ii) Factory Mutual Research Corporation, 1151 Boston-Providence 
Turnpike, Norwood, Massachusetts 02062.
    b. At the end of the five-year period, the two temporarily 
recognized laboratories shall apply for renewal of OSHA recognition 
utilizing the following procedures established for renewal of OSHA 
recognition.

                      II. Supplementary Procedures.

                        A. Test standard changes.

    A recognized NRTL may change a testing standard or elements 
incorporated in the standard such as testing methods or pass-fail 
criteria by notifying the Assistant Secretary of the change, certifying 
that the revised standard will be at least as effective as the prior 
standard, and providing the supporting data upon which its conclusions 
are based. The NRTL need not inform the Assistant Secretary of minor 
deviations from a test standard such as the use of new instrumentation 
that is more accurate or sensitive than originally called for in the 
standard. The NRTL also need not inform the Assistant Secretary of its 
adoption of revisions to third-party testing standards meeting the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.7(c)(4), if such revisions have been developed 
by the standards developing organization, or of its adoption of 
revisions to other third-party test standards which the developing 
organization has submitted to OSHA. If, upon review, the Assistant 
Secretary or his designee determines that the proposed revised standard 
is not ``substantially equivalent'' to the previous version with regard 
to the level of safety obtained, OSHA will not accept the proposed 
testing standard by the recognized NRTL, and will initiate 
discontinuance of that aspect of OSHA-recognized activity by the NRTL by 
modification of the official letter of recognition. OSHA will publicly 
announce this action and the NRTL will be required to communicate this 
OSHA decision directly to affected manufacturers.

                   B. Expansion of current recognition

    1. Eligibility. A recognized NRTL may apply to OSHA for an expansion 
of its current recognition to cover other categories of NRTL testing in 
addition to those included in the current recognition.
    2. Procedure. a. The application for expansion will be acted upon 
and processed by OSHA in accordance with subsection I.B. of this 
appendix.
    b. In that process, OSHA may decide not to conduct an on-site 
review, where the substantive scope of the request to expand recognition 
is closely related to the current area of recognition.
    c. The expiration date for each expansion of recognition shall 
coincide with the expiration date of the current basic recognition 
period.

                     C. Renewal of OSHA recognition

    1. Eligibility. A recognized NRTL may renew its recognition by 
filing a renewal request at the address in paragraph I.A.3. of this 
appendix not less than nine months, nor more than one year, before the 
expiration date of its current recognition.
    2. Procedure. a. The renewal request will be processed in accordance 
with subsection I.B. of this appendix.
    b. In that process, OSHA may determine not to conduct the on-site 
reviews in I.B.1.a. where appropriate.
    c. When a recognized NRTL has filed a timely and sufficient renewal 
request, its current recognition will not expire until a final decision 
has been made by OSHA on the request.
    d. After the first renewal has been granted to the NRTL, the NRTL 
shall apply for a continuation of its recognition status every five 
years by submitting a renewal request. In lieu of submitting a renewal 
request after the initial renewal, the NRTL may certify

[[Page 87]]

its continuing compliance with the terms of its letter of recognition 
and 29 CFR 1910.7.
    3. Alternative procedure. After the initial recognition and before 
the expiration thereof, OSHA may (for good cause) determine that there 
is a sufficient basis to dispense with the renewal requirement for a 
given laboratory and will so notify the laboratory of such a 
determination in writing. In lieu of submitting a renewal request, any 
laboratory so notified shall certify its continuing compliance with the 
terms of its letter of recognition and 29 CFR 1910.7.

                D. Voluntary termination of recognition.

    At any time, a recognized NRTL may voluntarily terminate its 
recognition, either in its entirety or with respect to any area covered 
in its recognition, by giving written notice to OSHA. The written notice 
shall state the date as of which the termination is to take effect. The 
Assistant Secretary shall inform the public of any voluntary termination 
by Federal Register notice.

                  E. Revocation of recognition by OSHA.

    1. Potential causes. If an NRTL either has failed to continue to 
substantially satisfy the requirements of Sec. 1910.7 or this appendix, 
or has not been reasonably performing the NRTL testing requirements 
encompassed within its letter of recognition, or has materially 
misrepresented itself in its applications or misrepresented the scope or 
conditions of its recognition, the Assistant Secretary may revoke the 
recognition of a recognized NRTL, in whole or in part. OSHA may initiate 
revocation procedures on the basis of information provided by any 
interested person.
    2. Procedure. a. Before proposing to revoke recognition, the Agency 
will notify the recognized NRTL in writing, giving it the opportunity to 
rebut or correct the alleged deficiencies which would form the basis of 
the proposed revocation, within a reasonable period.
    b. If the alleged deficiencies are not corrected or reconciled 
within a reasonable period, OSHA will propose, in writing to the 
recognized NRTL, to revoke recognition. If deemed appropriate, no other 
announcement need be made by OSHA.
    c. The revocation shall be effective in 60 days unless within that 
period the recognized NRTL corrects the deficiencies or requests a 
hearing in writing.
    d. If a hearing is requested, it shall be held before an 
administrative law judge of the Department of Labor pursuant to the 
rules specified in 29 CFR part 1905, subpart C.
    e. The parties shall be OSHA and the recognized NRTL. The Assistant 
Secretary may allow other interested persons to participate in these 
hearings if such participation would contribute to the resolution of 
issues germane to the proceeding and not cause undue delay.
    f. The burden of proof shall be on OSHA to demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the recognition should be revoked 
because the NRTL is not meeting the requirements for recognition, has 
not been reasonably performing the product testing functions as required 
by Sec. 1910.7, this appendix A, or the letter of recognition, or has 
materially misrepresented itself in its applications or publicity.
    3. Final decision. a. After the hearing, the Administrative Law 
Judge shall issue a decision stating the reasons based on the record as 
to whether it has been demonstrated, based on a preponderance of 
evidence, that the applicant does not continue to meet the requirements 
for its current recognition.
    b. Upon issuance of the decision, any party to the hearing may file 
exceptions within 20 days pursuant to 29 CFR 1905.28. If no exceptions 
are filed, this decision is the final decision of the Assistant 
Secretary. If objections are filed, the Administrative Law Judge shall 
forward the decision, exceptions and record to the Assistant Secretary 
for the final decision on the proposed revocation.
    c. The Assistant Secretary will review the record, the decision by 
the Administrative Law Judge, and the exceptions filed. Based on this, 
the Assistant Secretary shall issue the final decision as to whether it 
has been demonstrated, by a preponderance of evidence, that the 
recognized NRTL has not continued to meet the requirements for OSHA 
recognition. If the Assistant Secretary finds that the NRTL does not 
meet the NRTL recognition requirements, the recognition will be revoked.
    4. Public announcement. A copy of the Assistant Secretary's final 
decision will be provided to the applicant, and a notification will be 
published in the Federal Register announcing the decision, and the 
availability of the complete record of this proceeding at OSHA. The 
effective date of any revocation will be the date the final decision 
copy is sent to the NRTL.
    5. Review of final decision. There will be no further review 
activity available within the Department of Labor from the final 
decision of the Assistant Secretary.
[53 FR 12120, Apr. 12, 1988; 53 FR 16838, May 11, 1988, as amended at 54 
FR 24333, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.8  OMB control numbers under the Paperwork Reduction Act.

    The following sections or paragraphs each contain a collection of 
information requirement which has been approved by the Office of 
Management and Budget under the control number listed.

[[Page 88]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  OMB
                       29 CFR citation                          control
                                                                  No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1910.7......................................................   1218-0147
1910.23.....................................................   1218-0199
1910.66.....................................................   1218-0121
1910.67(b)..................................................   1218-0230
1910.68.....................................................   1218-0226
1910.95.....................................................   1218-0048
1910.111....................................................   1218-0208
1910.119....................................................   1218-0200
1910.120....................................................   1218-0202
1910.132....................................................   1218-0205
1910.134....................................................   1218-0099
1910.137....................................................   1218-0190
1910.142....................................................   1218-0096
1910.145....................................................   1218-0132
1910.146....................................................   1218-0203
1910.147....................................................   1218-0150
1910.156....................................................   1218-0075
1910.157(e)(3)..............................................   1218-0210
1910.157(f)(16).............................................   1218-0218
1910.177(d)(3)(iv)..........................................   1218-0219
1910.179(j)(2)(iii) and (iv)................................   1218-0224
1910.179(m)(1) and (m)(2)...................................   1218-0224
1910.180(d)(6)..............................................   1218-0221
1910.180(g)(1) and (g)(2)(ii)...............................   1218-0221
1910.181(g)(1) and (g)(3)...................................   1218-0222
1910.184(e)(4), (f)(4) and (i)(8)(ii).......................   1218-0223
1910.217(e)(1)(i) and (ii)..................................   1218-0229
1910.217(g).................................................   1218-0070
1910.217(h).................................................   1218-0143
1910.218(a)(2)(i) and (ii)..................................   1218-0228
1910.252(a)(2)(xiii)(c).....................................   1218-0207
1910.255(e).................................................   1218-0207
1910.266....................................................   1218-0198
1910.268....................................................   1218-0225
1910.269....................................................   1218-0190
1910.272....................................................   1218-0206
1910.420....................................................   1218-0069
1910.421....................................................   1218-0069
1910.423....................................................   1218-0069
1910.430....................................................   1218-0069
1910.440....................................................   1218-0069
1910.1001...................................................   1218-0133
1910.1003...................................................   1218-0085
1910.1004...................................................   1218-0084
1910.1006...................................................   1218-0086
1910.1007...................................................   1218-0083
1910.1008...................................................   1218-0087
1910.1009...................................................   1218-0089
1910.1010...................................................   1218-0082
1910.1011...................................................   1218-0090
1910.1012...................................................   1218-0080
1910.1013...................................................   1218-0079
1910.1014...................................................   1218-0088
1910.1015...................................................   1218-0044
1910.1016...................................................   1218-0081
1910.1017...................................................   1218-0010
1910.1018...................................................   1218-0104
1910.1020...................................................   1218-0065
1910.1025...................................................   1218-0092
1910.1027...................................................   1218-0185
1910.1028...................................................   1218-0129
1910.1029...................................................   1218-0128
1910.1030...................................................   1218-0180
1910.1043...................................................   1218-0061
1910.1044...................................................   1218-0101
1910.1045...................................................   1218-0126
1910.1047...................................................   1218-0108
1910.1048...................................................   1218-0145
1910.1050...................................................   1218-0184
1910.1051...................................................   1218-0170
1910.1052...................................................   1218-0179
1910.1096...................................................   1218-0103
1910.1200...................................................   1218-0072
1910.1450...................................................   1218-0131
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[61 FR 5508, Feb. 13, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 29668, June 2, 1997; 62 
FR 42666, Aug. 8, 1997; 62 FR 43581, Aug. 14, 1997; 62 FR 65203, Dec. 
11, 1997; 63 FR 13340, Mar. 19, 1998; 63 FR 17093, Apr. 8, 1998]


<R04>
   Subpart B--Adoption and Extension of Established Federal Standards

    Authority:  Secs. 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act, 29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657; Walsh-Healey Act, 41 U.S.C. 35 et seq.; 
Service Contract Act of 1965, 41 U.S.C. 351 et seq.; Sec.107, Contract 
Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (Construction Safety Act), 40 U.S.C. 
333; Sec. 41, Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, 33 U.S.C. 
941; National Foundation of Arts and Humanities Act, 20 U.S.C. 951 et 
seq.; Secretary of Labor's Order No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 
1911), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), 1-90 (55 FR 9033), or 6-96 (62 FR 111), as 
applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.11  Scope and purpose.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart B adopt and extend the 
applicability of, established Federal standards in effect on April 28, 
1971, with respect to every employer, employee, and employment covered 
by the Act.
    (b) It bears emphasis that only standards (i.e., substantive rules) 
relating to safety or health are adopted by any incorporations by 
reference of standards prescribed elsewhere in this chapter or this 
title. Other materials contained in the referenced parties are not 
adopted. Illustrations of the types of materials which are not adopted 
are these. The incorporations by reference of parts 1915, 1916, 1917, 
1918 in Secs. 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, and 1910.16 are not intended to 
include the discussion in those parts of the coverage of the 
Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act or the penalty 
provisions of the Act. Similarly, the incorporation by reference of part 
1926 in Sec. 1910.12 is not intended to include references to 
interpretative rules having relevance to the application of the 
Construction Safety Act, but having no relevance to the application to 
the Occupational Safety and Health Act.

[[Page 89]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.12  Construction work.

    (a) Standards. The standards prescribed in part 1926 of this chapter 
are adopted as occupational safety and health standards under section 6 
of the Act and shall apply, according to the provisions thereof, to 
every employment and place of employment of every employee engaged in 
construction work. Each employer shall protect the employment and places 
of employment of each of his employees engaged in construction work by 
complying with the appropriate standards prescribed in this paragraph.
    (b) Definition. For purposes of this section, Construction work 
means work for construction, alteration, and/or repair, including 
painting and decorating. See discussion of these terms in Sec. 1926.13 
of this title.
    (c) Construction Safety Act distinguished. This section adopts as 
occupational safety and health standards under section 6 of the Act the 
standards which are prescribed in part 1926 of this chapter. Thus, the 
standards (substantive rules) published in subpart C and the following 
subparts of part 1926 of this chapter are applied. This section does not 
incorporate subparts A and B of part 1926 of this chapter. Subparts A 
and B have pertinence only to the application of section 107 of the 
Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (the Construction Safety 
Act). For example, the interpretation of the term ``subcontractor'' in 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1926.13 of this chapter is significant in 
discerning the coverage of the Construction Safety Act and duties 
thereunder. However, the term ``subcontractor'' has no significance in 
the application of the Act, which was enacted under the Commerce Clause 
and which establishes duties for ``employers'' which are not dependent 
for their application upon any contractual relationship with the Federal 
Government or upon any form of Federal financial assistance.
    (d) For the purposes of this part, to the extent that it may not 
already be included in paragraph (b) of this section, ``construction 
work'' includes the erection of new electric transmission and 
distribution lines and equipment, and the alteration, conversion, and 
improvement of the existing transmission and distribution lines and 
equipment.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.15  Shipyard employment.

    (a) Adoption and extension of established safety and health 
standards for shipyard employment. The standards prescribed by part 1915 
(formerly parts 1501-1503) of this title and in effect on April 28, 1971 
(as revised), are adopted as occupational safety or health standards 
under section 6(a) of the Act and shall apply, according to the 
provisions thereof, to every employment and place of employment of every 
employee engaged in ship repair, shipbreaking, and shipbuilding, or a 
related employment. Each employer shall protect the employment and 
places of employment of each of his employees engaged in ship repair, 
shipbreaking, and shipbuilding, or a related employment, by complying 
with the appropriate standards prescribed by this paragraph.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
    (1) Ship repair means any repair of a vessel, including, but not 
restricted to, alterations, conversions, installations, cleaning, 
painting, and maintenance work;
    (2) Shipbreaking means any breaking down of a vessel's structure for 
the purpose of scrapping the vessel, including the removal of gear, 
equipment, or any component of a vessel;
    (3) Shipbuilding means the construction of a vessel, including the 
installation of machinery and equipment;
    (4) Related employment means any employment performed as an incident 
to, or in conjunction with, ship repair, shipbreaking, and shipbuilding 
work, including, but not restricted to, inspection, testing, and 
employment as a watchman; and
    (5) Vessel includes every description of watercraft or other 
artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of 
transportation on water, including special purpose floating structures 
not primarily designed for, or used as a means of, transportation on 
water.
[58 FR 35308, June 30, 1993]

[[Page 90]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.16  Longshoring and marine terminals.

    (a) Safety and health standards for longshoring. (1) Part 1918 of 
this chapter shall apply exclusively, according to the provisions 
thereof, to all employment of every employee engaged in longshoring 
operations or related employment aboard any vessel. All cargo transfer 
accomplished with the use of shore-based material handling devices shall 
be governed by part 1917 of this chapter.
    (2) Part 1910 does not apply to longshoring operations except for 
the following provisions:
    (i) Access to employee exposure and medical records. Subpart Z, 
Sec. 1910.1020;
    (ii) Commercial diving operations. Subpart T;
    (iii) Electrical. Subpart S when shore-based electrical 
installations provide power for use aboard vessels;
    (iv) Hazard communication. Subpart Z, Sec. 1910.1200;
    (v) Ionizing radiation. Subpart Z, Sec. 1910.1096;
    (vi) Noise. Subpart G, Sec. 1910.95;
    (vii) Nonionizing radiation. Subpart G, Sec. 1910.97;

    Note to paragraph (a)(2)(vii): Exposures to nonionizing radiation 
emissions from commercial vessel transmitters are considered hazardous 
under the following conditions: (1) where the radar is transmitting, the 
scanner is stationary, and the exposure distance is 18.7 feet (6 m.) or 
less; or (2) where the radar is transmitting, the scanner is rotating, 
and the exposure distance is 5.2 feet (1.8 m.) or less.

    (viii) Respiratory protection. Subpart I, Sec. 1910.134;
    (ix) Toxic and hazardous substances. Subpart Z applies to marine 
cargo handling activities except for the following:
    (A) When a substance or cargo is contained within a sealed, intact 
means of packaging or containment complying with Department of 
Transportation or International Maritime Organization requirements;\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The International Maritime Organization publishes the 
International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code to aid compliance with the 
international legal requirements of the International Convention for the 
Safety of Life at Sea, 1960.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (B) Bloodborne pathogens, Sec. 1910.1030;
    (C) Carbon monoxide, Sec. 1910.1000 (See Sec. 1918.94 (a)); and
    (D) Hydrogen sulfide, Sec. 1910.1000 (See Sec. 1918.94 (f)).
    (b) Safety and health standards for marine terminals. Part 1917 of 
this chapter shall apply exclusively, according to the provisions 
thereof, to employment within a marine terminal, except as follows:
    (1) The provisions of part 1917 of this chapter do not apply to the 
following:
    (i) Facilities used solely for the bulk storage, handling, and 
transfer of flammable and combustible liquids and gases.
    (ii) Facilities subject to the regulations of the Office of Pipeline 
Safety of the Research and Special Programs Administration, Department 
of Transportation (49 CFR chapter I, subchapter D), to the extent such 
regulations apply to specific working conditions.
    (iii) Fully automated bulk coal handling facilities contiguous to 
electrical power generating plants.
    (2) Part 1910 does not apply to marine terminals except for the 
following:
    (i) Abrasive blasting. Subpart G, Sec. 1910.94(a);
    (ii) Access to employee exposure and medical records. Subpart Z, 
Sec. 1910.1020;
    (iii) Commercial diving operations. Subpart T;
    (iv) Electrical. Subpart S;
    (v) Grain handling facilities. Subpart R, Sec. 1910.272;
    (vi) Hazard communication. Subpart Z, Sec. 1910.1200;
    (vii) Ionizing radiation. Subpart Z, Sec. 1910.1096;
    (viii) Noise. Subpart G, Sec. 1910.95;
    (ix) Nonionizing radiation. Subpart G, Sec. 1910.97.
    (x) Respiratory protection. Subpart I, Sec. 1910.134.
    (xi) Safety requirements for scaffolding. Subpart D, Sec. 1910.28;
    (xii) Servicing multi-piece and single piece rim wheels. Subpart N, 
Sec. 1910.177; and
    (xiii) Toxic and hazardous substances. Subpart Z applies to marine 
cargo handling activities except for the following:
    (A) When a substance or cargo is contained within a sealed, intact 
means of packaging or containment complying with Department of 
Transportation or

[[Page 91]]

International Maritime Organization requirements; \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ The International Maritime Organization publishes the 
International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code to aid compliance with the 
international legal requirements of the International Convention for the 
Safety of Life at Sea, 1960.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (B) Bloodborne pathogens, Sec. 1910.1030;
    (C) Carbon monoxide, Sec. 1910.1000 (See Sec. 1917.24(a)); and
    (D) Hydrogen sulfide, Sec. 1910.1000 (See Sec. 1917.73(a)(2)).
    (c) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
    (1) Longshoring operation means the loading, unloading, moving, or 
handling of, cargo, ship's stores, gear, etc., into, in, on, or out of 
any vessel;
    (2) Related employment means any employment performed as an incident 
to or in conjunction with, longshoring operations including, but not 
restricted to, securing cargo, rigging, and employment as a porter, 
checker, or watchman; and
    (3) Vessel includes every description of watercraft or other 
artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of 
transportation on water, including special purpose floating structures 
not primarily designed for, or used as a means of, transportation on 
water.
    (4) Marine terminal means wharves, bulkheads, quays, piers, docks 
and other berthing locations and adjacent storage or adjacent areas and 
structures associated with the primary movement of cargo or materials 
from vessel to shore or shore to vessel including structures which are 
devoted to receiving, handling, holding, consolidation and loading or 
delivery of waterborne shipments or passengers, including areas devoted 
to the maintenance of the terminal or equipment. The term does not 
include production or manufacturing areas having their own docking 
facilities and located at a marine terminal nor does the term include 
storage facilities directly associated with those production or 
manufacturing areas.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 48 FR 30908, July 5, 1983; 52 
FR 36026, Sept. 25, 1987; 62 FR 40195, July 25, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.17  Effective dates.

    (a)-(b) [Reserved]
    (c) Except whenever any employment or place of employment is, or 
becomes, subject to any safety and health standard prescribed in part 
1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, or 1926 of this title on a date before August 
27, 1971, by virtue of the Construction Safety Act or the Longshoremen's 
and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, that occupational safety and 
health standard as incorporated by reference in this subpart shall also 
become effective under the Williams-Steiger Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 on that date.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 61 FR 9235, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.18  Changes in established Federal standards.

    Whenever an occupational safety and health standard adopted and 
incorporated by reference in this subpart B is changed pursuant to 
section 6(b) of the Act and the statute under which the standard was 
originally promulgated, and in accordance with part 1911 of this 
chapter, the standard shall be deemed changed for purposes of that 
statute and this subpart B, and shall apply under this subpart B. For 
the purposes of this section, a change in a standard includes any 
amendment, addition, or repeal, in whole or in part, of any standard.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.19  Special provisions for air contaminants.

    (a) Asbestos, tremolite, anthophyllite, and actinolite dust. Section 
1910.1001 shall apply to the exposure of every employee to asbestos, 
tremolite, anthophyllite, and actinolite dust in every employment and 
place of employment covered by Sec. 1910.16, in lieu of any different 
standard on exposure to asbestos, tremolite, anthophyllite, and 
actinolite dust which would otherwise be applicable by virtue of any of 
those sections.
    (b) Vinyl chloride. Section 1910.1017 shall apply to the exposure of 
every employee to vinyl chloride in every employment and place of 
employment covered by Secs. 1910.12, 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, or 
1910.16, in lieu of any different standard on exposure to vinyl

[[Page 92]]

chloride which would otherwise be applicable by virtue of any of those 
sections.
    (c) Acrylonitrile. Section 1910.1045 shall apply to the exposure of 
every employee to acrylonitrile in every employment and place of 
employment covered by Secs. 1910.12, 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, or 
Sec. 1910.16, in lieu of any different standard on exposure to 
acrylonitrile which would otherwise be applicable by virtue of any of 
those sections.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Inorganic arsenic. Section 1910.1018 shall apply to the exposure 
of every employee to inorganic arsenic in every employment covered by 
Secs. 1910.12, 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, or Sec. 1910.16, in lieu of 
any different standard on exposure to inorganic arsenic which would 
otherwise be applicable by virtue of any of those sections.
    (f)  [Reserved]
    (g) Lead. Section 1910.1025 shall apply to the exposure of every 
employee to lead in every employment and place of employment covered by 
Secs. 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, and 1910.16, in lieu of any different 
standard on exposure to lead which would otherwise be applicable by 
virtue of those sections.
    (h) Ethylene oxide. Section 1910.1047 shall apply to the exposure of 
every employee to ethylene oxide in every employment and place of 
employment covered by Secs. 1910.12, 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, or 
1910.16, in lieu of any different standard on exposure to ethylene oxide 
which would otherwise be applicable by virtue of those sections.
    (i) 4,4'-Methylenedianiline (MDA). Section 1910.1050 shall apply to 
the exposure of every employee to MDA in every employment and place of 
employment covered by Secs. 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, or 1910.16, in 
lieu of any different standard on exposure to MDA which would otherwise 
be applicable by virtue of those sections.
    (j) Formaldehyde. Section 1910.1048 shall apply to the exposure of 
every employee to formaldehyde in every employment and place of 
employment covered by Sec. 1910.12, 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15 or 1910.16 
in lieu of any different standard on exposure to formaldehyde which 
would otherwise be applicable by virtue of those sections.
    (k) Cadmium. Section 1910.1027 shall apply to the exposure of every 
employee to cadmium in every employment and place of employment covered 
by 1910.16 in lieu of any different standard on exposures to cadmium 
that would otherwise be applicable by virtue of those sections.
    (l) 1,3-Butadiene (BD). Section 1910.1051 shall apply to the 
exposure of every employee to BD in every employment and place of 
employment covered by Secs. 1910.12, 1910.13, 1910.14, 1910.15, or 
1910.16, in lieu of any different standard on exposure to BD which would 
otherwise be applicable by virtue of those sections.
    (m) Methylene chloride (MC). Section 1910.1052 shall apply to the 
exposure of every employee to MC in every employment and place of 
employment covered by Sec. 1910.16 in lieu of any different standard on 
exposure to MC which would otherwise be applicable by virtue of that 
section when it is not present in sealed, intact containers.
[43 FR 28473, June 30, 1978, as amended at 43 FR 45809, Oct. 3, 1978; 43 
FR 53007, Nov. 14, 1978; 44 FR 5447, Jan. 26, 1979; 46 FR 32022, June 
19, 1981; 49 FR 25796, June 22, 1984; 50 FR 51173, Dec. 13, 1985; 52 FR 
46291, Dec. 4, 1987; 57 FR 35666, Aug. 10, 1992; 57 FR 42388, Sept. 14, 
1992; 59 FR 41057, Aug. 10, 1994; 61 FR 56831, Nov. 4, 1996; 62 FR 1600, 
Jan. 10, 1997]


<R04>
                          Subpart C [Reserved]


<R04>
                   Subpart D--Walking-Working Surfaces

    Authority: Secs. 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, and 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 1-90 
(55 FR 9033), as applicable; and 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.21  Definitions.

    (a) As used in Sec. 1910.23, unless the context requires otherwise, 
floor and wall opening, railing and toe board terms shall have the 
meanings ascribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Floor hole. An opening measuring less than 12 inches but more 
than 1 inch in its least dimension, in any floor, platform, pavement, or 
yard, through which materials but not persons may fall; such as a belt 
hole, pipe opening, or slot opening.

[[Page 93]]

    (2) Floor opening. An opening measuring 12 inches or more in its 
least dimension, in any floor, platform, pavement, or yard through which 
persons may fall; such as a hatchway, stair or ladder opening, pit, or 
large manhole. Floor openings occupied by elevators, dumb waiters, 
conveyors, machinery, or containers are excluded from this subpart.
    (3) Handrail. A single bar or pipe supported on brackets from a wall 
or partition, as on a stairway or ramp, to furnish persons with a 
handhold in case of tripping.
    (4) Platform. A working space for persons, elevated above the 
surrounding floor or ground; such as a balcony or platform for the 
operation of machinery and equipment.
    (5) Runway. A passageway for persons, elevated above the surrounding 
floor or ground level, such as a footwalk along shafting or a walkway 
between buildings.
    (6) Standard railing. A vertical barrier erected along exposed edges 
of a floor opening, wall opening, ramp, platform, or runway to prevent 
falls of persons.
    (7) Standard strength and construction. Any construction of 
railings, covers, or other guards that meets the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.23.
    (8) Stair railing. A vertical barrier erected along exposed sides of 
a stairway to prevent falls of persons.
    (9) Toeboard. A vertical barrier at floor level erected along 
exposed edges of a floor opening, wall opening, platform, runway, or 
ramp to prevent falls of materials.
    (10) Wall hole. An opening less than 30 inches but more than 1 inch 
high, of unrestricted width, in any wall or partition; such as a 
ventilation hole or drainage scupper.
    (11) Wall opening. An opening at least 30 inches high and 18 inches 
wide, in any wall or partition, through which persons may fall; such as 
a yard-arm doorway or chute opening.
    (b) As used in Sec. 1910.24, unless the context requires otherwise, 
fixed industrial stair terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this 
paragraph.
    (1) Handrail. A single bar or pipe supported on brackets from a wall 
or partition to provide a continuous handhold for persons using a stair.
    (2) Nose, nosing. That portion of a tread projecting beyond the face 
of the riser immediately below.
    (3) Open riser. The air space between the treads of stairways 
without upright members (risers).
    (4) Platform. An extended step or landing breaking a continuous run 
of stairs.
    (5) Railing. A vertical barrier erected along exposed sides of 
stairways and platforms to prevent falls of persons. The top member of 
railing usually serves as a handrail.
    (6) Rise. The vertical distance from the top of a tread to the top 
of the next higher tread.
    (7) Riser. The upright member of a step situated at the back of a 
lower tread and near the leading edge of the next higher tread.
    (8) Stairs, stairway. A series of steps leading from one level or 
floor to another, or leading to platforms, pits, boiler rooms, 
crossovers, or around machinery, tanks, and other equipment that are 
used more or less continuously or routinely by employees, or only 
occasionally by specific individuals. A series of steps and landings 
having three or more risers constitutes stairs or stairway.
    (9) Tread. The horizontal member of a step.
    (10) Tread run. The horizontal distance from the leading edge of a 
tread to the leading edge of an adjacent tread.
    (11) Tread width. The horizontal distance from front to back of 
tread including nosing when used.
    (c) As used in Sec. 1910.25, unless the context requires otherwise, 
portable wood ladders terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this 
paragraph.
    (1) Ladders. A ladder is an appliance usually consisting of two side 
rails joined at regular intervals by cross- pieces called steps, rungs, 
or cleats, on which a person may step in ascending or descending.
    (2) Stepladder. A stepladder is a selfsupporting portable ladder, 
nonadjustable in length, having flat steps and a hinged back. Its size 
is designated by the overall length of the ladder measured along the 
front edge of the side rails.

[[Page 94]]

    (3) Single ladder. A single ladder is a non-self-supporting portable 
ladder, nonadjustable in length, consisting of but one section. Its size 
is designated by the overall length of the side rail.
    (4) Extension ladder. An extension ladder is a non-self-supporting 
portable ladder adjustable in length. It consists of two or more 
sections traveling in guides or brackets so arranged as to permit length 
adjustment. Its size is designated by the sum of the lengths of the 
sections measured along the side rails.
    (5) Sectional ladder. A sectional ladder is a non-self-supporting 
portable ladder, nonadjustable in length, consisting of two or more 
sections of ladder so constructed that the sections may be combined to 
function as a single ladder. Its size is designated by the overall 
length of the assembled sections.
    (6) Trestle ladder. A trestle ladder is a self-supporting portable 
ladder, nonadjustable in length, consisting of two sections hinged at 
the top to form equal angles with the base. The size is designated by 
the length of the side rails measured along the front edge.
    (7) Extension trestle ladder. An extension trestle ladder is a self-
supporting portable ladder, adjustable in length, consisting of a 
trestle ladder base and a vertically adjustable single ladder, with 
suitable means for locking the ladders together. The size is designated 
by the length of the trestle ladder base.
    (8) Special-purpose ladder. A special-purpose ladder is a portable 
ladder which represents either a modification or a combination of design 
or construction features in one of the general-purpose types of ladders 
previously defined, in order to adapt the ladder to special or specific 
uses.
    (9) Trolley ladder. A trolley ladder is a semifixed ladder, 
nonadjustable in length, supported by attachments to an overhead track, 
the plane of the ladder being at right angles to the plane of motion.
    (10) Side-rolling ladder. A side-rolling ladder is a semifixed 
ladder, nonadjustable in length, supported by attachments to a guide 
rail, which is generally fastened to shelving, the plane of the ladder 
being also its plane of motion.
    (11) Wood characteristics. Wood characteristics are distinguishing 
features which by their extent and number determine the quality of a 
piece of wood.
    (12) Wood irregularities. Wood irregularities are natural 
characteristics in or on wood that may lower its durability, strength, 
or utility.
    (13) Cross grain. Cross grain (slope of grain) is a deviation of the 
fiber direction from a line parallel to the sides of the piece.
    (14) Knot. A knot is a branch or limb, imbedded in the tree and cut 
through in the process of lumber manufacture, classified according to 
size, quality, and occurrence. The size of the knot is determined as the 
average diameter on the surface of the piece.
    (15) Pitch and bark pockets. A pitch pocket is an opening extending 
parallel to the annual growth rings containing, or that has contained, 
pitch, either solid or liquid. A bark pocket is an opening between 
annual growth rings that contains bark.
    (16) Shake. A shake is a separation along the grain, most of which 
occurs between the rings of annual growth.
    (17) Check. A check is a lengthwise separation of the wood, most of 
which occurs across the rings of annual growth.
    (18) Wane. Wane is bark, or the lack of wood from any cause, on the 
corner of a piece.
    (19) Decay. Decay is disintegration of wood substance due to action 
of wood-destroying fungi. It is also known as dote and rot.
    (20) Compression failure. A compression failure is a deformation 
(buckling) of the fibers due to excessive compression along the grain.
    (21) Compression wood. Compression wood is an aberrant (abnormal) 
and highly variable type of wood structure occurring in softwood 
species. The wood commonly has density somewhat higher than does normal 
wood, but somewhat lower stiffness and tensile strength for its weight 
in addition to high longitudinal shrinkage.
    (22) Low density. Low-density wood is that which is exceptionally 
light in weight and usually deficient in strength properties for the 
species.
    (d) As used in Sec. 1910.26, unless the context requires otherwise, 
portable metal

[[Page 95]]

ladder terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Ladder. A ladder is an appliance usually consisting of two side 
rails joined at regular intervals by cross- pieces called steps, rungs, 
or cleats, on which a person may step in ascending or descending.
    (2) Step ladder. A step ladder is a self-supporting portable ladder, 
nonadjustable in length, having flat steps and a hinged back. Its size 
is designated by the overall length of the ladder measured along the 
front edge of the side rails.
    (3) Single ladder. A single ladder is a non-self-supporting portable 
ladder, nonadjustable in length, consisting of but one section. Its size 
is designated by the overall length of the side rail.
    (4) Extension ladder. An extension ladder is a non-self-supporting 
portable ladder adjustable in length. It consists of two or more 
sections traveling in guides or brackets so arranged as to permit length 
adjustment. Its size is designated by the sum of the lengths of the 
sections measured along the side rails.
    (5) Platform ladder. A self-supporting ladder of fixed size with a 
platform provided at the working level. The size is determined by the 
distance along the front rail from the platform to the base of the 
ladder.
    (6) Sectional ladder. A sectional ladder is a non-self-supporting 
portable ladder, non-adjustable in length, consisting of two or more 
sections so constructed that the sections may be combined to function as 
a single ladder. Its size is designated by the overall length of the 
assembled sections.
    (7) Trestle ladder. A trestle ladder is a self-supporting portable 
ladder, non-adjustable in length, consisting of two sections, hinged at 
the top to form equal angles with the base. The size is designated by 
the length of the side rails measured along the front edge.
    (8) Extension trestle ladder. An extension trestle ladder is a self-
supporting portable ladder, adjustable in length, consisting of a 
trestle ladder base and a vertically adjustable single ladder, with 
suitable means for locking the ladders together. The size is designated 
by the length of the trestle ladder base.
    (9) Special-purpose ladder. A special-purpose ladder is a portable 
ladder which represents either a modification or a combination of design 
or construction features in one of the general-purpose types of ladders 
previously defined, in order to adapt the ladder to special or specific 
uses.
    (e) As used in Sec. 1910.27, unless the context requires otherwise, 
fixed ladder terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Ladder. A ladder is an appliance usually consisting of two side 
rails joined at regular intervals by cross- pieces called steps, rungs, 
or cleats, on which a person may step in ascending or descending.
    (2) Fixed ladder. A fixed ladder is a ladder permanently attached to 
a structure, building, or equipment.
    (3) Individual-rung ladder. An individual-rung ladder is a fixed 
ladder each rung of which is individually attached to a structure, 
building, or equipment.
    (4) Rail ladder. A rail ladder is a fixed ladder consisting of side 
rails joined at regular intervals by rungs or cleats and fastened in 
full length or in sections to a building, structure, or equipment.
    (5) Railings. A railing is any one or a combination of those 
railings constructed in accordance with Sec. 1910.23. A standard railing 
is a vertical barrier erected along exposed edges of floor openings, 
wall openings, ramps, platforms, and runways to prevent falls of 
persons.
    (6) Pitch. Pitch is the included angle between the horizontal and 
the ladder, measured on the opposite side of the ladder from the 
climbing side.
    (7) Fastenings. A fastening is a device to attach a ladder to a 
structure, building, or equipment.
    (8) Rungs. Rungs are ladder cross- pieces of circular or oval cross-
section on which a person may step in ascending or descending.
    (9) Cleats. Cleats are ladder cross- pieces of rectangular cross-
section placed on edge on which a person may step in ascending or 
descending.
    (10) Steps. Steps are the flat cross- pieces of a ladder on which a 
person may step in ascending or descending.
    (11) Cage. A cage is a guard that may be referred to as a cage or 
basket guard which is an enclosure that is fastened

[[Page 96]]

to the side rails of the fixed ladder or to the structure to encircle 
the climbing space of the ladder for the safety of the person who must 
climb the ladder.
    (12) Well. A well is a permanent complete enclosure around a fixed 
ladder, which is attached to the walls of the well. Proper clearances 
for a well will give the person who must climb the ladder the same 
protection as a cage.
    (13) Ladder safety device. A ladder safety device is any device, 
other than a cage or well, designed to eliminate or reduce the 
possibility of accidental falls and which may incorporate such features 
as life belts, friction brakes, and sliding attachments.
    (14) Grab bars. Grab bars are individual handholds placed adjacent 
to or as an extension above ladders for the purpose of providing access 
beyond the limits of the ladder.
    (15) Through ladder. A through ladder is one from which a man 
getting off at the top must step through the ladder in order to reach 
the landing.
    (16) Side-step ladder. A side-step ladder is one from which a man 
getting off at the top must step sideways from the ladder in order to 
reach the landing.
    (f) As used in Sec. 1910.28, unless the context requires otherwise, 
scaffolding terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Bearer. A horizontal member of a scaffold upon which the 
platform rests and which may be supported by ledgers.
    (2) Boatswain's chair. A seat supported by slings attached to a 
suspended rope, designed to accommodate one workman in a sitting 
position.
    (3) Brace. A tie that holds one scaffold member in a fixed position 
with respect to another member.
    (4) Bricklayers' square scaffold. A scaffold composed of framed wood 
squares which support a platform limited to light and medium duty.
    (5) Carpenters' bracket scaffold. A scaffold consisting of wood or 
metal brackets supporting a platform.
    (6) Coupler. A device for locking together the component parts of a 
tubular metal scaffold. The material used for the couplers shall be of a 
structural type, such as a drop-forged steel, malleable iron, or 
structural grade aluminum. The use of gray cast iron is prohibited.
    (7) Crawling board or chicken ladder. A plank with cleats spaced and 
secured at equal intervals, for use by a worker on roofs, not designed 
to carry any material.
    (8) Double pole or independent pole scaffold. A scaffold supported 
from the base by a double row of uprights, independent of support from 
the walls and constructed of uprights, ledgers, horizontal platform 
bearers, and diagonal bracing.
    (9) Float or ship scaffold. A scaffold hung from overhead supports 
by means of ropes and consisting of a substantial platform having 
diagonal bracing underneath, resting upon and securely fastened to two 
parallel plank bearers at right angles to the span.
    (10) Guardrail. A rail secured to uprights and erected along the 
exposed sides and ends of platforms.
    (11) Heavy duty scaffold. A scaffold designed and constructed to 
carry a working load not to exceed 75 pounds per square foot.
    (12) Horse scaffold. A scaffold for light or medium duty, composed 
of horses supporting a work platform.
    (13) Interior hung scaffold. A scaffold suspended from the ceiling 
or roof structure.
    (14) Ladder jack scaffold. A light duty scaffold supported by 
brackets attached to ladders.
    (15) Ledger (stringer). A horizontal scaffold member which extends 
from post to post and which supports the putlogs or bearer forming a tie 
between the posts.
    (16) Light duty scaffold. A scaffold designed and constructed to 
carry a working load not to exceed 25 pounds per square foot.
    (17) Manually propelled mobile scaffold. A portable rolling scaffold 
supported by casters.
    (18) Masons' adjustable multiple-point suspension scaffold. A 
scaffold having a continuous platform supported by bearers suspended by 
wire rope from overhead supports, so arranged and operated as to permit 
the raising or lowering of the platform to desired working positions.
    (19) Maximum intended load. The total of all loads including the 
working load,

[[Page 97]]

the weight of the scaffold, and such other loads as may be reasonably 
anticipated.
    (20) Medium duty scaffold. A scaffold designed and constructed to 
carry a working load not to exceed 50 pounds per square foot.
    (21) Mid-rail. A rail approximately midway between the guardrail and 
platform, used when required, and secured to the uprights erected along 
the exposed sides and ends of platforms.
    (22) Needle beam scaffold. A light duty scaffold consisting of 
needle beams supporting a platform.
    (23) Outrigger scaffold. A scaffold supported by outriggers or 
thrustouts projecting beyond the wall or face of the building or 
structure, the inboard ends of which are secured inside of such a 
building or structure.
    (24) Putlog. A scaffold member upon which the platform rests.
    (25) Roofing bracket. A bracket used in sloped roof construction, 
having provisions for fastening to the roof or supported by ropes 
fastened over the ridge and secured to some suitable object.
    (26) Runner. The lengthwise horizontal bracing or bearing members or 
both.
    (27) Scaffold. Any temporary elevated platform and its supporting 
structure used for supporting workmen or materials or both.
    (28) Single-point adjustable suspension scaffold. A manually or 
power-operated unit designed for light duty use, supported by a single 
wire rope from an overhead support so arranged and operated as to permit 
the raising or lowering of the platform to desired working positions.
    (29) Single pole scaffold. Platforms resting on putlogs or 
crossbeams, the outside ends of which are supported on ledgers secured 
to a single row of posts or uprights and the inner ends of which are 
supported on or in a wall.
    (30) Stone setters' adjustable multiple-point suspension scaffold. A 
swinging-type scaffold having a platform supported by hangers suspended 
at four points so as to permit the raising or lowering of the platform 
to the desired working position by the use of hoisting machines.
    (31) Toeboard. A barrier secured along the sides and ends of a 
platform, to guard against the falling of material.
    (32) Tube and coupler scaffold. An assembly consisting of tubing 
which serves as posts, bearers, braces, ties, and runners, a base 
supporting the posts, and special couplers which serve to connect the 
uprights and to join the various members.
    (33) Tubular welded frame scaffold. A sectional, panel, or frame 
metal scaffold substantially built up of prefabricated welded sections 
which consist of posts and horizontal bearer with intermediate members. 
Panels or frames shall be braced with diagonal or cross braces.
    (34) Two-point suspension scaffold (swinging scaffold). A scaffold, 
the platform of which is supported by hangers (stirrups) at two points, 
suspended from overhead supports so as to permit the raising or lowering 
of the platform to the desired working position by tackle or hoisting 
machines.
    (35) Window jack scaffold. A scaffold, the platform of which is 
supported by a bracket or jack which projects through a window opening.
    (36) Working load. Load imposed by men, materials, and equipment.
    (g) As used in Sec. 1910.29, unless the context requires otherwise, 
manually propelled mobile ladder stand and scaffold (tower) terms shall 
have the meaning ascribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Bearer. A horizontal member of a scaffold upon which the 
platform rests and which may be supported by ledgers.
    (2) Brace. A tie that holds one scaffold member in a fixed position 
with respect to another member.
    (3) Climbing ladder. A separate ladder with equally spaced rungs 
usually attached to the scaffold structure for climbing and descending.
    (4) Coupler. A device for locking together the components of a 
tubular metal scaffold which shall be designed and used to safely 
support the maximum intended loads.
    (5) Design working load. The maximum intended load, being the total 
of all loads including the weight of the men, materials, equipment, and 
platform.

[[Page 98]]

    (6) Equivalent. Alternative design or features, which will provide 
an equal degree or factor of safety.
    (7) Guardrail. A barrier secured to uprights and erected along the 
exposed sides and ends of platforms to prevent falls of persons.
    (8) Handrail. A rail connected to a ladder stand running parallel to 
the slope and/or top step.
    (9) Ladder stand. A mobile fixed size self-supporting ladder 
consisting of a wide flat tread ladder in the form of stairs. The 
assembly may include handrails.
    (10) Ledger (stringer). A horizontal scaffold member which extends 
from post to post and which supports the bearer forming a tie between 
the posts.
    (11) Mobile scaffold (tower). A light, medium, or heavy duty 
scaffold mounted on casters or wheels.
    (12) Mobile. ``Manually propelled.''
    (13) Mobile work platform. Generally a fixed work level one frame 
high on casters or wheels, with bracing diagonally from platform to 
vertical frame.
    (14) Runner. The lengthwise horizontal bracing and/or bearing 
members.
    (15) Scaffold. Any temporary elevated platform and its necessary 
vertical, diagonal, and horizontal members used for supporting workmen 
and materials. (Also known as a scaffold tower.)
    (16) Toeboard. A barrier at platform level erected along the exposed 
sides and ends of a scaffold platform to prevent falls of materials.
    (17) Tube and coupler scaffold. An assembly consisting of tubing 
which serves as posts, bearers, braces, ties, and runners, a base 
supporting the posts, and uprights, and serves to join the various 
members, usually used in fixed locations.
    (18) Tubular welded frame scaffold. A sectional, panel, or frame 
metal scaffold substantially built up of prefabricated welded sections, 
which consist of posts and bearers with intermediate connecting members 
and braced with diagonal or cross braces.
    (19) Tubular welded sectional folding scaffold. A sectional, folding 
metal scaffold either of ladder frame or inside stairway design, 
substantially built of prefabricated welded sections, which consist of 
end frames, platform frame, inside inclined stairway frame and braces, 
or hinged connected diagonal and horizontal braces, capable of being 
folded into a flat package when the scaffold is not in use.
    (20) Work level. The elevated platform, used for supporting workmen 
and their materials, comprising the necessary vertical, horizontal, and 
diagonal braces, guardrails, and ladder for access to the work platform.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.22  General requirements.

    This section applies to all permanent places of employment, except 
where domestic, mining, or agricultural work only is performed. Measures 
for the control of toxic materials are considered to be outside the 
scope of this section.
    (a) Housekeeping. (1) All places of employment, passageways, 
storerooms, and service rooms shall be kept clean and orderly and in a 
sanitary condition.
    (2) The floor of every workroom shall be maintained in a clean and, 
so far as possible, a dry condition. Where wet processes are used, 
drainage shall be maintained, and false floors, platforms, mats, or 
other dry standing places should be provided where practicable.
    (3) To facilitate cleaning, every floor, working place, and 
passageway shall be kept free from protruding nails, splinters, holes, 
or loose boards.
    (b) Aisles and passageways. (1) Where mechanical handling equipment 
is used, sufficient safe clearances shall be allowed for aisles, at 
loading docks, through doorways and wherever turns or passage must be 
made. Aisles and passageways shall be kept clear and in good repairs, 
with no obstruction across or in aisles that could create a hazard.
    (2) Permanent aisles and passageways shall be appropriately marked.
    (c) Covers and guardrails. Covers and/or guardrails shall be 
provided to protect personnel from the hazards of open pits, tanks, 
vats, ditches, etc.
    (d) Floor loading protection. (1) In every building or other 
structure, or part thereof, used for mercantile, business, industrial, 
or storage purposes, the loads approved by the building official shall 
be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and 
securely affixed by the owner of

[[Page 99]]

the building, or his duly authorized agent, in a conspicuous place in 
each space to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or 
defaced but, if lost, removed, or defaced, shall be replaced by the 
owner or his agent.
    (2) It shall be unlawful to place, or cause, or permit to be placed, 
on any floor or roof of a building or other structure a load greater 
than that for which such floor or roof is approved by the building 
official.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.23  Guarding floor and wall openings and holes.

    (a) Protection for floor openings. (1) Every stairway floor opening 
shall be guarded by a standard railing constructed in accordance with 
paragraph (e) of this section. The railing shall be provided on all 
exposed sides (except at entrance to stairway). For infrequently used 
stairways where traffic across the opening prevents the use of fixed 
standard railing (as when located in aisle spaces, etc.), the guard 
shall consist of a hinged floor opening cover of standard strength and 
construction and removable standard railings on all exposed sides 
(except at entrance to stairway).
    (2) Every ladderway floor opening or platform shall be guarded by a 
standard railing with standard toeboard on all exposed sides (except at 
entrance to opening), with the passage through the railing either 
provided with a swinging gate or so offset that a person cannot walk 
directly into the opening.
    (3) Every hatchway and chute floor opening shall be guarded by one 
of the following:
    (i) Hinged floor opening cover of standard strength and construction 
equipped with standard railings or permanently attached thereto so as to 
leave only one exposed side. When the opening is not in use, the cover 
shall be closed or the exposed side shall be guarded at both top and 
intermediate positions by removable standard railings.
    (ii) A removable railing with toeboard on not more than two sides of 
the opening and fixed standard railings with toeboards on all other 
exposed sides. The removable railings shall be kept in place when the 
opening is not in use.

Where operating conditions necessitate the feeding of material into any 
hatchway or chute opening, protection shall be provided to prevent a 
person from falling through the opening.
    (4) Every skylight floor opening and hole shall be guarded by a 
standard skylight screen or a fixed standard railing on all exposed 
sides.
    (5) Every pit and trapdoor floor opening, infrequently used, shall 
be guarded by a floor opening cover of standard strength and 
construction. While the cover is not in place, the pit or trap opening 
shall be constantly attended by someone or shall be protected on all 
exposed sides by removable standard railings.
    (6) Every manhole floor opening shall be guarded by a standard 
manhole cover which need not be hinged in place. While the cover is not 
in place, the manhole opening shall be constantly attended by someone or 
shall be protected by removable standard railings.
    (7) Every temporary floor opening shall have standard railings, or 
shall be constantly attended by someone.
    (8) Every floor hole into which persons can accidentally walk shall 
be guarded by either:
    (i) A standard railing with standard toeboard on all exposed sides, 
or
    (ii) A floor hole cover of standard strength and construction. While 
the cover is not in place, the floor hole shall be constantly attended 
by someone or shall be protected by a removable standard railing.
    (9) Every floor hole into which persons cannot accidentally walk (on 
account of fixed machinery, equipment, or walls) shall be protected by a 
cover that leaves no openings more than 1 inch wide. The cover shall be 
securely held in place to prevent tools or materials from falling 
through.
    (10) Where doors or gates open directly on a stairway, a platform 
shall be provided, and the swing of the door shall not reduce the 
effective width to less than 20 inches.
    (b) Protection for wall openings and holes. (1) Every wall opening 
from which there is a drop of more than 4 feet shall be guarded by one 
of the following:

[[Page 100]]

    (i) Rail, roller, picket fence, half door, or equivalent barrier. 
Where there is exposure below to falling materials, a removable toe 
board or the equivalent shall also be provided. When the opening is not 
in use for handling materials, the guard shall be kept in position 
regardless of a door on the opening. In addition, a grab handle shall be 
provided on each side of the opening with its center approximately 4 
feet above floor level and of standard strength and mounting.
    (ii) Extension platform onto which materials can be hoisted for 
handling, and which shall have side rails or equivalent guards of 
standard specifications.
    (2) Every chute wall opening from which there is a drop of more than 
4 feet shall be guarded by one or more of the barriers specified in 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section or as required by the conditions.
    (3) Every window wall opening at a stairway landing, floor, 
platform, or balcony, from which there is a drop of more than 4 feet, 
and where the bottom of the opening is less than 3 feet above the 
platform or landing, shall be guarded by standard slats, standard grill 
work (as specified in paragraph (e)(11) of this section), or standard 
railing.

Where the window opening is below the landing, or platform, a standard 
toe board shall be provided.
    (4) Every temporary wall opening shall have adequate guards but 
these need not be of standard construction.
    (5) Where there is a hazard of materials falling through a wall 
hole, and the lower edge of the near side of the hole is less than 4 
inches above the floor, and the far side of the hole more than 5 feet 
above the next lower level, the hole shall be protected by a standard 
toeboard, or an enclosing screen either of solid construction, or as 
specified in paragraph (e)(11) of this section.
    (c) Protection of open-sided floors, platforms, and runways. (1) 
Every open-sided floor or platform 4 feet or more above adjacent floor 
or ground level shall be guarded by a standard railing (or the 
equivalent as specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section) on all open 
sides except where there is entrance to a ramp, stairway, or fixed 
ladder. The railing shall be provided with a toeboard wherever, beneath 
the open sides,
    (i) Persons can pass,
    (ii) There is moving machinery, or
    (iii) There is equipment with which falling materials could create a 
hazard.
    (2) Every runway shall be guarded by a standard railing (or the 
equivalent as specified in paragraph (e)(3) of this section) on all open 
sides 4 feet or more above floor or ground level. Wherever tools, 
machine parts, or materials are likely to be used on the runway, a 
toeboard shall also be provided on each exposed side.

Runways used exclusively for special purposes (such as oiling, shafting, 
or filling tank cars) may have the railing on one side omitted where 
operating conditions necessitate such omission, providing the falling 
hazard is minimized by using a runway of not less than 18 inches wide. 
Where persons entering upon runways become thereby exposed to machinery, 
electrical equipment, or other danger not a falling hazard, additional 
guarding than is here specified may be essential for protection.
    (3) Regardless of height, open-sided floors, walkways, platforms, or 
runways above or adjacent to dangerous equipment, pickling or 
galvanizing tanks, degreasing units, and similar hazards shall be 
guarded with a standard railing and toe board.
    (d) Stairway railings and guards. (1) Every flight of stairs having 
four or more risers shall be equipped with standard stair railings or 
standard handrails as specified in paragraphs (d)(1) (i) through (v) of 
this section, the width of the stair to be measured clear of all 
obstructions except handrails:
    (i) On stairways less than 44 inches wide having both sides 
enclosed, at least one handrail, preferably on the right side 
descending.
    (ii) On stairways less than 44 inches wide having one side open, at 
least one stair railing on open side.
    (iii) On stairways less than 44 inches wide having both sides open, 
one stair railing on each side.
    (iv) On stairways more than 44 inches wide but less than 88 inches 
wide, one handrail on each enclosed side and one stair railing on each 
open side.

[[Page 101]]

    (v) On stairways 88 or more inches wide, one handrail on each 
enclosed side, one stair railing on each open side, and one intermediate 
stair railing located approximately midway of the width.
    (2) Winding stairs shall be equipped with a handrail offset to 
prevent walking on all portions of the treads having width less than 6 
inches.
    (e) Railing, toe boards, and cover specifications. (1) A standard 
railing shall consist of top rail, intermediate rail, and posts, and 
shall have a vertical height of 42 inches nominal from upper surface of 
top rail to floor, platform, runway, or ramp level. The top rail shall 
be smooth-surfaced throughout the length of the railing. The 
intermediate rail shall be approximately halfway between the top rail 
and the floor, platform, runway, or ramp. The ends of the rails shall 
not overhang the terminal posts except where such overhang does not 
constitute a projection hazard.
    (2) A stair railing shall be of construction similar to a standard 
railing but the vertical height shall be not more than 34 inches nor 
less than 30 inches from upper surface of top rail to surface of tread 
in line with face of riser at forward edge of tread.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (i) For wood railings, the posts shall be of at least 2-inch by 4-
inch stock spaced not to exceed 6 feet; the top and intermediate rails 
shall be of at least 2-inch by 4-inch stock. If top rail is made of two 
right-angle pieces of 1-inch by 4-inch stock, posts may be spaced on 8-
foot centers, with 2-inch by 4-inch intermediate rail.
    (ii) For pipe railings, posts and top and intermediate railings 
shall be at least 1\1/2\ inches nominal diameter with posts spaced not 
more than 8 feet on centers.
    (iii) For structural steel railings, posts and top and intermediate 
rails shall be of 2-inch by 2-inch by \3/8\-inch angles or other metal 
shapes of equivalent bending strength with posts spaced not more than 8 
feet on centers.
    (iv) The anchoring of posts and framing of members for railings of 
all types shall be of such construction that the completed structure 
shall be capable of withstanding a load of at least 200 pounds applied 
in any direction at any point on the top rail.
    (v) Other types, sizes, and arrangements of railing construction are 
acceptable provided they meet the following conditions:
    (a) A smooth-surfaced top rail at a height above floor, platform, 
runway, or ramp level of 42 inches nominal;
    (b) A strength to withstand at least the minimum requirement of 200 
pounds top rail pressure;
    (c) Protection between top rail and floor, platform, runway, ramp, 
or stair treads, equivalent at least to that afforded by a standard 
intermediate rail;
    (4) A standard toeboard shall be 4 inches nominal in vertical height 
from its top edge to the level of the floor, platform, runway, or ramp. 
It shall be securely fastened in place and with not more than \1/4\-inch 
clearance above floor level. It may be made of any substantial material 
either solid or with openings not over 1 inch in greatest dimension.

Where material is piled to such height that a standard toeboard does not 
provide protection, paneling from floor to intermediate rail, or to top 
rail shall be provided.
    (5)(i) A handrail shall consist of a lengthwise member mounted 
directly on a wall or partition by means of brackets attached to the 
lower side of the handrail so as to offer no obstruction to a smooth 
surface along the top and both sides of the handrail. The handrail shall 
be of rounded or other section that will furnish an adequate handhold 
for anyone grasping it to avoid falling. The ends of the handrail should 
be turned in to the supporting wall or otherwise arranged so as not to 
constitute a projection hazard.
    (ii) The height of handrails shall be not more than 34 inches nor 
less than 30 inches from upper surface of handrail to surface of tread 
in line with face of riser or to surface of ramp.
    (iii) The size of handrails shall be: When of hardwood, at least 2 
inches in diameter; when of metal pipe, at least 1\1/2\ inches in 
diameter. The length of brackets shall be such as will give a clearance 
between handrail and wall or any projection thereon of at least 3 
inches. The spacing of brackets shall not exceed 8 feet.

[[Page 102]]

    (iv) The mounting of handrails shall be such that the completed 
structure is capable of withstanding a load of at least 200 pounds 
applied in any direction at any point on the rail.
    (6) All handrails and railings shall be provided with a clearance of 
not less than 3 inches between the handrail or railing and any other 
object.
    (7) Floor opening covers may be of any material that meets the 
following strength requirements:
    (i) Trench or conduit covers and their supports, when located in 
plant roadways, shall be designed to carry a truck rear-axle load of at 
least 20,000 pounds.
    (ii) Manhole covers and their supports, when located in plant 
roadways, shall comply with local standard highway requirements if any; 
otherwise, they shall be designed to carry a truck rear-axle load of at 
least 20,000 pounds.
    (iii) The construction of floor opening covers may be of any 
material that meets the strength requirements. Covers projecting not 
more than 1 inch above the floor level may be used providing all edges 
are chamfered to an angle with the horizontal of not over 30 degrees. 
All hinges, handles, bolts, or other parts shall set flush with the 
floor or cover surface.
    (8) Skylight screens shall be of such construction and mounting that 
they are capable of withstanding a load of at least 200 pounds applied 
perpendicularly at any one area on the screen. They shall also be of 
such construction and mounting that under ordinary loads or impacts, 
they will not deflect downward sufficiently to break the glass below 
them. The construction shall be of grillwork with openings not more than 
4 inches long or of slatwork with openings not more than 2 inches wide 
with length unrestricted.
    (9) Wall opening barriers (rails, rollers, picket fences, and half 
doors) shall be of such construction and mounting that, when in place at 
the opening, the barrier is capable of withstanding a load of at least 
200 pounds applied in any direction (except upward) at any point on the 
top rail or corresponding member.
    (10) Wall opening grab handles shall be not less than 12 inches in 
length and shall be so mounted as to give 3 inches clearance from the 
side framing of the wall opening. The size, material, and anchoring of 
the grab handle shall be such that the completed structure is capable of 
withstanding a load of at least 200 pounds applied in any direction at 
any point of the handle.
    (11) Wall opening screens shall be of such construction and mounting 
that they are capable of withstanding a load of at least 200 pounds 
applied horizontally at any point on the near side of the screen. They 
may be of solid construction, of grillwork with openings not more than 8 
inches long, or of slatwork with openings not more than 4 inches wide 
with length unrestricted.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49744, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5321, Feb. 10, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.24  Fixed industrial stairs.

    (a) Application of requirements. This section contains 
specifications for the safe design and construction of fixed general 
industrial stairs. This classification includes interior and exterior 
stairs around machinery, tanks, and other equipment, and stairs leading 
to or from floors, platforms, or pits. This section does not apply to 
stairs used for fire exit purposes, to construction operations to 
private residences, or to articulated stairs, such as may be installed 
on floating roof tanks or on dock facilities, the angle of which changes 
with the rise and fall of the base support.
    (b) Where fixed stairs are required. Fixed stairs shall be provided 
for access from one structure level to another where operations 
necessitate regular travel between levels, and for access to operating 
platforms at any equipment which requires attention routinely during 
operations. Fixed stairs shall also be provided where access to 
elevations is daily or at each shift for such purposes as gauging, 
inspection, regular maintenance, etc., where such work may expose 
employees to acids, caustics, gases, or other harmful substances, or for 
which purposes the carrying of tools or equipment by hand is normally 
required. (It is not the intent of this section to preclude the use of 
fixed ladders for access to elevated tanks, towers, and similar 
structures, overhead traveling cranes,

[[Page 103]]

etc., where the use of fixed ladders is common practice.) Spiral 
stairways shall not be permitted except for special limited usage and 
secondary access situations where it is not practical to provide a 
conventional stairway. Winding stairways may be installed on tanks and 
similar round structures where the diameter of the structure is not less 
than five (5) feet.
    (c) Stair strength. Fixed stairways shall be designed and 
constructed to carry a load of five times the normal live load 
anticipated but never of less strength than to carry safely a moving 
concentrated load of 1,000 pounds.
    (d) Stair width. Fixed stairways shall have a minimum width of 22 
inches.
    (e) Angle of stairway rise. Fixed stairs shall be installed at 
angles to the horizontal of between 30 deg. and 50 deg.. Any uniform 
combination of rise/tread dimensions may be used that will result in a 
stairway at an angle to the horizontal within the permissible range. 
Table D-1 gives rise/tread dimensions which will produce a stairway 
within the permissible range, stating the angle to the horizontal 
produced by each combination. However, the rise/tread combinations are 
not limited to those given in Table D-1.

                                Table D-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Tread
                 Angle to horizontal                  Rise (in   run (in
                                                       inches)   inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
30 deg.35'..........................................    6\1/2\        11
32 deg.08'..........................................    6\3/4\   10\3/4\
33 deg.41'..........................................         7   10\1/2\
35 deg.16'..........................................    7\1/4\   10\1/4\
36 deg.52'..........................................    7\1/2\        10
38 deg.29'..........................................    7\3/4\    9\3/4\
40 deg.08'..........................................         8    9\1/2\
41 deg.44'..........................................    8\1/4\    9\1/4\
43 deg.22'..........................................    8\1/2\         9
45 deg.00'..........................................    8\3/4\    8\3/4\
46 deg.38'..........................................         9    8\1/2\
48 deg.16'..........................................    9\1/4\    8\1/4\
49 deg.54'..........................................    9\1/2\         8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (f) Stair treads. All treads shall be reasonably slip-resistant and 
the nosings shall be of nonslip finish. Welded bar grating treads 
without nosings are acceptable providing the leading edge can be readily 
identified by personnel descending the stairway and provided the tread 
is serrated or is of definite nonslip design. Rise height and tread 
width shall be uniform throughout any flight of stairs including any 
foundation structure used as one or more treads of the stairs.
    (g) Stairway platforms. Stairway platforms shall be no less than the 
width of a stairway and a minimum of 30 inches in length measured in the 
direction of travel.
    (h) Railings and handrails. Standard railings shall be provided on 
the open sides of all exposed stairways and stair platforms. Handrails 
shall be provided on at least one side of closed stairways preferably on 
the right side descending. Stair railings and handrails shall be 
installed in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1910.23.
    (i) Vertical clearance. Vertical clearance above any stair tread to 
an overhead obstruction shall be at least 7 feet measured from the 
leading edge of the tread.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49744, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5321, Feb. 10, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.25  Portable wood ladders.

    (a) Application of requirements. This section is intended to 
prescribe rules and establish minimum requirements for the construction, 
care, and use of the common types of portable wood ladders, in order to 
insure safety under normal conditions of usage. Other types of special 
ladders, fruitpicker's ladders, combination step and extension ladders, 
stockroom step ladders, aisle-way step ladders, shelf ladders, and 
library ladders are not specifically covered by this section.
    (b) Materials--(1) Requirements applicable to all wood parts. (i) 
All wood parts shall be free from sharp edges and splinters; sound and 
free from accepted visual inspection from shake, wane, compression 
failures, decay, or other irregularities. Low density wood shall not be 
used.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (2) [Reserved]
    (c) Construction requirements.
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) Portable stepladders. Stepladders longer than 20 feet shall not 
be supplied. Stepladders as hereinafter specified shall be of three 
types:

    Type I--Industrial stepladder, 3 to 20 feet for heavy duty, such as 
utilities, contractors, and industrial use.

[[Page 104]]

    Type II--Commercial stepladder, 3 to 12 feet for medium duty, such 
as painters, offices, and light industrial use.
    Type III--Household stepladder, 3 to 6 feet for light duty, such as 
light household use.

    (i) General requirements.
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) A uniform step spacing shall be employed which shall be not more 
than 12 inches. Steps shall be parallel and level when the ladder is in 
position for use.
    (c) The minimum width between side rails at the top, inside to 
inside, shall be not less than 11\1/2\ inches. From top to bottom, the 
side rails shall spread at least 1 inch for each foot of length of 
stepladder.
    (d)-(e) [Reserved]
    (f) A metal spreader or locking device of sufficient size and 
strength to securely hold the front and back sections in open positions 
shall be a component of each stepladder. The spreader shall have all 
sharp points covered or removed to protect the user. For Type III 
ladder, the pail shelf and spreader may be combined in one unit (the so-
called shelf-lock ladder).
    (3) Portable rung ladders.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Single ladder. (a) Single ladders longer than 30 feet shall not 
be supplied.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (iii) Two-section ladder. (a) Two-section extension ladders longer 
than 60 feet shall not be supplied. All ladders of this type shall 
consist of two sections, one to fit within the side rails of the other, 
and arranged in such a manner that the upper section can be raised and 
lowered.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (iv) Sectional ladder. (a) Assembled combinations of sectional 
ladders longer than lengths specified in this subdivision shall not be 
used.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (v) Trestle and extension trestle ladder. (a) Trestle ladders, or 
extension sections or base sections of extension trestle ladders longer 
than 20 feet shall not be supplied.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (4) Special-purpose ladders.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Painter's stepladder. (a) Painter's stepladders longer than 12 
feet shall not be supplied.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (iii) Mason's ladder. A mason's ladder is a special type of single 
ladder intended for use in heavy construction work.
    (a) Mason's ladders longer than 40 feet shall not be supplied.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (5) Trolley and side-rolling ladders--(i) Length. Trolley ladders 
and side-rolling ladders longer than 20 feet should not be supplied.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (d) Care and use of ladders--(1) Care. To insure safety and 
serviceability the following precautions on the care of ladders shall be 
observed:
    (i) Ladders shall be maintained in good condition at all times, the 
joint between the steps and side rails shall be tight, all hardware and 
fittings securely attached, and the movable parts shall operate freely 
without binding or undue play.
    (ii) Metal bearings of locks, wheels, pulleys, etc., shall be 
frequently lubricated.
    (iii) Frayed or badly worn rope shall be replaced.
    (iv) Safety feet and other auxiliary equipment shall be kept in good 
condition to insure proper performance.
    (v)-(ix) [Reserved]
    (x) Ladders shall be inspected frequently and those which have 
developed defects shall be withdrawn from service for repair or 
destruction and tagged or marked as ``Dangerous, Do Not Use.''
    (xi) Rungs should be kept free of grease and oil.
    (2) Use. The following safety precautions shall be observed in 
connection with the use of ladders:
    (i) Portable rung and cleat ladders shall, where possible, be used 
at such a pitch that the horizontal distance from the top support to the 
foot of the ladder is one-quarter of the working length of the ladder 
(the length along the ladder between the foot and the top support). The 
ladder shall be so placed as to prevent slipping, or it shall be lashed, 
or held in position. Ladders

[[Page 105]]

shall not be used in a horizontal position as platforms, runways, or 
scaffolds;
    (ii) Ladders for which dimensions are specified should not be used 
by more than one man at a time nor with ladder jacks and scaffold planks 
where use by more than one man is anticipated. In such cases, specially 
designed ladders with larger dimensions of the parts should be procured;
    (iii) Portable ladders shall be so placed that the side rails have a 
secure footing. The top rest for portable rung and cleat ladders shall 
be reasonably rigid and shall have ample strength to support the applied 
load;
    (iv) Ladders shall not be placed in front of doors opening toward 
the ladder unless the door is blocked upon, locked, or guarded;
    (v) Ladders shall not be placed on boxes, barrels, or other unstable 
bases to obtain additional height;
    (vi)-(vii) [Reserved]
    (viii) Ladders with broken or missing steps, rungs, or cleats, 
broken side rails, or other faulty equipment shall not be used; 
improvised repairs shall not be made;
    (ix) Short ladders shall not be spliced together to provide long 
sections;
    (x) Ladders made by fastening cleats across a single rail shall not 
be used;
    (xi) Ladders shall not be used as guys, braces, or skids, or for 
other than their intended purposes;
    (xii) Tops of the ordinary types of stepladders shall not be used as 
steps;
    (xiii) On two-section extension ladders the minimum overlap for the 
two sections in use shall be as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Overlap
                    Size of ladder (feet)                       (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to and including 36......................................           3
Over 36 up to and including 48..............................           4
Over 48 up to and including 60..............................           5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (xiv) Portable rung ladders with reinforced rails (see paragraphs 
(c)(3) (ii)(c) and (iii)(d) this section) shall be used only with the 
metal reinforcement on the under side;
    (xv) No ladder should be used to gain access to a roof unless the 
top of the ladder shall extend at least 3 feet above the point of 
support, at eave, gutter, or roofline;
    (xvi) [Reserved]
    (xvii) Middle and top sections of sectional or window cleaner's 
ladders should not be used for bottom section unless the user equips 
them with safety shoes;
    (xviii) [Reserved]
    (xix) The user should equip all portable rung ladders with nonslip 
bases when there is a hazard of slipping. Nonslip bases are not intended 
as a substitute for care in safely placing, lashing, or holding a ladder 
that is being used upon oily, metal, concrete, or slippery surfaces;
    (xx) The bracing on the back legs of step ladders is designed solely 
for increasing stability and not for climbing.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49744, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5321, Feb. 10, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.26  Portable metal ladders.

    (a) Requirements--(1) General. Specific design and construction 
requirements are not part of this section because of the wide variety of 
metals and design possibilities. However, the design shall be such as to 
produce a ladder without structural defects or accident hazards such as 
sharp edges, burrs, etc. The metal selected shall be of sufficient 
strength to meet the test requirements, and shall be protected against 
corrosion unless inherently corrosion-resistant.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) The spacing of rungs or steps shall be on 12-inch centers.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Rungs and steps shall be corrugated, knurled, dimpled, coated 
with skid-resistant material, or otherwise treated to minimize the 
possibility of slipping.
    (2) General specifications--straight and extension ladders. (i) The 
minimum width between side rails of a straight ladder or any section of 
an extension ladder shall be 12 inches.
    (ii) The length of single ladders or individual sections of ladders 
shall not exceed 30 feet. Two-section ladders shall not exceed 48 feet 
in length and over two-section ladders shall not exceed 60 feet in 
length.
    (iii) Based on the nominal length of the ladder, each section of a 
multisection ladder shall overlap the adjacent

[[Page 106]]

section by at least the number of feet stated in the following:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Overlap
               Normal length of ladder (feet)                   (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to and including 36......................................           3
Over 36, up to and including 48.............................           4
Over 48, up to 60...........................................           5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iv) Extension ladders shall be equipped with positive stops which 
will insure the overlap specified in the table above.
    (3) General specifications--step ladders.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) The length of a stepladder is measured by the length of the 
front rail. To be classified as a standard length ladder, the measured 
length shall be within plus or minus one-half inch of the specified 
length. Stepladders shall not exceed 20 feet in length.
    (iv)-(vi) [Reserved]
    (vii) The bottoms of the four rails are to be supplied with 
insulating nonslip material for the safety of the user.
    (viii) A metal spreader or locking device of sufficient size and 
strength to securely hold the front and back sections in the open 
position shall be a component of each stepladder. The spreader shall 
have all sharp points or edges covered or removed to protect the user.
    (4) General specifications--trestles and extension trestle ladders. 
(i) Trestle ladders or extension sections or base sections of extension 
trestle ladders shall be not more than 20 feet in length.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (5) General specifications--platform ladders. (i) The length of a 
platform ladder shall not exceed 20 feet. The length of a platform 
ladder shall be measured along the front rail from the floor to the 
platform.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Care and maintenance of ladders--(1) General. To get maximum 
serviceability, safety, and to eliminate unnecessary damage of 
equipment, good safe practices in the use and care of ladder equipment 
must be employed by the users.
    The following rules and regulations are essential to the life of the 
equipment and the safety of the user.
    (2) Care of ladders.
    (i)-(iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) Ladders must be maintained in good usable condition at all 
times.
    (v) [Reserved]
    (vi) If a ladder is involved in any of the following, immediate 
inspection is necessary:
    (a) If ladders tip over, inspect ladder for side rails dents or 
bends, or excessively dented rungs; check all rung-to- side-rail 
connections; check hardware connections; check rivets for shear.
    (b)-(c) [Reserved]
    (d) If ladders are exposed to oil and grease, equipment should be 
cleaned of oil, grease, or slippery materials. This can easily be done 
with a solvent or steam cleaning.
    (vii) Ladders having defects are to be marked and taken out of 
service until repaired by either maintenance department or the 
manufacturer.
    (3) Use of ladders. (i). A simple rule for setting up a ladder at 
the proper angle is to place the base a distance from the vertical wall 
equal to one-fourth the working length of the ladder.
    (ii) Portable ladders are designed as a one-man working ladder based 
on a 200-pound load.
    (iii) The ladder base section must be placed with a secure footing.
    (iv) The top of the ladder must be placed with the two rails 
supported, unless equipped with a single support attachment.
    (v) When ascending or descending, the climber must face the ladder.
    (vi) Ladders must not be tied or fastened together to provide longer 
sections. They must be equipped with the hardware fittings necessary if 
the manufacturer endorses extended uses.
    (vii) Ladders should not be used as a brace, skid, guy or gin pole, 
gangway, or for other uses than that for which they were intended, 
unless specifically recommended for use by the manufacturer.
    (viii) See Sec. 1910.333(c) for work practices to be used when work 
is performed on or near electric circuits.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49745, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5321, Feb. 10, 1984; 55 FR 32014, Aug. 6, 1990]

[[Page 107]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.27  Fixed ladders.

    (a) Design requirements--(1) Design considerations. All ladders, 
appurtenances, and fastenings shall be designed to meet the following 
load requirements:
    (i) The minimum design live load shall be a single concentrated load 
of 200 pounds.
    (ii) The number and position of additional concentrated live-load 
units of 200 pounds each as determined from anticipated usage of the 
ladder shall be considered in the design.
    (iii) The live loads imposed by persons occupying the ladder shall 
be considered to be concentrated at such points as will cause the 
maximum stress in the structural member being considered.
    (iv) The weight of the ladder and attached appurtenances together 
with the live load shall be considered in the design of rails and 
fastenings.
    (2) Design stresses. Design stresses for wood components of ladders 
shall not exceed those specified in Sec. 1910.25. All wood parts of 
fixed ladders shall meet the requirements of Sec. 1910.25(b).

For fixed ladders consisting of wood side rails and wood rungs or 
cleats, used at a pitch in the range 75 degrees to 90 degrees, and 
intended for use by no more than one person per section, single ladders 
as described in Sec. 1910.25(c)(3)(ii) are acceptable.
    (b) Specific features--(1) Rungs and cleats. (i) All rungs shall 
have a minimum diameter of three-fourths inch for metal ladders, except 
as covered in paragraph (b)(7)(i) of this section and a minimum diameter 
of 1\1/8\ inches for wood ladders.
    (ii) The distance between rungs, cleats, and steps shall not exceed 
12 inches and shall be uniform throughout the length of the ladder.
    (iii) The minimum clear length of rungs or cleats shall be 16 
inches.
    (iv) Rungs, cleats, and steps shall be free of splinters, sharp 
edges, burrs, or projections which may be a hazard.
    (v) The rungs of an individual-rung ladder shall be so designed that 
the foot cannot slide off the end. A suggested design is shown in figure 
D-1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.001

   Figure D-1.--Suggested design for rungs on individual-rung ladders.

    (2) Side rails. Side rails which might be used as a climbing aid 
shall be of such cross sections as to afford adequate gripping surface 
without sharp edges, splinters, or burrs.
    (3) Fastenings. Fastenings shall be an integral part of fixed ladder 
design.
    (4) Splices. All splices made by whatever means shall meet design 
requirements as noted in paragraph (a) of this section. All splices and 
connections shall have smooth transition with original members and with 
no sharp or extensive projections.
    (5) Electrolytic action. Adequate means shall be employed to protect 
dissimilar metals from electrolytic action when such metals are joined.
    (6) Welding. All welding shall be in accordance with the ``Code for 
Welding in Building Construction'' (AWSD1.0-1966).
    (7) Protection from deterioration. (i) Metal ladders and 
appurtenances shall be painted or otherwise treated to resist corrosion 
and rusting when location demands. Ladders formed by individual metal 
rungs imbedded in concrete, which serve as access to pits and to other 
areas under floors, are frequently located in an atmosphere that causes 
corrosion and rusting. To increase rung life in such atmosphere, 
individual metal rungs shall have a minimum diameter of 1 inch or shall 
be painted or otherwise treated to resist corrosion and rusting.

[[Page 108]]

    (ii) Wood ladders, when used under conditions where decay may occur, 
shall be treated with a nonirritating preservative, and the details 
shall be such as to prevent or minimize the accumulation of water on 
wood parts.
    (iii) When different types of materials are used in the construction 
of a ladder, the materials used shall be so treated as to have no 
deleterious effect one upon the other.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.002

   Figure D-2.--Rail Ladder With Bar Steel Rails and Round Steel Rungs

    (c) Clearance--(1) Climbing side. On fixed ladders, the 
perpendicular distance from the centerline of the rungs to the nearest 
permanent object on the climbing side of the ladder shall be 36 inches 
for a pitch of 76 degrees, and 30 inches for a pitch of 90 degrees (fig. 
D-2 of this section), with minimum clearances for intermediate pitches 
varying between these two limits in proportion to the slope, except as 
provided in subparagraphs (3) and (5) of this paragraph.
    (2) Ladders without cages or wells. A clear width of at least 15 
inches shall be provided each way from the centerline of the ladder in 
the climbing space, except when cages or wells are necessary.
    (3) Ladders with cages or baskets. Ladders equipped with cage or 
basket are excepted from the provisions of subparagraphs (1) and (2) of 
this paragraph, but shall conform to the provisions of paragraph 
(d)(1)(v) of this section. Fixed ladders in smooth-walled wells are 
excepted from the provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, but 
shall conform to the provisions of paragraph (d)(1)(vi) of this section.
    (4) Clearance in back of ladder. The distance from the centerline of 
rungs, cleats, or steps to the nearest permanent object in back of the 
ladder shall be not less than 7 inches, except that when unavoidable 
obstructions are encountered, minimum clearances as shown in figure D-3 
shall be provided.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TLEARANCESI92EC27OC91.003

  Figure D-3.--Clearance for Unavoidable Obstruction at Rear of Fixed 
                                 Ladder

    (5) Clearance in back of grab bar. The distance from the centerline 
of the grab bar to the nearest permanent object in back of the grab bars 
shall be not less than 4 inches. Grab bars shall not protrude on the 
climbing side beyond the rungs of the ladder which they serve.
    (6) Step-across distance. The step-across distance from the nearest 
edge of ladder to the nearest edge of equipment or structure shall be 
not more than 12 inches, or less than 2\1/2\ inches (fig. D-4).

[[Page 109]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.004


                    Figure D-4.--Ladder Far from Wall

    (7) Hatch cover. Counterweighted hatch covers shall open a minimum 
of 60 degrees from the horizontal. The distance from the centerline of 
rungs or cleats to the edge of the hatch opening on the climbing side 
shall be not less than 24 inches for offset wells or 30 inches for 
straight wells. There shall be not protruding potential hazards within 
24 inches of the centerline of rungs or cleats; any such hazards within 
30 inches of the centerline of the rungs or cleats shall be fitted with 
deflector plates placed at an angle of 60 degrees from the horizontal as 
indicated in figure D-5. The relationship of a fixed ladder to an 
acceptable counterweighted hatch cover is illustrated in figure D-6.
    (d) Special requirements--(1) Cages or wells. (i) Cages or wells 
(except on chimney ladders) shall be built, as shown on the applicable 
drawings, covered in detail in figures D-7, D-8, and D-9, or of 
equivalent construction.
    (ii) Cages or wells (except as provided in subparagraph (5) of this 
paragraph) conforming to the dimensions shown in figures D-7, D-8, and 
D-9 shall be provided on ladders of more than 20 feet to a maximum 
unbroken length of 30 feet.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.005

             Figure D-5.--Deflector Plates for Head Hazards
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.006

    Figure D-6.--Relationship of Fixed Ladder to a Safe Access Hatch

    (iii) Cages shall extend a minimum of 42 inches above the top of 
landing, unless other acceptable protection is provided.
    (iv) Cages shall extend down the ladder to a point not less than 7 
feet nor more than 8 feet above the base of the ladder, with bottom 
flared not less than 4 inches, or portion of cage opposite ladder shall 
be carried to the base.
    (v) Cages shall not extend less than 27 nor more than 28 inches from 
the centerline of the rungs of the ladder. Cage shall not be less than 
27 inches in width. The inside shall be clear of projections. Vertical 
bars shall be located at a maximum spacing of 40 degrees around the 
circumference of the cage; this will give a maximum spacing of 
approximately 9\1/2\ inches, center to center.
    (vi) Ladder wells shall have a clear width of at least 15 inches 
measured each way from the centerline of the ladder. Smooth-walled wells 
shall be a

[[Page 110]]

minimum of 27 inches from the centerline of rungs to the well wall on 
the climbing side of the ladder. Where other obstructions on the 
climbing side of the ladder exist, there shall be a minimum of 30 inches 
from the centerline of the rungs.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.007

          Figure D-7.--Cages for Ladders More Than 20 Feet High
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.008

         Figure D-8.--Clearance Diagram for Fixed Ladder in Well

[[Page 111]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.009


                Figure D-9.--Cages--Special applications.

    (2) Landing platforms. When ladders are used to ascend to heights 
exceeding 20 feet (except on chimneys), landing platforms shall be 
provided for each 30 feet of height or fraction thereof, except that, 
where no cage, well, or ladder safety device is provided, landing 
platforms shall be provided for each 20 feet of height or fraction 
thereof. Each ladder section shall be offset from adjacent sections. 
Where installation conditions (even for a short, unbroken length) 
require that adjacent sections be offset, landing platforms shall be 
provided at each offset.
    (i) Where a man has to step a distance greater than 12 inches from 
the centerline of the rung of a ladder to the nearest edge of structure 
or equipment, a landing platform shall be provided. The minimum step-
across distance shall be 2\1/2\ inches.
    (ii) All landing platforms shall be equipped with standard railings 
and toeboards, so arranged as to give safe access to the ladder. 
Platforms shall be not less than 24 inches in width and 30 inches in 
length.
    (iii) One rung of any section of ladder shall be located at the 
level of the landing laterally served by the ladder. Where access to the 
landing is through the ladder, the same rung spacing as used on the 
ladder shall be used from the landing platform to the first rung below 
the landing.
    (3) Ladder extensions. The side rails of through or side-step ladder 
extensions shall extend 3\1/2\ feet above parapets and landings. For 
through ladder extensions, the rungs shall be omitted from the extension 
and shall have not less than 18 nor more than 24 inches clearance 
between rails. For side-step or offset fixed ladder sections, at 
landings, the side rails and rungs shall be carried to the next regular 
rung beyond or above the 3\1/2\ feet minimum (fig. D-10).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.010

               Figure D-10.--Offset Fixed Ladder Sections

    (4) Grab bars. Grab bars shall be spaced by a continuation of the 
rung spacing when they are located in the horizontal position. Vertical 
grab bars shall have the same spacing as the ladder side rails. Grab-bar 
diameters shall be the equivalent of the round-rung diameters.
    (5) Ladder safety devices. Ladder safety devices may be used on 
tower, water tank, and chimney ladders over 20 feet in unbroken length 
in lieu of cage protection. No landing platform is required in these 
cases. All ladder safety devices such as those that incorporate 
lifebelts, friction brakes, and sliding

[[Page 112]]

attachments shall meet the design requirements of the ladders which they 
serve.
    (e) Pitch--(1) Preferred pitch. The preferred pitch of fixed ladders 
shall be considered to come in the range of 75 degrees and 90 degrees 
with the horizontal (fig. D-11).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.011

                  Figure D-11.--Pitch of Fixed Ladders

    (2) Substandard pitch. Fixed ladders shall be considered as 
substandard if they are installed within the substandard pitch range of 
60 and 75 degrees with the horizontal. Substandard fixed ladders are 
permitted only where it is found necessary to meet conditions of 
installation. This substandard pitch range shall be considered as a 
critical range to be avoided, if possible.
    (3) Scope of coverage in this section. This section covers only 
fixed ladders within the pitch range of 60 degrees and 90 degrees with 
the horizontal.
    (4) Pitch greater than 90 degrees. Ladders having a pitch in excess 
of 90 degrees with the horizontal are prohibited.
    (f) Maintenance. All ladders shall be maintained in a safe 
condition. All ladders shall be inspected regularly, with the intervals 
between inspections being determined by use and exposure.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.28  Safety requirements for scaffolding.

    (a) General requirements for all scaffolds. (1) Scaffolds shall be 
furnished and erected in accordance with this standard for persons 
engaged in work that cannot be done safely from the ground or from solid 
construction, except that ladders used for such work shall conform to 
Sec. 1910.25 and Sec. 1910.26.
    (2) The footing or anchorage for scaffolds shall be sound, rigid, 
and capable of carrying the maximum intended load without settling or 
displacement. Unstable objects such as barrels, boxes, loose brick, or 
concrete blocks shall not be used to support scaffolds or planks.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Scaffolds and their components shall be capable of supporting 
without failure at least four times the maximum intended load.
    (5) Scaffolds and other devices mentioned or described in this 
section shall be maintained in safe condition. Scaffolds shall not be 
altered or moved horizontally while they are in use or occupied.
    (6) Any scaffold damaged or weakened from any cause shall be 
immediately repaired and shall not be used until repairs have been 
completed.
    (7) Scaffolds shall not be loaded in excess of the working load for 
which they are intended.
    (8) All load-carrying timber members of scaffold framing shall be a 
minimum of 1,500 f. (Stress Grade) construction grade lumber. All 
dimensions are nominal sizes as provided in the American Lumber 
Standards, except that where rough sizes are noted, only rough or 
undressed lumber of the size specified will satisfy minimum 
requirements. (Note: Where nominal sizes of lumber are used in place of 
rough sizes, the nominal size lumber shall be such as to provide 
equivalent strength to that specified in tables D-7 through D-12 and D-
16.)
    (9) All planking shall be Scaffold Grade as recognized by grading 
rules for the species of wood used. The maximum permissible spans for 2- 
 x  9-inch or wider planks are shown in the following table:

[[Page 113]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Material
                                 ---------------------------------------
                                      Full thickness          Nominal
                                     undressed lumber        thickness
                                 ------------------------     lumber
                                                         ---------------
Working load (p.s.f.)...........      25      50      75      25      50
Permissible span (ft.)..........      10       8       6       8       9
------------------------------------------------------------------------


The maximum permissible span for 1\1/4\ x 9-inch or wider plank of full 
thickness is 4 feet with medium loading of 50 p.s.f.
    (10) Nails or bolts used in the construction of scaffolds shall be 
of adequate size and in sufficient numbers at each connection to develop 
the designed strength of the scaffold. Nails shall not be subjected to a 
straight pull and shall be driven full length.
    (11) All planking or platforms shall be overlapped (minimum 12 
inches) or secured from movement.
    (12) An access ladder or equivalent safe access shall be provided.
    (13) Scaffold planks shall extend over their end supports not less 
than 6 inches nor more than 18 inches.
    (14) The poles, legs, or uprights of scaffolds shall be plumb, and 
securely and rigidly braced to prevent swaying and displacement.
    (15) Materials being hoisted onto a scaffold shall have a tag line.
    (16) Overhead protection shall be provided for men on a scaffold 
exposed to overhead hazards.
    (17) Scaffolds shall be provided with a screen between the toeboard 
and the guardrail, extending along the entire opening, consisting of No. 
18 gauge U.S. Standard Wire one-half-inch mesh or the equivalent, where 
persons are required to work or pass under the scaffolds.
    (18) Employees shall not work on scaffolds during storms or high 
winds.
    (19) Employees shall not work on scaffolds which are covered with 
ice or snow, unless all ice or snow is removed and planking sanded to 
prevent slipping.
    (20) Tools, materials, and debris shall not be allowed to accumulate 
in quantities to cause a hazard.
    (21) Only treated or protected fiber rope shall be used for or near 
any work involving the use of corrosive substances or chemicals.
    (22) Wire or fiber rope used for scaffold suspension shall be 
capable of supporting at least six times the intended load.
    (23) When acid solutions are used for cleaning buildings over 50 
feet in height, wire rope supported scaffolds shall be used.
    (24) The use of shore scaffolds or lean-to scaffolds is prohibited.
    (25) Lumber sizes, when used in this section, refer to nominal sizes 
except where otherwise stated.
    (26) Scaffolds shall be secured to permanent structures, through use 
of anchor bolts, reveal bolts, or other equivalent means. Window 
cleaners' anchor bolts shall not be used.
    (27) Special precautions shall be taken to protect scaffold members, 
including any wire or fiber ropes, when using a heat-producing process.
    (b) General requirements for wood pole scaffolds. (1) Scaffold poles 
shall bear on a foundation of sufficient size and strength to spread the 
load from the poles over a sufficient area to prevent settlement. All 
poles shall be set plumb.
    (2) Where wood poles are spliced, the ends shall be squared and the 
upper section shall rest squarely on the lower section. Wood splice 
plates shall be provided on at least two adjacent sides and shall not be 
less than 4 feet 0 inches in length, overlapping the abutted ends 
equally, and have the same width and not less than the cross-sectional 
area of the pole. Splice plates of other materials of equivalent 
strength may be used.
    (3) Independent pole scaffolds shall be set as near to the wall of 
the building as practicable.
    (4) All pole scaffolds shall be securely guyed or tied to the 
building or structure. Where the height or length exceeds 25 feet, the 
scaffold shall be secured at intervals not greater than 25 feet 
vertically and horizontally.
    (5) Putlogs or bearers shall be set with their greater dimensions 
vertical, long enough to project over the ledgers of the inner and outer 
rows of poles at least 3 inches for proper support.
    (6) Every wooden putlog on single pole scaffolds shall be reinforced 
with a

[[Page 114]]

\3/16\ x 2-inch steel strip or equivalent secured to its lower edge 
throughout its entire length.
    (7) Ledgers shall be long enough to extend over two pole spaces. 
Ledgers shall not be spliced between the poles. Ledgers shall be 
reinforced by bearing blocks securely nailed to the side of the pole to 
form a support for the ledger.
    (8) Diagonal bracing shall be provided to prevent the poles from 
moving in a direction parallel with the wall of the building, or from 
buckling.
    (9) Cross bracing shall be provided between the inner and outer sets 
of poles in independent pole scaffolds. The free ends of pole scaffolds 
shall be cross braced.
    (10) Full diagonal face bracing shall be erected across the entire 
face of pole scaffolds in both directions. The braces shall be spliced 
at the poles.
    (11) Platform planks shall be laid with their edges close together 
so the platform will be tight with no spaces through which tools or 
fragments of material can fall.
    (12) Where planking is lapped, each plank shall lap its end supports 
at least 12 inches. Where the ends of planks abut each other to form a 
flush floor, the butt joint shall be at the centerline of a pole. The 
abutted ends shall rest on separate bearers. Intermediate beams shall be 
provided where necessary to prevent dislodgment of planks due to 
deflection, and the ends shall be nailed or cleated to prevent their 
dislodgment.
    (13) When a scaffold turns a corner, the platform planks shall be 
laid to prevent tipping. The planks that meet the corner putlog at an 
angle shall be laid first, extending over the diagonally placed putlog 
far enough to have a good safe bearing, but not far enough to involve 
any danger from tipping. The planking running in the opposite direction 
at right angles shall be laid so as to extend over and rest on the first 
layer of planking.
    (14) When moving platforms to the next level, the old platform shall 
be left undisturbed until the new putlogs or bearers have been set in 
place, ready to receive the platform planks.
    (15) Guardrails not less than 2  x  4 inches or the equivalent and 
not less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, 
when required, of 1  x  4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, 
shall be installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet 
above the ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in 
height. Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph 
(a)(17) of this section.
    (16) All wood pole scaffolds 60 feet or less in height shall be 
constructed and erected in accordance with tables D-7 through D-12 of 
this section. If they are over 60 feet in height they shall be designed 
by a registered professional engineer and constructed and erected in 
accordance with such design. A copy of the typical drawings and 
specifications shall be made available to the employer and for 
inspection purposes.
    (17) Wood-pole scaffolds shall not be erected beyond the reach of 
effective firefighting apparatus.

Table D-7--Minimum Nominal Size and Maximum Spacing of Members of Single
                       Pole Scaffolds--Light Duty
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Maximum height of scaffold
                                ----------------------------------------
                                       20 feet              60 feet
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uniformly distributed load.....  Not to exceed 25
                                  pounds per square
                                  foot..
Poles or uprights..............  2 by 4 in..........  4 by 4 in.
Pole spacing (longitudinal)....  6 ft. 0 in.........  10 ft. 0 in.
Maximum width of scaffold......  5 ft. 0 in.........  5 ft. 0 in.
Bearers or putlogs to 3 ft. 0    2 by 4 in..........  2 by 4 in.
 in. width.
Bearers or putlogs to 5 ft. 0    2 by 6 in. or 3 by   2 by 6 in. or 3 by
 in. width.                       4 in.                4 in.(rough).
Ledgers........................  1 by 4 in..........  1\1/4\ by 9 in.
Planking.......................  1\1/4\ by 9 in.      2 by 9 in.
                                  (rough).
Vertical spacing of horizontal   7 ft. 0 in.........  7 ft. 0 in.
 members.
Bracing, horizontal and          1 by 4 in..........  1 by 4 in.
 diagonal.
Tie-ins........................  1 by 4 in..........  1 by 4 in.
Toeboards......................  4 in. high           4 in. high
                                  (minimum).           (minimum).

[[Page 115]]

Guardrail......................  2 by 4 in..........  2 by 4 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
All members except planking are used on edge.


Table D-8--Minimum Nominal Size and Maximum Spacing of Members of Single
                       Pole Scaffolds--Medium Duty
Uniformly distributed load................  Not to exceed 50 pounds per
                                             square foot.
Maximum height of scaffold................  60 ft.
Poles or uprights.........................  4 by 4 in.
Pole spacing (longitudinal)...............  8 ft. 0 in.
Maximum width of scaffold.................  5 ft. 0 in.
Bearers or putlogs........................  2 by 9 in. or 3 by 4 in.
Spacing of bearers or putlogs.............  8 ft. 0 in.
Ledgers...................................  2 by 9 in.
Vertical spacing of horizontal members....  9 ft. 0 in.
Bracing, horizontal.......................  1 by 6 in. or 1\1/4\ by 4
                                             in.
Bracing, diagonal.........................  1 by 4 in.
Tie-ins...................................  1 by 4 in.
Planking..................................  2 by 9 in.
Toeboards.................................  4 in. high (minimum).
Guardrail.................................  2 by 4 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
All members except planking are used on edge.


Table D-9--Minimum Nominal Size and Maximum Spacing of Members of Single
                       Pole Scaffolds--Heavy Duty
Uniformly distributed load................  Not to exceed 75 pounds per
                                             square foot.
Maximum height of scaffold................  60 ft.
Poles or uprights.........................  4 by 4 in.
Pole spacing (longitudinal)...............  6 ft. 0 in.
Maximum width of scaffold.................  5 ft. 0 in.
Bearers or putlogs........................  2 by 9 in. or 3 by 5 in.
                                             (rough).
Spacing of bearers or putlogs.............  6 ft. 0 in.
Ledgers...................................  2 by 9 in.
Vertical spacing of horizontal members....  6 ft. 6 in.
Bracing, horizontal and diagonal..........  2 by 4 in.
Tie-ins...................................  1 by 4 in.
Planking..................................  2 by 9 in.
Toeboards.................................  4 in. high (minimum).
Guardrail.................................  2 by 4 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
All members except planking are used on edge.


   Table D-10--Minimum Nominal Size and Maximum Spacing of Members of
                 Independent Pole Scaffolds--Light Duty
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Maximum height of scaffold
                                ----------------------------------------
                                       20 feet              60 feet
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uniformly distributed load.....  Not to exceed 25
                                  pounds per square
                                  foot..
Poles or uprights..............  2 by 4 in..........  4 by 4 in.
Pole spacing (longitudinal)....  6 ft. 0 in.........  10 ft. 0 in.
Pole spacing (transverse)......  6 ft. 0 in.........  10 ft. 0 in.
Ledgers........................  1\1/4\ by 4 in.....  1\1/4\ by 9 in.
Bearers to 3 ft. 0 in. span....  2 by 4 in..........  2 by 4 in.
Bearers to 10 ft. 0 in. span...  2 by 6 in. or 3 by   2 by 9 (rough) or
                                  4 in.                3 by 8 in.
Planking.......................  1\1/4\ by 9 in.....  2 by 9 in.
Vertical spacing of horizontal   7 ft. 0 in.........  7 ft. 0 in.
 members.
Bracing, horizontal and          1 by 4 in..........  1 by 4 in.
 diagonal.
Tie-ins........................  1 by 4 in..........  1 by 4 in.
Toeboards......................  4 in. high.........  4 in. high
                                                       (minimum).
Guardrail......................  2 by 4 in..........  2 by 4 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
All members except planking are used on edge.


   Table D-11--Minimum Nominal Size and Maximum Spacing of Members of
                 Independent Pole Scaffolds--Medium Duty
Uniformly distributed load................  Not to exceed 50 pounds per
                                             square foot.
Maximum height of scaffold................  60 ft.
Poles or uprights.........................  4 by 4 in.
Pole spacing (longitudinal)...............  8 ft. 0 in.
Pole spacing (transverse).................  8 ft. 0 in.
Ledgers...................................  2 by 9 in.
Vertical spacing of horizontal members....  6 ft. 0 in.
Spacing of bearers........................  8 ft. 0 in.
Bearers...................................  2 by 9 in. (rough) or 2 by
                                             10 in.
Bracing, horizontal.......................  1 by 6 in. or 1\1/4\ by 4
                                             in.
Bracing, diagonal.........................  1 by 4 in.
Tie-ins...................................  1 by 4 in.
Planking..................................  2 by 9 in.
Toeboards.................................  4 in. high (minimum).
Guardrail.................................  2 by 4 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
All members except planking are used on edge.


[[Page 116]]


   Table D-12--Minimum Nominal Size and Maximum Spacing of Members of
                 Independent Pole Scaffolds--Heavy Duty
Uniformly distributed load................  Not to exceed 75 pounds per
                                             square foot.
Maximum height of scaffold................  60 ft.
Poles or uprights.........................  4 by 4 in.
Pole spacing (longitudinal)...............  6 ft. 0 in.
Pole spacing (transverse).................  8 ft. 0 in.
Ledgers...................................  2 by 9 in.
Vertical spacing of horizontal members....  4 ft. 6 in.
Bearers...................................  2 by 9 in. (rough).
Bracing, horizontal and diagonal..........  2 by 4 in.
Tie-ins...................................  1 by 4 in.
Planking..................................  2 by 9 in.
Toeboards.................................  4 in. high (minimum).
Guardrail.................................  2 by 4 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
All members except planking are used on edge.


           Table D-13--Tube and Coupler Scaffolds--Light Duty
Uniformly distributed load................  Not to exceed 25 p.s.f.
post spacing (longitudinal)...............  10 ft. 0 in.
Post spacing (transverse).................  6 ft. 0 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Additional planked
     Working levels               levels              Maximum height
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1......................                  8                 125 ft.
2......................                  4                 125 ft.
3......................                  0            91 ft. 0 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


           Table D-14--Tube and Coupler Scaffolds--Medium Duty
Uniformly distributed load................  Not to exceed 50 p.s.f.
Post spacing (longitudinal)...............  8 ft. 0 in.
Post spacing (transverse).................  6 ft. 0 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Additional planked
     Working levels               levels              Maximum height
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1......................                  6                 125 ft.
2......................                  0            78 ft. 0 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


           Table D-15--Tube and Coupler Scaffolds--Heavy Duty
Uniformly distributed load................  Not to exceed 75 p.s.f.
Post spacing (longitudinal)...............  6 ft. 6 in.
Post spacing (transverse).................  6 ft. 0 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Additional planked
     Working levels               levels              Maximum height
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1......................                  6                 125 ft.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Tube and coupler scaffolds. (1) A light-duty tube and coupler 
scaffold shall have all posts, bearers, runners, and bracing of nominal 
2-inch O.D. steel tubing. The posts shall be spaced no more than 6 feet 
apart by 10 feet along the length of the scaffold. Other structural 
metals when used must be designed to carry an equivalent load.
    (2) A medium-duty tube and coupler scaffold shall have all posts, 
runners, and bracing of nominal 2-inch O.D. steel tubing. Posts spaced 
not more than 6 feet apart by 8 feet along the length of the scaffold 
shall have bearers of nominal 2\1/2\-inch O.D. steel tubing. Posts 
spaced not more than 5 feet apart by 8 feet along the length of the 
scaffold shall have bearers of nominal 2-inch O.D. steel tubing. Other 
structural metals when used must be designed to carry an equivalent 
load.
    (3) A heavy-duty tube and coupler scaffold shall have all posts, 
runners, and bracing of nominal 2-inch O.D. steel tubing, with the posts 
spaced not more than 6 feet apart by 6 feet 6 inches along the length of 
the scaffold. Other structural metals when used must be designed to 
carry an equivalent load.
    (4) Tube and coupler scaffolds shall be limited in heights and 
working levels to those permitted in tables D-13, 14, and 15, of this 
section. Drawings and specifications of all tube and coupler scaffolds 
above the limitations in tables D-13, 14, and 15 of this section shall 
be designed by a registered professional engineer and copies made 
available to the employer and for inspection purposes.
    (5) All tube and coupler scaffolds shall be constructed and erected 
to support four times the maximum intended loads as set forth in tables 
D-13, 14, and 15 of this section, or as set forth in the specifications 
by a registered professional engineer, copies which shall be made 
available to the employer and for inspection purposes.
    (6) All tube and coupler scaffolds shall be erected by competent and 
experienced personnel.
    (7) Posts shall be accurately spaced, erected on suitable bases, and 
maintained plumb.
    (8) Runners shall be erected along the length of the scaffold 
located on both the inside and the outside posts at even height. Runners 
shall be interlocked to form continuous lengths and coupled to each 
post. The bottom runners shall be located as close to the base as 
possible. Runners shall be placed not more than 6 feet 6 inches on 
centers.

[[Page 117]]

    (9) Bearers shall be installed transversely between posts and shall 
be securely coupled to the posts bearing on the runner coupler. When 
coupled directly to the runners, the coupler must be kept as close to 
the posts as possible.
    (10) Bearers shall be at least 4 inches but not more than 12 inches 
longer than the post spacing or runner spacing. Bearers may be 
cantilevered for use as brackets to carry not more than two planks.
    (11) Cross bracing shall be installed across the width of the 
scaffold at least every third set of posts horizontally and every fourth 
runner vertically. Such bracing shall extend diagonally from the inner 
and outer runners upward to the next outer and inner runners.
    (12) Longitudinal diagonal bracing shall be installed at 
approximately a 45-degree angle from near the base of the first outer 
post upward to the extreme top of the scaffold. Where the longitudinal 
length of the scaffold permits, such bracing shall be duplicated 
beginning at every fifth post. In a similar manner, longitudinal 
diagonal bracing shall also be installed from the last post extending 
back and upward toward the first post. Where conditions preclude the 
attachment of this bracing to the posts, it may be attached to the 
runners.
    (13) The entire scaffold shall be tied to and securely braced 
against the building at intervals not to exceed 30 feet horizontally and 
26 feet vertically.
    (14) Guardrails not less than 2 x 4 inches or the equivalent and not 
less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, when 
required, of 1 x 4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, shall be 
installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet above the 
ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height. 
Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph (a)(17) of 
this section.
    (d) Tubular welded frame scaffolds. (1) Metal tubular frame 
scaffolds, including accessories such as braces, brackets, trusses, 
screw legs, ladders, etc., shall be designed and proved to safely 
support four times the maximum intended load.
    (2) Spacing of panels or frames shall be consistent with the loads 
imposed.
    (3) Scaffolds shall be properly braced by cross bracing or diagonal 
braces, or both, for securing vertical members together laterally, and 
the cross braces shall be of such length as will automatically square 
and aline vertical members so that the erected scaffold is always plumb, 
square, and rigid. All brace connections shall be made secure.
    (4) Scaffold legs shall be set on adjustable bases or plain bases 
placed on mud sills or other foundations adequate to support the maximum 
intended load.
    (5) The frames shall be placed one on top of the other with coupling 
or stacking pins to provide proper vertical alinement of the legs.
    (6) Where uplift may occur, panels shall be locked together 
vertically by pins or other equivalent suitable means.
    (7) Guardrails not less than 2  x  4 inches or the equivalent and 
not less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, 
when required, of 1-  x  4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, 
shall be installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet 
above the ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in 
height. Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph 
(a)(17) of this section.
    (8) All tubular metal scaffolds shall be constructed and erected to 
support four times the maximum intended loads.
    (9) To prevent movement, the scaffold shall be secured to the 
building or structure at intervals not to exceed 30 feet horizontally 
and 26 feet vertically.
    (10) Maximum permissible spans of planking shall be in conformity 
with paragraph (a)(9) of this section.
    (11) Drawings and specifications for all frame scaffolds over 125 
feet in height above the base plates shall be designed by a registered 
professional engineer and copies made available to the employer and for 
inspection purposes.
    (12) All tubular welded frame scaffolds shall be erected by 
competent and experienced personnel.

[[Page 118]]

    (13) Frames and accessories for scaffolds shall be maintained in 
good repair and every defect, unsafe condition, or noncompliance with 
this section shall be immediately corrected before further use of the 
scaffold. Any broken, bent, excessively rusted, altered, or otherwise 
structurally damaged frames or accessories shall not be used.
    (14) Periodic inspections shall be made of all welded frames and 
accessories, and any maintenance, including painting, or minor 
corrections authorized by the manufacturer, shall be made before further 
use.
    (e) Outrigger scaffolds. (1) Outrigger beams shall extend not more 
than 6 feet beyond the face of the building. The inboard end of 
outrigger beams, measured from the fulcrum point to the extreme point of 
support, shall be not less than one and one-half times the outboard end 
in length. The beams shall rest on edge, the sides shall be plumb, and 
the edges shall be horizontal. The fulcrum point of the beam shall rest 
on a secure bearing at least 6 inches in each horizontal dimension. The 
beam shall be secured in place against movement and shall be securely 
braced at the fulcrum point against tipping.
    (2) The inboard ends of outrigger beams shall be securely supported 
either by means of struts bearing against sills in contact with the 
overhead beams or ceiling, or by means of tension members secured to the 
floor joists underfoot, or by both if necessary. The inboard ends of 
outrigger beams shall be secured against tipping and the entire 
supporting structure shall be securely braced in both directions to 
prevent any horizontal movement.
    (3) Unless outrigger scaffolds are designed by a licensed 
professional engineer, they shall be constructed and erected in 
accordance with table D-16. Outrigger scaffolds designed by a registered 
professional engineer shall be constructed and erected in accordance 
with such design. A copy of the detailed drawings and specifications 
showing the sizes and spacing of members shall be kept on the job.
    (4) Planking shall be laid tight and shall extend to within 3 inches 
of the building wall. Planking shall be nailed or bolted to outriggers.
    (5) Where there is danger of material falling from the scaffold, a 
wire mesh or other enclosure shall be provided between the guardrail and 
the toeboard.
    (6) Where additional working levels are required to be supported by 
the outrigger method, the plans and specifications of the outrigger and 
scaffolding structure shall be designed by a registered professional 
engineer.
    (f) Masons' adjustable multiple-point suspension scaffolds. (1) The 
scaffold shall be capable of sustaining a working load of 50 pounds per 
square foot and shall not be loaded in excess of that figure.
    (2) The scaffold shall be provided with hoisting machines that meet 
the requirements of a nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to 
Sec. 1910.7 for definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.

   Table D-16--Minimum Nominal Size and Maximum Spacing of Members of
                           Outrigger Scaffolds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Light duty          Medium duty
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maximum scaffold load...........  25 p.s.f..........  50 p.s.f.
Outrigger size..................  2 x 10 in.........  3 x 10 in.
Maximum outrigger spacing.......  10 ft 0 in........  6 ft 0 in.
Planking........................  2 x 9 in..........  2 x 9 in.
Guardrail.......................  2 x 4 in..........  2 x 4 in.
Guardrail uprights..............  2 x 4 in..........  2 x 4 in.
Toeboards (minimum).............  4 in..............  4 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) The platform shall be supported by wire ropes in conformity with 
paragraph (a)(22) of this section, suspended from overhead outrigger 
beams.
    (4) The scaffold outrigger beams shall consist of structural metal 
securely fastened or anchored to the frame or floor system of the 
building or structure.
    (5) Each outrigger beam shall be equivalent in strength to at least 
a standard 7-inch, 15.3-pound steel I-beam, be at least 15 feet long, 
and shall not project more than 6 feet 6 inches beyond the bearing 
point.
    (6) Where the overhang exceeds 6 feet 6 inches, outrigger beams 
shall be composed of stronger beams or multiple beams and be installed 
in accordance with approved designs and instructions.

[[Page 119]]

    (7) If channel iron outrigger beams are used in place of I-beams, 
they shall be securely fastened together with the flanges turned out.
    (8) All outrigger beams shall be set and maintained with their webs 
into vertical position.
    (9) A stop bolt shall be placed at each end of every outrigger beam.
    (10) The outrigger beam shall rest on suitable wood-bearing blocks.
    (11) All parts of the scaffold such as bolts, nuts, fittings, 
clamps, wire rope, and outrigger beams and their fastenings, shall be 
maintained in sound and good working condition and shall be inspected 
before each installation and periodically thereafter.
    (12) The free end of the suspension wire ropes shall be equipped 
with proper size thimbles and be secured by splicing or other equivalent 
means. The running ends shall be securely attached to the hoisting drum 
and at least four turns of rope shall at all times remain on the drum.
    (13) Where a single outrigger beam is used, the steel shackles or 
clevises with which the wire ropes are attached to the outrigger beams 
shall be placed directly over the hoisting drums.
    (14) The scaffold platform shall be equivalent in strength to at 
least 2-inch planking. (For maximum planking spans see paragraph (a)(9) 
of this section.)
    (15) Guardrails not less than 2  x  4 inches or the equivalent and 
not less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, 
when required, of 1  x  4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, 
shall be installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet 
above the ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in 
height. Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph 
(a)(17) of this section.
    (16) Overhead protection shall be provided on the scaffold, not more 
than 9 feet above the platform, consisting of 2-inch planking or 
material of equivalent strength laid tight, when men are at work on the 
scaffold and an overhead hazard exists.
    (17) Each scaffold shall be installed or relocated in accordance 
with designs and instructions, of a registered professional engineer, 
and supervised by a competent, designated person.
    (g) Two-point suspension scaffolds (swinging scaffolds). (1) Two-
point suspension scaffold platforms shall be not less than 20 inches no 
more than 36 inches wide overall. The platform shall be securely 
fastened to the hangers by U-bolts or by other equivalent means.
    (2) The hangers of two-point suspension scaffolds shall be made of 
wrought iron, mild steel, or other equivalent material having a cross-
sectional area capable of sustaining four times the maximum intended 
load, and shall be designed with a support for guardrail, intermediate 
rail, and toeboard.
    (3) When hoisting machines are used on two-point suspension 
scaffolds, such machines shall be of a design tested and approved by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for 
definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (4) The roof irons or hooks shall be of wrought iron, mild steel, or 
other equivalent material of proper size and design, securely installed 
and anchored. Tie-backs of three-fourth inch manila rope or the 
equivalent shall serve as a secondary means of anchorage, installed at 
right angles to the face of the building whenever possible and secured 
to a structurally sound portion of the building.
    (5) Guardrails not less than 2  x  4 inches or the equivalent and 
not less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, 
when required, of 1-  x  4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, 
shall be installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet 
above the ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in 
height. Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph 
(a)(17) of this section.
    (6) Two-point suspension scaffolds shall be suspended by wire or 
fiber ropes. Wire and fiber ropes shall conform to paragraph (a)(22) of 
this section.
    (7) The blocks for fiber ropes shall be of standard 6-inch size, 
consisting of at least one double and one single block. The sheaves of 
all blocks shall fit the size of rope used.

[[Page 120]]

    (8) All wire ropes, fiber ropes, slings, hangers, platforms, and 
other supporting parts shall be inspected before every installation. 
Periodic inspections shall be made while the scaffold is in use.
    (9) On suspension scaffolds designed for a working load of 500 
pounds no more than two men shall be permitted to work at one time. On 
suspension scaffolds with a working load of 750 pounds, no more than 
three men shall be permitted to work at one time. Each workman shall be 
protected by a safety lifebelt attached to a lifeline. The lifeline 
shall be securely attached to substantial members of the structure (not 
scaffold), or to securely rigged lines, which will safely suspend the 
workman in case of a fall.
    (10) Where acid solutions are used, fiber ropes are not permitted 
unless acid-proof.
    (11) Two-point suspension scaffolds shall be securely lashed to the 
building or structure to prevent them from swaying. Window cleaners' 
anchors shall not be used for this purpose.
    (12) The platform of every two-point suspension scaffold shall be 
one of the following types:
    (i) The side stringer of ladder-type platforms shall be clear 
straight-grained spruce or materials of equivalent strength and 
durability. The rungs shall be of straight-grained oak, ash, or hickory, 
at least 1\1/8\ inch in diameter, with seven-eighth inch tenons mortised 
into the side stringers at least seven-eighth inch. The stringers shall 
be tied together with the tie rods not less than one-quarter inch in 
diameter, passing through the stringers and riveted up tight against 
washers on both ends. The flooring strips shall be spaced not more than 
five-eighth inch apart except at the side rails where the space may be 1 
inch. Ladder-type platforms shall be constructed in accordance with 
table D-17.
    (ii) Plank-type platforms shall be composed of not less than nominal 
2- x 8-inch unspliced planks, properly cleated together on the underside 
starting 6 inches from each end; intervals in between shall not exceed 4 
feet. The plank-type platform shall not extend beyond the hangers more 
than 18 inches. A bar or other effective means shall be securely 
fastened to the platform at each end to prevent its slipping off the 
hanger. The span between hangers for plank-type platforms shall not 
exceed 10 feet.
    (iii) Beam platforms shall have side stringers of lumber not less 
than 2 x 6 inches set on edge. The span between hangers shall not exceed 
12 feet when beam platforms are used. The flooring shall be supported on 
2- and 6-inch crossbeams, laid flat and set into the upper edge of the 
stringers with a snug fit, at intervals of not more than 4 feet, 
securely nailed in place. The flooring shall be of 1- x 6-inch material 
properly nailed. Floorboards shall not be spaced more than one-half inch 
apart.

                                 Table D-17--Schedule for Ladder-Type Platforms
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       Length of platform (feet)
                                                     -----------------------------------------------------------
                                                          12        14 & 16     18 & 20     22 & 24     28 & 30
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Side stringers, minimum cross section (finished
 sizes):
  At ends (in.).....................................    1\3/4\ x
                                                          2\3/4\    1\3/4\ x
                                                                      2\3/4\  1\3/4\ x 3  1\3/4\ x 3    1\3/4\ x
                                                                                                          3\1/2\
  At middle (in.)...................................    1\3/4\ x
                                                          3\3/4\    1\3/4\ x
                                                                      3\3/4\  1\3/4\ x 4    1\3/4\ x
                                                                                              4\1/4\  1\3/4\ x 5
Reinforcing strip (minimum) \1\.....................  ..........  ..........  ..........  ..........  ..........
Rungs \2\...........................................  ..........  ..........  ..........  ..........  ..........
Tie rods:
  Number (minimum)..................................           3           4           4           5           6
  Diameter (minimum)................................    \1/4\ in    \1/4\ in    \1/4\ in    \1/4\ in   \1/4\ in.
Flooring, minimum finished size (in.)...............     \1/2\ x
                                                          2\3/4\     \1/2\ x
                                                                      2\3/4\     \1/2\ x
                                                                                  2\3/4\  \1/2\ x \3/
                                                                                                  4\     \1/2\ x
                                                                                                          2\3/4\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A \1/8\x\7/8\-in. steel reinforcing strip or its equivalent shall be attached to the side or underside full
  length.
\2\ Rungs shall be 1\1/8\-in. minimum, diameter with at least \7/8\-in. diameter tenons, and the maximum spacing
  shall be 12 in. center to center.

    (h) Stone setters' adjustable multiple-point suspension scaffolds. 
(1) The scaffold shall be capable of sustaining a working load of 25 
pounds per square

[[Page 121]]

foot and shall not be overloaded. Scaffolds shall not be used for 
storage of stone or other heavy materials.
    (2) The hoisting machine and its supports shall be of a type tested 
and listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to 
Sec. 1910.399(a)(77) for definition of listed, and Sec. 1910.7 for 
nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (3) The platform shall be securely fastened to the hangers by U-
bolts or other equivalent means.
    (4) The scaffold unit shall be suspended from metal outriggers, iron 
brackets, wire rope slings, or iron hooks which will safely support the 
maximum intended load.
    (5) Outriggers when used shall be set with their webs in a vertical 
position, securely anchored to the building or structure and provided 
with stop bolts at each end.
    (6) The scaffold shall be supported by wire rope conforming with 
paragraph (a)(22) of this section, suspended from overhead supports.
    (7) The free ends of the suspension wire ropes shall be equipped 
with proper size thimbles, secured by splicing or other equivalent 
means. The running ends shall be securely attached to the hoisting drum 
and at least four turns of rope shall remain on the drum at all times.
    (8) Guardrails not less than 2 by 4 inches or the equivalent and not 
less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, when 
required, of 1- by 4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, shall be 
installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet above the 
ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height. 
Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph (a)(17) of 
this section.
    (9) When two or more scaffolds are used on a building or structure 
they shall not be bridged one to the other but shall be maintained at 
even height with platforms butting closely.
    (10) Each scaffold shall be installed or relocated in accordance 
with designs and instructions of a registered professional engineer, and 
such installation or relocation shall be supervised by a competent 
designated person.
    (i) Single-point adjustable suspension scaffolds. (1) The 
scaffolding, including power units or manually operated winches, shall 
be a type tested and listed by a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.399(a)(77) for definition of listed, and 
Sec. 1910.7 for nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) All power-operated gears and brakes shall be enclosed.
    (4) In addition to the normal operating brake, all-power driven 
units must have an emergency brake which engages automatically when the 
normal speed of descent is exceeded.
    (5) Guards, mid-rails, and toeboards shall completely enclose the 
cage or basket. Guardrails shall be no less than 2 by 4 inches or the 
equivalent installed no less than 36 inches nor more than 42 inches 
above the platform. Mid-rails shall be 1 by 6 inches or the equivalent, 
installed equidistant between the guardrail and the platform. Toeboards 
shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height.
    (6) The hoisting machines, cables, and equipment shall be regularly 
serviced and inspected after each installation and every 30 days 
thereafter.
    (7) The units may be combined to form a two-point suspension 
scaffold. Such scaffold shall comply with paragraph (g) of this section.
    (8) The supporting cable shall be straight for its entire length, 
and the operator shall not sway the basket and fix the cable to any 
intermediate points to change his original path of travel.
    (9) Equipment shall be maintained and used in accordance with the 
manufacturers' instructions.
    (10) Suspension methods shall conform to applicable provisions of 
paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section.
    (j) Boatswain's chairs. (1) The chair seat shall be not less than 12 
by 24 inches, and of 1-inch thickness. The seat shall be reinforced on 
the underside to prevent the board from splitting.
    (2) The two fiber rope seat slings shall be of \5/8\-inch diameter, 
reeved through the four seat holes so as to cross each other on the 
underside of the seat.

[[Page 122]]

    (3) Seat slings shall be of at least \3/8\-inch wire rope when a 
workman is conducting a heat producing process such as gas or arc 
welding.
    (4) The workman shall be protected by a safety life belt attached to 
a lifeline. The lifeline shall be securely attached to substantial 
members of the structure (not scaffold), or to securely rigged lines, 
which will safely suspend the worker in case of a fall.
    (5) The tackle shall consist of correct size ball bearing or bushed 
blocks and properly spliced \5/8\-inch diameter first-grade manila rope.
    (6) The roof irons, hooks, or the object to which the tackle is 
anchored shall be securely installed. Tiebacks when used shall be 
installed at right angles to the face of the building and securely 
fastened to a chimney.
    (k) Carpenters' bracket scaffolds. (1) The brackets shall consist of 
a triangular wood frame not less than 2 by 3 inches in cross section, or 
of metal of equivalent strength. Each member shall be properly fitted 
and securely joined.
    (2) Each bracket shall be attached to the structure by means of one 
of the following:
    (i) A bolt no less than five-eighths inch in diameter which shall 
extend through the inside of the building wall.
    (ii) A metal stud attachment device.
    (iii) Welding to steel tanks.
    (iv) Hooking over a well-secured and adequately strong supporting 
member.

The brackets shall be spaced no more than 10 feet apart.
    (3) No more than two persons shall occupy any given 10 feet of a 
bracket scaffold at any one time. Tools and materials shall not exceed 
75 pounds in addition to the occupancy.
    (4) The platform shall consist of not less than two 2- by 9-inch 
nominal size planks extending not more than 18 inches or less than 6 
inches beyond each end support.
    (5) Guardrails not less than 2 by 4 inches or the equivalent and not 
less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, when 
required, of 1- by 4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, shall be 
installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet above the 
ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height. 
Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph (a)(17) of 
this section.
    (l) Bricklayers' square scaffolds. (1) The squares shall not exceed 
5 feet in width and 5 feet in height.
    (2) Members shall be not less than those specified in Table D-18.
    (3) The squares shall be reinforced on both sides of each corner 
with 1- by 6-inch gusset pieces. They shall also have braces 1 by 8 
inches on both sides running from center to center of each member, or 
other means to secure equivalent strength and rigidity.
    (4) The squares shall be set not more than 5 feet apart for medium 
duty scaffolds, and not more than 8 feet apart for light duty scaffolds. 
Bracing 1 x 8 inches, extending from the bottom of each square to the 
top of the next square, shall be provided on both front and rear sides 
of the scaffold.

 Table D-18--Minimum Dimensions for Bricklayers' Square Scaffold Members
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Members                        Dimensions (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bearers or horizontal members..............  2 by 6.
Legs.......................................  2 by 6.
Braces at corners..........................  1 by 6.
Braces diagonally from center frame........  1 by 8.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) Platform planks shall be at least 2- by 9-inch nominal size. The 
ends of the planks shall overlap the bearers of the squares and each 
plank shall be supported by not less than three squares.
    (6) Bricklayers' square scaffolds shall not exceed three tiers in 
height and shall be so constructed and arranged that one square shall 
rest directly above the other. The upper tiers shall stand on a 
continuous row of planks laid across the next lower tier and be nailed 
down or otherwise secured to prevent displacement.
    (7) Scaffolds shall be level and set upon a firm foundation.
    (m) Horse scaffolds. (1) Horse scaffolds shall not be constructed or 
arranged more than two tiers or 10 feet in height.
    (2) The members of the horses shall be not less than those specified 
in Table D-19.
    (3) Horses shall be spaced not more than 5 feet for medium duty and 
not more than 8 feet for light duty.

[[Page 123]]

    (4) When arranged in tiers, each horse shall be placed directly over 
the horse in the tier below.
    (5) On all scaffolds arranged in tiers, the legs shall be nailed 
down to the planks to prevent displacement or thrust and each tier shall 
be substantially cross braced.

        Table D-19--Minimum Dimensions for Horse Scaffold Members
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Members                        Dimensions (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Horizontal members or bearers..............  3 by 4.
Legs.......................................  1\1/4\ by 4\1/2\.
Longitudinal brace between legs............  1 by 6.
Gusset brace at top of legs................  1 by 8.
Half diagonal braces.......................  1\1/4\ by 4\1/2\.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (6) Horses or parts which have become weak or defective shall not be 
used.
    (7) Guardrails not less than 2 by 4 inches or the equivalent and not 
less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high with a mid-rail, when 
required, of 1- by 4-inch lumber or equivalent and toeboards, shall be 
installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet above the 
ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height. 
Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph (a)(17) of 
this section.
    (n) Needle beam scaffold. (1) Wood needle beams shall be in 
accordance with paragraph (a) (5) and (9) of this section, and shall be 
not less than 4 by 6 inches in size, with the greater dimension placed 
in a vertical direction. Metal beams or the equivalent conforming to 
paragraph (a) (4) and (8) of this section may be used.
    (2) Ropes or hangers shall be provided for supports. The span 
between supports on the needle beam shall not exceed 10 feet for 4- by 
6-inch timbers. Rope supports shall be equivalent in strength to 1-inch 
diameter first-grade manila rope.
    (3) The ropes shall be attached to the needle beams by a scaffold 
hitch or a properly made eye splice. The loose end of the rope shall be 
tied by a bowline knot or by a round turn and one-half hitch.
    (4) The platform span between the needle beams shall not exceed 8 
feet when using 2-inch scaffold plank. For spans greater than 8 feet, 
platforms shall be designed based on design requirements for the special 
span. The overhang of each end of the platform planks shall be not less 
than 1 foot and not more than 18 inches.
    (5) When one needle beam is higher than the other or when the 
platform is not level the platform shall be secured against slipping.
    (6) All unattached tools, bolts, and nuts used on needle beam 
scaffolds shall be kept in suitable containers.
    (7) One end of a needle beam scaffold may be supported by a 
permanent structural member conforming to paragraphs (a) (4) and (8) of 
this section.
    (8) Each man working on a needle beam scaffold 20 feet or more above 
the ground or floor and working with both hands, shall be protected by a 
safety life belt attached to a lifeline. The lifeline shall be securely 
attached to substantial members of the structure (not scaffold), or to 
securely rigged lines, which will safely suspend the workman in case of 
a fall.
    (o) Plasterers', decorators', and large area scaffolds. (1) 
Plasterers', decorators', lathers', and ceiling workers' inside 
scaffolds shall be constructed in accordance with the general 
requirements set forth for independent wood pole scaffolds.
    (2) Guardrails not less than 2 by 4 inches or the equivalent and not 
less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, when 
required, of 1- by 4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, shall be 
installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet above the 
ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height. 
Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph (a)(17) of 
this section.
    (3) All platform planks shall be laid with the edges close together.
    (4) When independent pole scaffold platforms are erected in 
sections, such sections shall be provided with connecting runways 
equipped with substantial guardrails.
    (p) Interior hung scaffolds.
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) The suspended steel wire rope shall conform to paragraph (a)(22) 
of this section. Wire may be used providing the strength requirements of 
paragraph (a)(22) of this section are met.

[[Page 124]]

    (3) For hanging wood scaffolds, the following minimum nominal size 
material is recommended:
    (i) Supporting bearers 2 by 9 inches on edge.
    (ii) Planking 2 by 9 inches or 2 by 10 inches, with maximum span 7 
feet for heavy duty and 10 feet for light duty or medium duty.
    (4) Steel tube and coupler members may be used for hanging scaffolds 
with both types of scaffold designed to sustain a uniform distributed 
working load up to heavy duty scaffold loads with a safety factor of 
four.
    (5) When a hanging scaffold is supported by means of wire rope, such 
wire rope shall be wrapped at least twice around the supporting members 
and twice around the bearers of the scaffold, with each end of the wire 
rope secured by at least three standard wire-rope clips.
    (6) All overhead supporting members shall be inspected and checked 
for strength before the scaffold is erected.
    (7) Guardrails not less than 2 by 4 inches or the equivalent and not 
less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a mid-rail, when 
required, of 1- by 4-inch lumber or equivalent, and toeboards, shall be 
installed at all open sides on all scaffolds more than 10 feet above the 
ground or floor. Toeboards shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height. 
Wire mesh shall be installed in accordance with paragraph (a)(17) of 
this section.
    (q) Ladder-jack scaffolds. (1) All ladder-jack scaffolds shall be 
limited to light duty and shall not exceed a height of 20 feet above the 
floor or ground.
    (2) All ladders used in connection with ladder-jack scaffolds shall 
be heavy-duty ladders and shall be designed and constructed in 
accordance with Sec. 1910.25 and Sec. 1910.26.
    (3) The ladder jack shall be so designed and constructed that it 
will bear on the side rails in addition to the ladder rungs, or if 
bearing on rungs only, the bearing area shall be at least 10 inches on 
each rung.
    (4) Ladders used in conjunction with ladder jacks shall be so 
placed, fastened, held, or equipped with devices so as to prevent 
slipping.
    (5) The wood platform planks shall be not less than 2 inches nominal 
in thickness. Both metal and wood platform planks shall overlap the 
bearing surface not less than 12 inches. The span between supports for 
wood shall not exceed 8 feet. Platform width shall be not less than 18 
inches.
    (6) Not more than two persons shall occupy any given 8 feet of any 
ladder-jack scaffold at any one time.
    (r) Window-jack scaffolds. (1) Window-jack scaffolds shall be used 
only for the purpose of working at the window opening through which the 
jack is placed.
    (2) Window jacks shall not be used to support planks placed between 
one window jack and another or for other elements of scaffolding.
    (3) Window-jack scaffolds shall be provided with suitable guardrails 
unless safety belts with lifelines are attached and provided for the 
workman. Window-jack scaffolds shall be used by one man only.
    (s) Roofing brackets. (1) Roofing brackets shall be constructed to 
fit the pitch of the roof.
    (2) Brackets shall be secured in place by nailing in addition to the 
pointed metal projections. The nails shall be driven full length into 
the roof. When rope supports are used, they shall consist of first-grade 
manila of at least three-quarter-inch diameter, or equivalent.
    (3) A substantial catch platform shall be installed below the 
working area of roofs more than 20 feet from the ground to eaves with a 
slope greater than 3 inches in 12 inches without a parapet. In width the 
platform shall extend 2 feet beyond the projection of the eaves and 
shall be provided with a safety rail, mid-rail, and toeboard. This 
provision shall not apply where employees engaged in work upon such 
roofs are protected by a safety belt attached to a lifeline.
    (t) Crawling boards or chicken ladders. (1) Crawling boards shall be 
not less than 10 inches wide and 1 inch thick, having cleats 1 x 1\1/2\ 
inches. The cleats shall be equal in length to the width of the board 
and spaced at equal intervals not to exceed 24 inches. Nails shall be

[[Page 125]]

driven through and clinched on the underside. The crawling board shall 
extend from the ridge pole to the eaves when used in connection with 
roof construction, repair, or maintenance.
    (2) A firmly fastened lifeline of at least three-quarter-inch rope 
shall be strung beside each crawling board for a handhold.
    (3) Crawling boards shall be secured to the roof by means of 
adequate ridge hooks or equivalent effective means.
    (u) Float or ship scaffolds. (1) Float or ship scaffolds shall 
support not more than three men and a few light tools, such as those 
needed for riveting, bolting, and welding. They shall be constructed in 
accordance with paragraphs (u) (2) through (6) of this section, unless 
substitute designs and materials provide equivalent strength, stability, 
and safety.
    (2) The platform shall be not less than 3 feet wide and 6 feet long, 
made of three-quarter-inch plywood, equivalent to American Plywood 
Association Grade B-B, Group I, Exterior.
    (3) Under the platform, there shall be two supporting bearers made 
from 2- x 4-inch, or 1- x 10-inch rough, selected lumber, or better. 
They shall be free of knots or other flaws and project 6 inches beyond 
the platform on both sides. The ends of the platform shall extend about 
6 inches beyond the outer edges of the bearers. Each bearer shall be 
securely fastened to the platform.
    (4) An edging of wood not less than \3/4\ x 1\1/2\ inches, or 
equivalent, shall be placed around all sides of the platform to prevent 
tools from rolling off.
    (5) Supporting ropes shall be 1-inch diameter manila rope or 
equivalent, free from deterioration, chemical damage, flaws, or other 
imperfections. Rope connections shall be such that the platform cannot 
shift or slip. If two ropes are used with each float, each of the two 
supporting ropes shall be hitched around one end of a bearer and pass 
under the platforms to the other end of the bearer where it is hitched 
again, leaving sufficient rope at each end for the supporting ties.
    (6) Each workman shall be protected by a safety lifebelt attached to 
a lifeline. The lifeline shall be securely attached to substantial 
members of the structure (not scaffold), or to securely rigged lines, 
which will safely suspend the workman in case of a fall.
    (v) Scope. This section establishes safety requirements for the 
construction, operation, maintenance, and use of scaffolds used in the 
maintenance of buildings and structures.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49746, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5321, Feb. 10, 1984; 53 FR 12121, Apr. 12, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.29  Manually propelled mobile ladder stands and scaffolds (towers).

    (a) General requirements--(1) Application. This section is intended 
to prescribe rules and requirements for the design, construction, and 
use of mobile work platforms (including ladder stands but not including 
aerial ladders) and rolling (mobile) scaffolds (towers). This standard 
is promulgated to aid in providing for the safety of life, limb, and 
property, by establishing minimum standards for structural design 
requirements and for the use of mobile work platforms and towers.
    (2) Working loads. (i) Work platforms and scaffolds shall be capable 
of carrying the design load under varying circumstances depending upon 
the conditions of use. Therefore, all parts and appurtenances necessary 
for their safe and efficient utilization must be integral parts of the 
design.
    (ii) Specific design and construction requirements are not a part of 
this section because of the wide variety of materials and design 
possibilities. However, the design shall be such as to produce a mobile 
ladder stand or scaffold that will safely sustain the specified loads. 
The material selected shall be of sufficient strength to meet the test 
requirements and shall be protected against corrosion or deterioration.
    (a) The design working load of ladder stands shall be calculated on 
the basis of one or more 200-pound persons together with 50 pounds of 
equipment each.
    (b) The design load of all scaffolds shall be calculated on the 
basis of:

    Light-- Designed and constructed to carry a working load of 25 
pounds per square foot.
    Medium-- Designed and constructed to carry a working load of 50 
pounds per square foot.

[[Page 126]]

    Heavy-- Designed and constructed to carry a working load of 75 
pounds per square foot.


All ladder stands and scaffolds shall be capable of supporting at least 
four times the design working load.
    (iii) The materials used in mobile ladder stands and scaffolds shall 
be of standard manufacture and conform to standard specifications of 
strength, dimensions, and weights, and shall be selected to safely 
support the design working load.
    (iv) Nails, bolts, or other fasteners used in the construction of 
ladders, scaffolds, and towers shall be of adequate size and in 
sufficient numbers at each connection to develop the designed strength 
of the unit. Nails shall be driven full length. (All nails should be 
immediately withdrawn from dismantled lumber.)
    (v) All exposed surfaces shall be free from sharp edges, burrs or 
other safety hazards.
    (3) Work levels. (i) The maximum work level height shall not exceed 
four (4) times the minimum or least base dimensions of any mobile ladder 
stand or scaffold. Where the basic mobile unit does not meet this 
requirement, suitable outrigger frames shall be employed to achieve this 
least base dimension, or provisions shall be made to guy or brace the 
unit against tipping.
    (ii) The minimum platform width for any work level shall not be less 
than 20 inches for mobile scaffolds (towers). Ladder stands shall have a 
minimum step width of 16 inches.
    (iii) The supporting structure for the work level shall be rigidly 
braced, using adequate cross bracing or diagonal bracing with rigid 
platforms at each work level.
    (iv) The steps of ladder stands shall be fabricated from slip 
resistant treads.
    (v) The work level platform of scaffolds (towers) shall be of wood, 
aluminum, or plywood planking, steel or expanded metal, for the full 
width of the scaffold, except for necessary openings. Work platforms 
shall be secured in place. All planking shall be 2-inch (nominal) 
scaffold grade minimum 1,500 f. (stress grade) construction grade lumber 
or equivalent.
    (vi) All scaffold work levels 10 feet or higher above the ground or 
floor shall have a standard (4-inch nominal) toeboard.
    (vii) All work levels 10 feet or higher above the ground or floor 
shall have a guardrail of 2- by 4-inch nominal or the equivalent 
installed no less than 36 inches or more than 42 inches high, with a 
mid-rail, when required, of 1- by 4-inch nominal lumber or equivalent.
    (viii) A climbing ladder or stairway shall be provided for proper 
access and egress, and shall be affixed or built into the scaffold and 
so located that its use will not have a tendency to tip the scaffold. A 
landing platform shall be provided at intervals not to exceed 30 feet.
    (4) Wheels or casters. (i) Wheels or casters shall be properly 
designed for strength and dimensions to support four (4) times the 
design working load.
    (ii) All scaffold casters shall be provided with a positive wheel 
and/or swivel lock to prevent movement. Ladder stands shall have at 
least two (2) of the four (4) casters and shall be of the swivel type.
    (iii) Where leveling of the elevated work platform is required, 
screw jacks or other suitable means for adjusting the height shall be 
provided in the base section of each mobile unit.
    (b) Mobile tubular welded frame scaffolds--(1) General. Units shall 
be designed to comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (2) Bracing. Scaffolds shall be properly braced by cross braces and/
or diagonal braces for securing vertical members together laterally. The 
cross braces shall be of a length that will automatically square and 
align vertical members so the erected scaffold is always plumb, square, 
and rigid.
    (3) Spacing. Spacing of panels or frames shall be consistent with 
the loads imposed. The frames shall be placed one on top of the other 
with coupling or stacking pins to provide proper vertical alignment of 
the legs.
    (4) Locking. Where uplift may occur, panels shall be locked together 
vertically by pins or other equivalent means.
    (5) Erection. Only the manufacturer of a scaffold or his qualified 
designated

[[Page 127]]

agent shall be permitted to erect or supervise the erection of scaffolds 
exceeding 50 feet in height above the base, unless such structure is 
approved in writing by a registered professional engineer, or erected in 
accordance with instructions furnished by the manufacturer.
    (c) Mobile tubular welded sectional folding scaffolds--(1) General. 
Units including sectional stairway and sectional ladder scaffolds shall 
be designed to comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (2) Stairway. An integral stairway and work platform shall be 
incorporated into the structure of each sectional folding stairway 
scaffold.
    (3) Bracing. An integral set of pivoting and hinged folding diagonal 
and horizontal braces and a detachable work platform shall be 
incorporated into the structure of each sectional folding ladder 
scaffold.
    (4) Sectional folding stairway scaffolds. Sectional folding stairway 
scaffolds shall be designed as medium duty scaffolds except for high 
clearance. These special base sections shall be designed as light duty 
scaffolds. When upper sectional folding stairway scaffolds are used with 
a special high clearance base, the load capacity of the entire scaffold 
shall be reduced accordingly. The width of a sectional folding stairway 
scaffold shall not exceed 4\1/2\ feet. The maximum length of a sectional 
folding stairway scaffold shall not exceed 6 feet.
    (5) Sectional folding ladder scaffolds. Sectional folding ladder 
scaffolds shall be designed as light duty scaffolds including special 
base (open end) sections which are designed for high clearance. For 
certain special applications the six-foot (6') folding ladder scaffolds, 
except for special high clearance base sections, shall be designed for 
use as medium duty scaffolds. The width of a sectional folding ladder 
scaffold shall not exceed 4\1/2\ feet. The maximum length of a sectional 
folding ladder scaffold shall not exceed 6 feet 6 inches for a six-foot 
(6') long unit, 8 feet 6 inches for an eight-foot (8') unit or 10 feet 6 
inches for a ten-foot (10') long unit.
    (6) End frames. The end frames of sectional ladder and stairway 
scaffolds shall be designed so that the horizontal bearers provide 
supports for multiple planking levels.
    (7) Erection. Only the manufacturer of the scaffold or his qualified 
designated agent shall be permitted to erect or supervise the erection 
of scaffolds exceeding 50 feet in height above the base, unless such 
structure is approved in writing by a licensed professional engineer, or 
erected in accordance with instructions furnished by the manufacturer.
    (d) Mobile tube and coupler scaffolds--(1) Design. Units shall be 
designed to comply with the applicable requirements of paragraph (a) of 
this section.
    (2) Material. The material used for the couplers shall be of a 
structural type, such as a drop-forged steel, malleable iron or 
structural grade aluminum. The use of gray cast iron is prohibited.
    (3) Erection. Only the manufacturer of the scaffold or his qualified 
designated agent shall be permitted to erect or supervise the erection 
of scaffolds exceeding 50 feet in height above the base, unless such 
structure is approved in writing by a licensed professional engineer, or 
erected in accordance with instructions furnished by the manufacturer.
    (e) Mobile work platforms--(1) Design. Units shall be designed for 
the use intended and shall comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) 
of this section.
    (2) Base width. The minimum width of the base of mobile work 
platforms shall not be less than 20 inches.
    (3) Bracing. Adequate rigid diagonal bracing to vertical members 
shall be provided.
    (f) Mobile ladder stands--(1) Design. Units shall comply with 
applicable requirements of paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) Base width. The minimum base width shall conform to paragraph 
(a)(3)(i) of this section. The maximum length of the base section shall 
be the total length of combined steps and top assembly, measured 
horizontally, plus five-eighths inch per step of rise.
    (3) Steps. Steps shall be uniformly spaced, and sloped, with a rise 
of not less than nine (9) inches, nor more than ten (10) inches, and a 
depth of not less seven (7) inches. The slope of the steps section shall 
be a minimum of fifty-

[[Page 128]]

five (55) degrees and a maximum of sixty (60) degrees measured from the 
horizontal.
    (4) Handrails. (i) Units having more than five (5) steps or 60 
inches vertical height to the top step shall be equipped with handrails.
    (ii) Handrails shall be a minimum of 29 inches high. Measurements 
shall be taken vertically from the center of the step.
    (5) Loading. The load (see paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(a) of this section) 
shall be applied uniformly to a 3\1/2\ inches wide area front to back at 
the center of the width span with a safety factor of four (4).


<R05>
Sec. 1910.30  Other working surfaces.

    (a) Dockboards (bridge plates). (1) Portable and powered dockboards 
shall be strong enough to carry the load imposed on them.
    (2) Portable dockboards shall be secured in position, either by 
being anchored or equipped with devices which will prevent their 
slipping.
    (3) Powered dockboards shall be designed and constructed in 
accordance with Commercial Standard CS202-56 (1961) ``Industrial Lifts 
and Hinged Loading Ramps published by the U.S. Department of Commerce, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (4) Handholds, or other effective means, shall be provided on 
portable dockboards to permit safe handling.
    (5) Positive protection shall be provided to prevent railroad cars 
from being moved while dockboards or bridge plates are in position.
    (b) Forging machine area. (1) Machines shall be so located as to 
give (i) enough clearance between machines so that the movement of one 
operator will not interfere with the work of another, (ii) ample room 
for cleaning machines and handling the work, including material and 
scrap. The arrangement of machines shall be such that operators will not 
stand in aisles.
    (2) Aisles shall be provided of sufficient width to permit the free 
movement of employees bringing and removing material. This aisle space 
is to be independent of working and storage space.
    (3) Wood platforms used on the floor in front of machines shall be 
substantially constructed.
    (c) Veneer machinery. (1) Sides of steam vats shall extend to a 
height of not less than 36 inches above the floor, working platform, or 
ground.
    (2) Large steam vats divided into sections shall be provided with 
substantial walkways between sections. Each walkway shall be provided 
with a standard handrail on each exposed side. These handrails may be 
removable, if necessary.
    (3) Covers shall be removed only from that portion of steaming vats 
on which men are working and a portable railing shall be placed at this 
point to protect the operators.
    (4) Workmen shall not ride or step on logs in steam vats.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 
FR 9235, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R04>
                       Subpart E--Means of Egress

    Authority: Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 1-90 
(55 FR 9033), as applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.35  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart.
    (a) Means of egress. A means of egress is a continuous and 
unobstructed way of exit travel from any point in a building or 
structure to a public way and consists of three separate and distinct 
parts: the way of exit access, the exit, and the way of exit discharge. 
A means of egress comprises the vertical and horizontal ways of travel 
and shall include intervening room spaces, doorways, hallways, 
corridors, passageways, balconies, ramps, stairs, enclosures, lobbies, 
escalators, horizontal exits, courts, and yards.
    (b) Exit access. Exit access is that portion of a means of egress 
which leads to an entrance to an exit.
    (c) Exit. Exit is that portion of a means of egress which is 
separated from all other spaces of the building or structure by 
construction or equipment as required in this subpart to provide a 
protected way of travel to the exit discharge.

[[Page 129]]

    (d) Exit discharge. Exit discharge is that portion of a means of 
egress between the termination of an exit and a public way.
    (e) Low hazard contents. Low hazard contents shall be classified as 
those of such low combustibility that no self- propagating fire therein 
can occur and that consequently the only probable danger requiring the 
use of emergency exits will be from panic, fumes, or smoke, or fire from 
some external source.
    (f) High-hazard contents. High-hazard contents shall be classified 
as those which are liable to burn with extreme rapidity or from which 
poisonous fumes or explosions are to be feared in the event of fire.
    (g) Ordinary hazard contents. Ordinary hazard contents shall be 
classified as those which are liable to burn with moderate rapidity and 
to give off a considerable volume of smoke but from which neither 
poisonous fumes nor explosions are to be feared in case of fire.
    (h) Approved. For the purpose of this subpart approved shall mean 
listed or approved equipment by a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.155(c)(3)(iv)(A) for definition of 
listed, and Sec. 1910.7 for nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (i) Emergency action plan means a plan for a workplace, or parts 
thereof, describing what procedures the employer and employees must take 
to ensure employee safety from fire or other emergencies.
    (j) Emergency escape route means the route that employees are 
directed to follow in the event they are required to evacuate the 
workplace or seek a designated refuge area.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 45 FR 60703, Sept. 12, 1980; 
53 FR 12121, Apr. 12, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.36  General requirements.

    (a) Application. This subpart contains general fundamental 
requirements essential to providing a safe means of egress from fire and 
like emergencies. Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to prohibit 
a better type of building construction, more exits, or otherwise safer 
conditions than the minimum requirements specified in this subpart. 
Exits from vehicles, vessels, or other mobile structures are not covered 
by this subpart.
    (b) Fundamental requirements. (1) Every building or structure, new 
or old, designed for human occupancy shall be provided with exits 
sufficient to permit the prompt escape of occupants in case of fire or 
other emergency. The design of exits and other safeguards shall be such 
that reliance for safety to life in case of fire or other emergency will 
not depend solely on any single safeguard; additional safeguards shall 
be provided for life safety in case any single safeguard is ineffective 
due to some human or mechanical failure.
    (2) Every building or structure shall be so constructed, arranged, 
equipped, maintained, and operated as to avoid undue danger to the lives 
and safety of its occupants from fire, smoke, fumes, or resulting panic 
during the period of time reasonably necessary for escape from the 
building or structure in case of fire or other emergency.
    (3) Every building or structure shall be provided with exits of 
kinds, numbers, location, and capacity appropriate to the individual 
building or structure, with due regard to the character of the 
occupancy, the number of persons exposed, the fire protection available, 
and the height and type of construction of the building or structure, to 
afford all occupants convenient facilities for escape.
    (4) In every building or structure exits shall be so arranged and 
maintained as to provide free and unobstructed egress from all parts of 
the building or structure at all times when it is occupied. No lock or 
fastening to prevent free escape from the inside of any building shall 
be installed except in mental, penal, or corrective institutions where 
supervisory personnel is continually on duty and effective provisions 
are made to remove occupants in case of fire or other emergency.
    (5) Every exit shall be clearly visible or the route to reach it 
shall be conspicuously indicated in such a manner that every occupant of 
every building or structure who is physically and mentally capable will 
readily know the direction of escape from any point, and each path of 
escape, in its entirety, shall be so arranged or marked that

[[Page 130]]

the way to a place of safety outside is unmistakable. Any doorway or 
passageway not constituting an exit or way to reach an exit, but of such 
a character as to be subject to being mistaken for an exit, shall be so 
arranged or marked as to minimize its possible confusion with an exit 
and the resultant danger of persons endeavoring to escape from fire 
finding themselves trapped in a dead-end space, such as a cellar or 
storeroom, from which there is no other way out.
    (6) In every building or structure equipped for artificial 
illumination, adequate and reliable illumination shall be provided for 
all exit facilities.
    (7) In every building or structure of such size, arrangement, or 
occupancy that a fire may not itself provide adequate warning to 
occupants, fire alarm facilities shall be provided where necessary to 
warn occupants of the existence of fire so that they may escape, or to 
facilitate the orderly conduct of fire exit drills.
    (8) Every building or structure, section, or area thereof of such 
size, occupancy, and arrangement that the reasonable safety of numbers 
of occupants may be endangered by the blocking of any single means of 
egress due to fire or smoke, shall have at least two means of egress 
remote from each other, so arranged as to minimize any possibility that 
both may be blocked by any one fire or other emergency conditions.
    (9) Compliance with this subpart shall not be construed as 
eliminating or reducing the necessity for other provisions for safety of 
persons using a structure under normal occupancy conditions, nor shall 
any provision of the subpart be construed as requiring or permitting any 
condition that may be hazardous under normal occupancy conditions.
    (c) Protection of employees exposed by construction and repair 
operations. (1) No building or structure under construction shall be 
occupied in whole or in part until all exit facilities required for the 
part occupied are completed and ready for use.
    (2) No existing building shall be occupied during repairs or 
alterations unless all existing exits and any existing fire protection 
are continuously maintained, or in lieu thereof other measures are taken 
which provide equivalent safety.
    (3) No flammable or explosive substances or equipment for repairs or 
alterations shall be introduced in a building of normally low or 
ordinary hazard classification while the building is occupied, unless 
the condition of use and safeguards provided are such as not to create 
any additional danger or handicap to egress beyond the normally 
permissible conditions in the building.
    (d) Maintenance. (1) Every required exit, way of approach thereto, 
and way of travel from the exit into the street or open space, shall be 
continuously maintained free of all obstructions or impediments to full 
instant use in the case of fire or other emergency.
    (2) Every automatic sprinkler system, fire detection and alarm 
system, exit lighting, fire door, and other item of equipment, where 
provided, shall be continuously in proper operating condition.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.37  Means of egress, general.

    (a) Permissible exit components. An exit shall consist only of the 
approved components. Exit components shall be constructed as an integral 
part of the building or shall be permanently affixed thereto.
    (b) Protective enclosure of exits. When an exit is protected by 
separation from other parts of the building the separating construction 
shall meet the following requirements.
    (1) The separation shall have at least a 1-hour fire resistance 
rating when the exit connects three stories or less. This applies 
whether the stories connected are above or below the story at which exit 
discharge begins.
    (2) The separation shall have at least a 2-hour fire resistance 
rating when the exit connects four or more stories, whether above or 
below the floor of discharge. It shall be constructed of noncombustible 
materials, and shall be supported by construction having at least a 2-
hour fire resistance rating.
    (3) Any opening therein shall be protected by an approved self-
closing fire door.

[[Page 131]]

    (4) Openings in exit enclosures shall be confined to those necessary 
for access to the enclosure from normally occupied spaces and for egress 
from the enclosure.
    (c) Width and capacity of means of egress. (1) The capacity in 
number of persons per unit of exit width for approved components of 
means of egress shall be as follows:
    (i) Level Egress Components (including Class A Ramps) 100 persons.
    (ii) Inclined Egress Components (including Class B Ramps) 60 
persons.
    (iii) A ramp shall be designated as Class A or Class B in accordance 
with the following Table E-1:

                                Table E-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Class A             Class B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Width...........................  44 inches and       30 to 44 inches.
                                   greater.
Slope...........................  1 to 1\3/16\        1\3/16\ to 2
                                   inches in 12        inches in 12
                                   inches.             inches.
Maximum height between landings.  No limit..........  12 feet.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Means of egress shall be measured in units of exit width of 22 
inches. Fractions of a unit shall not be counted, except that 12 inches 
added to one or more full units shall be counted as one-half a unit of 
exit width.
    (3) Units of exit width shall be measured in the clear at the 
narrowest point of the means of egress except that a handrail may 
project inside the measured width on each side not more than 5 inches 
and a stringer may project inside the measured width not more than 1\1/
2\ inches. An exit or exit access door swinging into an aisle or 
passageway shall not restrict the effective width thereof at any point 
during its swing to less than the minimum widths hereafter specified.
    (d) Egress capacity and occupant load. (1) The capacity of means of 
egress for any floor, balcony, tier, or other occupied space shall be 
sufficient for the occupant load thereof. The occupant load shall be the 
maximum number of persons that may be in the space at any time.
    (2) Where exits serve more than one floor, only the occupant load of 
each floor considered individually need be used in computing the 
capacity of the exits at that floor, provided that exit capacity shall 
not be decreased in the direction of exit travel.
    (e) Arrangement of exits. When more than one exit is required from a 
story, at least two of the exits shall be remote from each other and so 
arranged as to minimize any possibility that both may be blocked by any 
one fire or other emergency condition.
    (f) Access to exits. (1) Exits shall be so located and exit access 
shall be so arranged that exits are readily accessible at all times. 
Where exits are not immediately accessible from an open floor area, safe 
and continuous passageways, aisles, or corridors leading directly to 
every exit and so arranged as to provide convenient access for each 
occupant to at least two exits by separate ways of travel, except as a 
single exit or limited dead ends are permitted by other provisions of 
this subpart, shall be maintained.
    (2) A door from a room to an exit or to a way of exit access shall 
be of the side-hinged, swinging type. It shall swing with exit travel 
when the room is occupied by more than 50 persons or used for a high 
hazard occupancy.
    (3) In no case shall access to an exit be through a bathroom, or 
other room subject to locking, except where the exit is required to 
serve only the room subject to locking.
    (4) Ways of exit access and the doors to exits to which they lead 
shall be so designed and arranged as to be clearly recognizable as such. 
Hangings or draperies shall not be placed over exit doors or otherwise 
so located as to conceal or obscure any exit. Mirrors shall not be 
placed on exit doors. Mirrors shall not be placed in or adjacent to any 
exit in such a manner as to confuse the direction of exit.
    (5) Exit access shall be so arranged that it will not be necessary 
to travel toward any area of high hazard occupancy in order to reach the 
nearest exit, unless the path of travel is effectively shielded from the 
high hazard location by suitable partitions or other physical barriers.
    (6) The minimum width of any way of exit access shall in no case be 
less than 28 inches. Where a single way of exit access leads to an exit, 
its capacity in terms of width shall be at least equal to the required 
capacity of the exit to

[[Page 132]]

which it leads. Where more than one way of exit access leads to an exit, 
each shall have a width adequate for the number of persons it must 
accommodate.
    (g) Exterior ways of exit access. (1) Access to an exit may be by 
means of any exterior balcony, porch, gallery, or roof that conforms to 
the requirements of this section.
    (2) Exterior ways of exit access shall have smooth, solid floors, 
substantially level, and shall have guards on the unenclosed sides.
    (3) Where accumulation of snow or ice is likely because of the 
climate, the exterior way of exit access shall be protected by a roof, 
unless it serves as the sole normal means of access to the rooms or 
spaces served, in which case it may be assumed that snow and ice will be 
regularly removed in the course of normal occupancy.
    (4) A permanent, reasonably straight path of travel shall be 
maintained over the required exterior way of exit access. There shall be 
no obstruction by railings, barriers, or gates that divide the open 
space into sections appurtenant to individual rooms, apartments, or 
other uses. Where the Assistant Secretary of Labor or his duly 
authorized representative finds the required path of travel to be 
obstructed by furniture or other movable objects, he may require that 
they be fastened out of the way or he may require that railings or other 
permanent barriers be installed to protect the path of travel against 
encroachment.
    (5) An exterior way of exit access shall be so arranged that there 
are no dead ends in excess of 20 feet. Any unenclosed exit served by an 
exterior way of exit access shall be so located that no part of the exit 
extends past a vertical plane 20 feet and one-half the required width of 
the exit from the end of and at right angles to the way of exit access.
    (6) Any gallery, balcony, bridge, porch, or other exterior exit 
access that projects beyond the outside wall of the building shall 
comply with the requirements of this section as to width and 
arrangement.
    (h) Discharge from exits. (1) All exits shall discharge directly to 
the street, or to a yard, court, or other open space that gives safe 
access to a public way. The streets to which the exits discharge shall 
be of width adequate to accommodate all persons leaving the building. 
Yards, courts, or other open spaces to which exits discharge shall also 
be of adequate width and size to provide all persons leaving the 
building with ready access to the street.
    (2) Stairs and other exits shall be so arranged as to make clear the 
direction of egress to the street. Exit stairs that continue beyond the 
floor of discharge shall be interrupted at the floor of discharge by 
partitions, doors, or other effective means.
    (i) Headroom. Means of egress shall be so designed and maintained as 
to provide adequate headroom, but in no case shall the ceiling height be 
less than 7 feet 6 inches nor any projection from the ceiling be less 
than 6 feet 8 inches from the floor.
    (j) Changes in elevation. Where a means of egress is not 
substantially level, such differences in elevation shall be negotiated 
by stairs or ramps.
    (k) Maintenance and workmanship. (1) Doors, stairs, ramps, passages, 
signs, and all other components of means of egress shall be of 
substantial, reliable construction and shall be built or installed in a 
workmanlike manner.
    (2) Means of egress shall be continuously maintained free of all 
obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or 
other emergency.
    (3) Any device or alarm installed to restrict the improper use of an 
exit shall be so designed and installed that it cannot, even in cases of 
failure, impede or prevent emergency use of such exit.
    (l) Furnishings and decorations. (1) No furnishings, decorations, or 
other objects shall be so placed as to obstruct exits, access thereto, 
egress therefrom, or visibility thereof.
    (2) No furnishings or decorations of an explosive or highly 
flammable character shall be used in any occupancy.
    (m) Automatic sprinkler systems. All automatic sprinkler systems 
shall be continuously maintained in reliable operating condition at all 
times, and such periodic inspections and tests shall be made as are 
necessary to assure proper maintenance.

[[Page 133]]

    (n) Fire alarm signaling systems. The employer shall assure that 
fire alarm signaling systems are maintained and tested in accordance 
with the requirements of Sec. 1910.165(d).
    (o) Fire retardant paints. Fire retardant paints or solutions shall 
be renewed at such intervals as necessary to maintain the necessary 
flame retardant properties.
    (p) [Reserved]
    (q) Exit marking. (1) Exits shall be marked by a readily visible 
sign. Access to exits shall be marked by readily visible signs in all 
cases where the exit or way to reach it is not immediately visible to 
the occupants.
    (2) Any door, passage, or stairway which is neither an exit nor a 
way of exit access, and which is so located or arranged as to be likely 
to be mistaken for an exit, shall be identified by a sign reading ``Not 
an Exit'' or similar designation, or shall be identified by a sign 
indicating its actual character, such as ``To Basement,'' ``Storeroom,'' 
``Linen Closet,'' or the like.
    (3) Every required sign designating an exit or way of exit access 
shall be so located and of such size, color, and design as to be readily 
visible. No decorations, furnishings, or equipment which impair 
visibility of an exit sign shall be permitted, nor shall there be any 
brightly illuminated sign (for other than exit purposes), display, or 
object in or near the line of vision to the required exit sign of such a 
character as to so detract attention from the exit sign that it may not 
be noticed.
    (4) Every exit sign shall be distinctive in color and shall provide 
contrast with decorations, interior finish, or other signs.
    (5) A sign reading ``Exit'', or similar designation, with an arrow 
indicating the directions, shall be placed in every location where the 
direction of travel to reach the nearest exit is not immediately 
apparent.
    (6) Every exit sign shall be suitably illuminated by a reliable 
light source giving a value of not less than 5 foot-candles on the 
illuminated surface. Artificial lights giving illumination to exit signs 
other than the internally illuminated types shall have screens, discs, 
or lenses of not less than 25 square inches area made of translucent 
material to show red or other specified designating color on the side of 
the approach.
    (7) Each internally illuminated exit sign shall be provided in all 
occupancies where reduction of normal illumination is permitted.
    (8) Every exit sign shall have the word ``Exit'' in plainly legible 
letters not less than 6 inches high, with the principal strokes of 
letters not less than three-fourths-inch wide.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 45 FR 60703, Sept. 12, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.38  Employee emergency plans and fire prevention plans.

    (a) Emergency action plan--(1) Scope and application. This paragraph 
(a) applies to all emergency action plans required by a particular OSHA 
standard. The emergency action plan shall be in writing (except as 
provided in the last sentence of paragraph (a)(5)(iii) of this section) 
and shall cover those designated actions employers and employees must 
take to ensure employee safety from fire and other emergencies.
    (2) Elements. The following elements, at a minimum, shall be 
included in the plan:
    (i) Emergency escape procedures and emergency escape route 
assignments;
    (ii) Procedures to be followed by employees who remain to operate 
critical plant operations before they evacuate;
    (iii) Procedures to account for all employees after emergency 
evacuation has been completed;
    (iv) Rescue and medical duties for those employees who are to 
perform them;
    (v) The preferred means of reporting fires and other emergencies; 
and
    (vi) Names or regular job titles of persons or departments who can 
be contacted for further information or explanation of duties under the 
plan.
    (3) Alarm system. (i) The employer shall establish an employee alarm 
system which complies with Sec. 1910.165.
    (ii) If the employee alarm system is used for alerting fire brigade 
members, or for other purposes, a distinctive signal for each purpose 
shall be used.
    (4) Evacuation. The employer shall establish in the emergency action 
plan the types of evacuation to be used in emergency circumstances.

[[Page 134]]

    (5) Training. (i) Before implementing the emergency action plan, the 
employer shall designate and train a sufficient number of persons to 
assist in the safe and orderly emergency evacuation of employees.
    (ii) The employer shall review the plan with each employee covered 
by the plan at the following times:
    (A) Initially when the plan is developed,
    (B) Whenever the employee's responsibilities or designated actions 
under the plan change, and
    (C) Whenever the plan is changed.
    (iii) The employer shall review with each employee upon initial 
assignment those parts of the plan which the employee must know to 
protect the employee in the event of an emergency. The written plan 
shall be kept at the workplace and made available for employee review. 
For those employers with 10 or fewer employees the plan may be 
communicated orally to employees and the employer need not maintain a 
written plan.
    (b) Fire prevention plan--(1) Scope and application. This paragraph 
(b) applies to all fire prevention plans required by a particular OSHA 
standard. The fire prevention plan shall be in writing, except as 
provided in the last sentence of paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section.
    (2) Elements. The following elements, at a minimum, shall be 
included in the fire prevention plan:
    (i) A list of the major workplace fire hazards and their proper 
handling and storage procedures, potential ignition sources (such as 
welding, smoking and others) and their control procedures, and the type 
of fire protection equipment or systems which can control a fire 
involving them;
    (ii) Names or regular job titles of those personnel responsible for 
maintenance of equipment and systems installed to prevent or control 
ignitions or fires; and
    (iii) Names or regular job titles of those personnel responsible for 
control of fuel source hazards.
    (3) Housekeeping. The employer shall control accumulations of 
flammable and combustible waste materials and residues so that they do 
not contribute to a fire emergency. The housekeeping procedures shall be 
included in the written fire prevention plan.
    (4) Training. (i) The employer shall apprise employees of the fire 
hazards of the materials and processes to which they are exposed.
    (ii) The employer shall review with each employee upon initial 
assignment those parts of the fire prevention plan which the employee 
must know to protect the employee in the event of an emergency. The 
written plan shall be kept in the workplace and made available for 
employee review. For those employers with 10 or fewer employees, the 
plan may be communicated orally to employees and the employer need not 
maintain a written plan.
    (5) Maintenance. The employer shall regularly and properly maintain, 
according to established procedures, equipment and systems installed on 
heat producing equipment to prevent accidental ignition of combustible 
materials. The maintenance procedures shall be included in the written 
fire prevention plan.
[45 FR 60703, Sept. 12, 1980]

           Appendix to Subpart E to Part 1910--Means of Egress

    This appendix serves as a nonmandatory guideline to assist employers 
in complying with the appropriate requirements of subpart E.

                 Sec. 1910.38  Employee emergency plans.

    1. Emergency action plan elements. The emergency action plan should 
address emergencies that the employer may reasonably expect in the 
workplace. Examples are: fire; toxic chemical releases; hurricanes; 
tornadoes; blizzards; floods; and others. The elements of the emergency 
action plan presented in paragraph 1910.38(a)(2) can be supplemented by 
the following to more effectively achieve employee safety and health in 
an emergency. The employer should list in detail the procedures to be 
taken by those employees who have been selected to remain behind to care 
for essential plant operations until their evacuation becomes absolutely 
necessary. Essential plant operations may include the monitoring of 
plant power supplies, water supplies, and other essential services which 
cannot be shut down for every emergency alarm. Essential plant 
operations may also include chemical or manufacturing processes which 
must be shut down in stages or steps where certain employees must be 
present to assure that safe shut down procedures are completed.

[[Page 135]]

    The use of floor plans or workplace maps which clearly show the 
emergency escape routes should be included in the emergency action plan. 
Color coding will aid employees in determining their route assignments.
    The employer should also develop and explain in detail what rescue 
and medical first aid duties are to be performed and by whom. All 
employees are to be told what actions they are to take in these 
emergency situations that the employer anticipates may occur in the 
workplace.
    2. Emergency evacuation. At the time of an emergency, employees 
should know what type of evacuation is necessary and what their role is 
in carrying out the plan. In some cases where the emergency is very 
grave, total and immediate evacuation of all employees is necessary. In 
other emergencies, a partial evacuation of nonessential employees with a 
delayed evacuation of others may be necessary for continued plant 
operation. In some cases, only those employees in the immediate area of 
the fire may be expected to evacuate or move to a safe area such as when 
a local application fire suppression system discharge employee alarm is 
sounded. Employees must be sure that they know what is expected of them 
in all such emergency possibilities which have been planned in order to 
provide assurance of their safety from fire or other emergency.
    The designation of refuge or safe areas for evacuation should be 
determined and identified in the plan. In a building divided into fire 
zones by fire walls, the refuge area may still be within the same 
building but in a different zone from where the emergency occurs.
    Exterior refuge or safe areas may include parking lots, open fields 
or streets which are located away from the site of the emergency and 
which provide sufficient space to accommodate the employees. Employees 
should be instructed to move away from the exit discharge doors of the 
building, and to avoid congregating close to the building where they may 
hamper emergency operations.
    3. Emergency action plan training. The employer should assure that 
an adequate number of employees are available at all times during 
working hours to act as evacuation wardens so that employees can be 
swiftly moved from the danger location to the safe areas. Generally, one 
warden for each twenty employees in the workplace should be able to 
provide adequate guidance and instruction at the time of a fire 
emergency. The employees selected or who volunteer to serve as wardens 
should be trained in the complete workplace layout and the various 
alternative escape routes from the workplace. All wardens and fellow 
employees should be made aware of handicapped employees who may need 
extra assistance, such as using the buddy system, and of hazardous areas 
to be avoided during emergencies. Before leaving, wardens should check 
rooms and other enclosed spaces in the workplace for employees who may 
be trapped or otherwise unable to evacuate the area.
    After the desired degree of evacuation is completed, the wardens 
should be able to account for or otherwise verify that all employees are 
in the safe areas.
    In buildings with several places of employment, employers are 
encouraged to coordinate their plans with the other employers in the 
building. A building-wide or standardized plan for the whole building is 
acceptable provided that the employers inform their respective employees 
of their duties and responsibilities under the plan. The standardized 
plan need not be kept by each employer in the multi-employer building, 
provided there is an accessible location within the building where the 
plan can be reviewed by affected employees. When multi-employer 
building-wide plans are not feasible, employers should coordinate their 
plans with the other employers within the building to assure that 
conflicts and confusion are avoided during times of emergencies. In 
multi-story buildings where more than one employer is on a single floor, 
it is essential that these employers coordinate their plans with each 
other to avoid conflicts and confusion.
    4. Fire prevention housekeeping. The standard calls for the control 
of accumulations of flammable and combustible waste materials.
    It is the intent of this standard to assure that hazardous 
accumulations of combustible waste materials are controlled so that a 
fast developing fire, rapid spread of toxic smoke, or an explosion will 
not occur. This does not necessarily mean that each room has to be swept 
each day. Employers and employees should be aware of the hazardous 
properties of materials in their workplaces, and the degree of hazard 
each poses. Certainly oil soaked rags have to be treated differently 
than general paper trash in office areas. However, large accumulations 
of waste paper or corrugated boxes, etc., can pose a significant fire 
hazard. Accumulations of materials which can cause large fires or 
generate dense smoke that are easily ignited or may start from 
spontaneous combustion, are the types of materials with which this 
standard is concerned. Such combustible materials may be easily ignited 
by matches, welder's sparks, cigarettes and similar low level energy 
ignition sources.
    5. Maintenance of equipment under the fire prevention plan. Certain 
equipment is often installed in workplaces to control heat sources or to 
detect fuel leaks. An example is a temperature limit switch often found 
on deep-fat food fryers found in restaurants. There may be similar 
switches for high temperature dip tanks, or flame failure and flashback 
arrester devices on furnaces and similar heat producing equipment. If 
these devices are not properly maintained or if

[[Page 136]]

they become inoperative, a definite fire hazard exists. Again employees 
and supervisors should be aware of the specific type of control devices 
on equipment involved with combustible materials in the workplace and 
should make sure, through periodic inspection or testing, that these 
controls are operable. Manufacturers' recommendations should be followed 
to assure proper maintenance procedures.
[45 FR 60714, Sept. 12, 1980]


<R04>
    Subpart F--Powered Platforms, Manlifts, and Vehicle-Mounted Work 
                                Platforms

    Authority: Secs. 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, and 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 1-90 
(55 FR 9033), as applicable; and 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.66  Powered platforms for building maintenance.

    (a) Scope. This section covers powered platform installations 
permanently dedicated to interior or exterior building maintenance of a 
specific structure or group of structures. This section does not apply 
to suspended scaffolds (swinging scaffolds) used to service buildings on 
a temporary basis and covered under subpart D of this part, nor to 
suspended scaffolds used for construction work and covered under subpart 
L of 29 CFR part 1926. Building maintenance includes, but is not limited 
to, such tasks as window cleaning, caulking, metal polishing and 
reglazing.
    (b) Application--(1) New installations. This section applies to all 
permanent installations completed after July 23, 1990. Major 
modifications to existing installations completed after that date are 
also considered new installations under this section.
    (2) Existing installations. (i) Permanent installations in existence 
and/or completed before July 23, 1990 shall comply with paragraphs (g), 
(h), (i), (j) and appendix C of this section.
    (ii) In addition, permanent installations completed after August 27, 
1971, and in existence and/or completed before July 23, 1990, shall 
comply with appendix D of this section.
    (c) Assurance. (1) Building owners of new installations shall inform 
the employer before each use in writing that the installation meets the 
requirements of paragraphs (e)(1) and (f)(1) of this section and the 
additional design criteria contained in other provisions of paragraphs 
(e) and (f) of this section relating to: required load sustaining 
capabilities of platforms, building components, hoisting and supporting 
equipment; stability factors for carriages, platforms and supporting 
equipment; maximum horizontal force for movement of carriages and 
davits; design of carriages, hoisting machines, wire rope and 
stabilization systems; and design criteria for electrical wiring and 
equipment.
    (2) Building owners shall base the information required in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section on the results of a field test of the 
installation before being placed into service and following any major 
alteration to an existing installation, as required in paragraph (g)(1) 
of this section. The assurance shall also be based on all other relevant 
available information, including, but not limited to, test data, 
equipment specifications and verification by a registered professional 
engineer.
    (3) Building owners of all installations, new and existing, shall 
inform the employer in writing that the installation has been inspected, 
tested and maintained in compliance with the requirements of paragraphs 
(g) and (h) of this section and that all protection anchorages meet the 
requirements of paragraph (I)(c)(10) of appendix C.
    (4) The employer shall not permit employees to use the installation 
prior to receiving assurance from the building owner that the 
installation meets the requirements contained in paragraphs (c)(1) and 
(c)(3) of this section.
    (d) Definitions.
    Anemometer means an instrument for measuring wind velocity.
    Angulated roping means a suspension method where the upper point of 
suspension is inboard from the attachments on the suspended unit, thus 
causing the suspended unit to bear against the face of the building.
    Building face roller means a rotating cylindrical member designed to 
ride on the face of the building wall to prevent the platform from 
abrading the face of

[[Page 137]]

the building and to assist in stabilizing the platform.
    Building maintenance means operations such as window cleaning, 
caulking, metal polishing, reglazing, and general maintenance on 
building surfaces.
    Cable means a conductor, or group of conductors, enclosed in a 
weatherproof sheath, that may be used to supply electrical power and/or 
control current for equipment or to provide voice communication 
circuits.
    Carriage means a wheeled vehicle used for the horizontal movement 
and support of other equipment.
    Certification means a written, signed and dated statement confirming 
the performance of a requirement of this section.
    Combination cable means a cable having both steel structural members 
capable of supporting the platform, and copper or other electrical 
conductors insulated from each other and the structural members by 
nonconductive barriers.
    Competent person means a person who, because of training and 
experience, is capable of identifying hazardous or dangerous conditions 
in powered platform installations and of training employees to identify 
such conditions.
    Continuous pressure means the need for constant manual actuation for 
a control to function.
    Control means a mechanism used to regulate or guide the operation of 
the equipment.
    Davit means a device, used singly or in pairs, for suspending a 
powered platform from work, storage and rigging locations on the 
building being serviced. Unlike outriggers, a davit reacts its operating 
load into a single roof socket or carriage attachment.
    Equivalent means alternative designs, materials or methods which the 
employer can demonstrate will provide an equal or greater degree of 
safety for employees than the methods, materials or designs specified in 
the standard.
    Ground rigging means a method of suspending a working platform 
starting from a safe surface to a point of suspension above the safe 
surface.
    Ground rigged davit means a davit which cannot be used to raise a 
suspended working platform above the building face being serviced.
    Guide button means a building face anchor designed to engage a guide 
track mounted on a platform.
    Guide roller means a rotating cylindrical member, operating 
separately or as part of a guide assembly, designed to provide 
continuous engagement between the platform and the building guides or 
guideways.
    Guide shoe means a device attached to the platform designed to 
provide a sliding contact between the platform and the building guides.
    Hoisting machine means a device intended to raise and lower a 
suspended or supported unit.
    Hoist rated load means the hoist manufacturer's maximum allowable 
operating load.
    Installation means all the equipment and all affected parts of a 
building which are associated with the performance of building 
maintenance using powered platforms.
    Interlock means a device designed to ensure that operations or 
motions occur in proper sequence.
    Intermittent stabilization means a method of platform stabilization 
in which the angulated suspension wire rope(s) are secured to regularly 
spaced building anchors.
    Lanyard means a flexible line of rope, wire rope or strap which is 
used to secure the body belt or body harness to a deceleration device, 
lifeline or anchorage.
    Lifeline means a component consisting of a flexible line for 
connection to an anchorage at one end to hang vertically (vertical 
lifeline), or for connection to anchorages at both ends to stretch 
horizontally (horizontal lifeline), and which serves as a means for 
connecting other components of a personal fall arrest system to the 
anchorage.
    Live load means the total static weight of workers, tools, parts, 
and supplies that the equipment is designed to support.
    Obstruction detector means a control that will stop the suspended or 
supported unit in the direction of travel if an obstruction is 
encountered, and will allow the unit to move only in a direction away 
from the obstruction.

[[Page 138]]

    Operating control means a mechanism regulating or guiding the 
operation of equipment that ensures a specific operating mode.
    Operating device means a device actuated manually to activate a 
control.
    Outrigger means a device, used singly or in pairs, for suspending a 
working platform from work, storage, and rigging locations on the 
building being serviced. Unlike davits, an outrigger reacts its 
operating moment load as at least two opposing vertical components 
acting into two or more distinct roof points and/or attachments.
    Platform rated load means the combined weight of workers, tools, 
equipment and other material which is permitted to be carried by the 
working platform at the installation, as stated on the load rating 
plate.
    Poured socket means the method of providing wire rope terminations 
in which the ends of the rope are held in a tapered socket by means of 
poured spelter or resins.
    Primary brake means a brake designed to be applied automatically 
whenever power to the prime mover is interrupted or discontinued.
    Prime mover means the source of mechanical power for a machine.
    Rated load means the manufacturer's recommended maximum load.
    Rated strength means the strength of wire rope, as designated by its 
manufacturer or vendor, based on standard testing procedures or 
acceptable engineering design practices.
    Rated working load means the combined static weight of men, 
materials, and suspended or supported equipment.
    Registered professional engineer means a person who has been duly 
and currently registered and licensed by an authority within the United 
States or its territories to practice the profession of engineering.
    Roof powered platform means a working platform where the hoist(s) 
used to raise or lower the platform is located on the roof.
    Roof rigged davit means a davit used to raise the suspended working 
platform above the building face being serviced. This type of davit can 
also be used to raise a suspended working platform which has been 
ground-rigged.
    Rope means the equipment used to suspend a component of an equipment 
installation, i.e., wire rope.
    Safe surface means a horizontal surface intended to be occupied by 
personnel, which is so protected by a fall protection system that it can 
be reasonably assured that said occupants will be protected against 
falls.
    Secondary brake means a brake designed to arrest the descent of the 
suspended or supported equipment in the event of an overspeed condition.
    Self powered platform means a working platform where the hoist(s) 
used to raise or lower the platform is mounted on the platform.
    Speed reducer means a positive type speed reducing machine.
    Stability factor means the ratio of the stabilizing moment to the 
overturning moment.
    Stabilizer tie means a flexible line connecting the building anchor 
and the suspension wire rope supporting the platform.
    Supported equipment means building maintenance equipment that is 
held or moved to its working position by means of attachment directly to 
the building or extensions of the building being maintained.
    Suspended equipment means building maintenance equipment that is 
suspended and raised or lowered to its working position by means of 
ropes or combination cables attached to some anchorage above the 
equipment.
    Suspended scaffold (swinging scaffold) means a scaffold supported on 
wire or other ropes, used for work on, or for providing access to, 
vertical sides of structures on a temporary basis. Such scaffold is not 
designed for use on a specific structure or group of structures.
    Tail line means the nonsupporting end of the wire rope used to 
suspend the platform.
    Tie-in guides means the portion of a building that provides 
continuous positive engagement between the building and a suspended or 
supported unit during its vertical travel on the face of the building.
    Traction hoist means a type of hoisting machine that does not 
accumulate the suspension wire rope on the hoisting drum or sheave, and 
is designed to

[[Page 139]]

raise and lower a suspended load by the application of friction forces 
between the suspension wire rope and the drum or sheave.
    Transportable outriggers means outriggers designed to be moved from 
one work location to another.
    Trolley carriage means a carriage suspended from an overhead track 
structure.
    Verified means accepted by design, evaluation, or inspection by a 
registered professional engineer.
    Weatherproof means so constructed that exposure to adverse weather 
conditions will not affect or interfere with the proper use or functions 
of the equipment or component.
    Winding drum hoist means a type of hoisting machine that accumulates 
the suspension wire rope on the hoisting drum.
    Working platform means suspended or supported equipment intended to 
provide access to the face of a building and manned by persons engaged 
in building maintenance.
    Wrap means one complete turn of the suspension wire rope around the 
surface of a hoist drum.
    (e) Powered platform installations--Affected parts of buildings--(1) 
General requirements. The following requirements apply to affected parts 
of buildings which utilize working platforms for building maintenance.
    (i) Structural supports, tie-downs, tie-in guides, anchoring devices 
and any affected parts of the building included in the installation 
shall be designed by or under the direction of a registered professional 
engineer experienced in such design;
    (ii) Exterior installations shall be capable of withstanding 
prevailing climatic conditions;
    (iii) The building installation shall provide safe access to, and 
egress from, the equipment and sufficient space to conduct necessary 
maintenance of the equipment;
    (iv) The affected parts of the building shall have the capability of 
sustaining all the loads imposed by the equipment; and,
    (v) The affected parts of the building shall be designed so as to 
allow the equipment to be used without exposing employees to a hazardous 
condition.
    (2) Tie-in guides. (i) The exterior of each building shall be 
provided with tie-in guides unless the conditions in paragraph 
(e)(2)(ii) or (e)(2)(iii) of this section are met.


    Note: See Figure 1 in appendix B of this section for a description 
of a typical continuous stabilization system utilizing tie-in guides.


    (ii) If angulated roping is employed, tie-in guides required in 
paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section may be eliminated for not more than 
75 feet (22.9 m) of the uppermost elevation of the building, if 
infeasible due to exterior building design, provided an angulation force 
of at least 10 pounds (44.4 n) is maintained under all conditions of 
loading.
    (iii) Tie-in guides required in paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section 
may be eliminated if one of the guide systems in paragraph 
(e)(2)(iii)(A), (e)(2)(iii)(B) or (e)(2)(iii)(C) of this section is 
provided, or an equivalent.
    (A) Intermittent stabilization system. The system shall keep the 
equipment in continuous contact with the building facade, and shall 
prevent sudden horizontal movement of the platform. The system may be 
used together with continuous positive building guide systems using tie-
in guides on the same building, provided the requirements for each 
system are met.
    (1) The maximum vertical interval between building anchors shall be 
three floors or 50 feet (15.3 m), whichever is less.
    (2) Building anchors shall be located vertically so that attachment 
of the stabilizer ties will not cause the platform suspension ropes to 
angulate the platform horizontally across the face of the building. The 
anchors shall be positioned horizontally on the building face so as to 
be symmetrical about the platform suspension ropes.
    (3) Building anchors shall be easily visible to employees and shall 
allow a stabilizer tie attachment for each of the platform suspension 
ropes at each vertical interval. If more than two suspension ropes are 
used on a platform, only the two building-side suspension ropes at the 
platform ends shall require a stabilizer attachment.

[[Page 140]]

    (4) Building anchors which extend beyond the face of the building 
shall be free of sharp edges or points. Where cables, suspension wire 
ropes and lifelines may be in contact with the building face, external 
building anchors shall not interfere with their handling or operation.
    (5) The intermittent stabilization system building anchors and 
components shall be capable of sustaining without failure at least four 
times the maximum anticipated load applied or transmitted to the 
components and anchors. The minimum design wind load for each anchor 
shall be 300 (1334 n) pounds, if two anchors share the wind load.
    (6) The building anchors and stabilizer ties shall be capable of 
sustaining anticipated horizontal and vertical loads from winds 
specified for roof storage design which may act on the platform and wire 
ropes if the platform is stranded on a building face. If the building 
anchors have different spacing than the suspension wire rope or if the 
building requires different suspension spacings on one platform, one 
building anchor and stabilizer tie shall be capable of sustaining the 
wind loads.


    Note: See Figure 2 in appendix B of this section for a description 
of a typical intermittent stabilization system.


    (B) Button guide stabilization system.
    (1) Guide buttons shall be coordinated with platform mounted 
equipment of paragraph (f)(5)(vi) of this section.
    (2) Guide buttons shall be located horizontally on the building face 
so as to allow engagement of each of the guide tracks mounted on the 
platform.
    (3) Guide buttons shall be located in vertical rows on the building 
face for proper engagement of the guide tracks mounted on the platform.
    (4) Two guide buttons shall engage each guide track at all times 
except for the initial engagement.
    (5) Guide buttons which extend beyond the face of the building shall 
be free of sharp edges or points. Where cables, ropes and lifelines may 
be in contact with the building face, guide buttons shall not interfere 
with their handling or operation.
    (6) Guide buttons, connections and seals shall be capable of 
sustaining without damage at least the weight of the platform, or 
provision shall be made in the guide tracks or guide track connectors to 
prevent the platform and its attachments from transmitting the weight of 
the platform to the guide buttons, connections and seals. In either 
case, the minimum design load shall be 300 pounds (1334 n) per building 
anchor.


    Note: See paragraph (f)(5)(vi) of this section for relevant 
equipment provisions.



    Note: See Figure 3 in appendix B of this section for a a description 
of a typical button guide stabilization system.


    (C) System utilizing angulated roping and building face rollers. The 
system shall keep the equipment in continuous contact with the building 
facade, and shall prevent sudden horizontal movement of the platform. 
This system is acceptable only where the suspended portion of the 
equipment in use does not exceed 130 feet (39.6 m) above a safe surface 
or ground level, and where the platform maintains no less than 10 pounds 
(44.4 n) angulation force on the building facade.
    (iv) Tie-in guides for building interiors (atriums) may be 
eliminated when a registered professional engineer determines that an 
alternative stabilization system, including systems in paragraphs 
(e)(2)(iii) (A), (B) and (C), or a platform tie-off at each work station 
will provide equivalent safety.
    (3) Roof guarding. (i) Employees working on roofs while performing 
building maintenance shall be protected by a perimeter guarding system 
which meets the requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1910.23 of this 
part.
    (ii) The perimeter guard shall not be more than six inches (152 mm) 
inboard of the inside face of a barrier, i.e. the parapet wall, or roof 
edge curb of the building being serviced; however, the perimeter guard 
location shall not exceed an 18 inch (457 mm) setback from the exterior 
building face.
    (4) Equipment stops. Operational areas for trackless type equipment 
shall be provided with structural stops, such as curbs, to prevent 
equipment from traveling outside its intended travel areas

[[Page 141]]

and to prevent a crushing or shearing hazard.
    (5) Maintenance access. Means shall be provided to traverse all 
carriages and their suspended equipment to a safe area for maintenance 
and storage.
    (6) Elevated track. (i) An elevated track system which is located 
four feet (1.2 m) or more above a safe surface, and traversed by 
carriage supported equipment, shall be provided with a walkway and 
guardrail system; or
    (ii) The working platform shall be capable of being lowered, as part 
of its normal operation, to the lower safe surface for access and egress 
of the personnel and shall be provided with a safe means of access and 
egress to the lower safe surface.
    (7) Tie-down anchors. Imbedded tie-down anchors, fasteners, and 
affected structures shall be resistant to corrosion.
    (8) Cable stabilization. (i) Hanging lifelines and all cables not in 
tension shall be stabilized at each 200 foot (61 m) interval of vertical 
travel of the working platform beyond an initial 200 foot (61 m) 
distance.
    (ii) Hanging cables, other than suspended wire ropes, which are in 
constant tension shall be stabilized when the vertical travel exceeds an 
initial 600 foot (183 m) distance, and at further intervals of 600 feet 
(183 m) or less.
    (9) Emergency planning. A written emergency action plan shall be 
developed and implemented for each kind of working platform operation. 
This plan shall explain the emergency procedures which are to be 
followed in the event of a power failure, equipment failure or other 
emergencies which may be encountered. The plan shall also explain that 
employees inform themselves about the building emergency escape routes, 
procedures and alarm systems before operating a platform. Upon initial 
assignment and whenever the plan is changed the employer shall review 
with each employee those parts of the plan which the employee must know 
to protect himself or herself in the event of an emergency.
    (10) Building maintenance. Repairs or major maintenance of those 
building portions that provide primary support for the suspended 
equipment shall not affect the capability of the building to meet the 
requirements of this standard.
    (11) Electrical requirements. The following electrical requirements 
apply to buildings which utilize working platforms for building 
maintenance.
    (i) General building electrical installations shall comply with 
Secs. 1910.302 through 1910.308 of this part, unless otherwise specified 
in this section;
    (ii) Building electrical wiring shall be of such capacity that when 
full load is applied to the equipment power circuit not more than a five 
percent drop from building service-vault voltage shall occur at any 
power circuit outlet used by equipment regulated by this section;
    (iii) The equipment power circuit shall be an independent electrical 
circuit that shall remain separate from all other equipment within or on 
the building, other than power circuits used for hand tools that will be 
used in conjunction with the equipment. If the building is provided with 
an emergency power system, the equipment power circuit may also be 
connected to this system;
    (iv) The power circuit shall be provided with a disconnect switch 
that can be locked in the ``OFF'' and ``ON'' positions. The switch shall 
be conveniently located with respect to the primary operating area of 
the equipment to allow the operators of the equipment access to the 
switch;
    (v) The disconnect switch for the power circuit shall be locked in 
the ``ON'' position when the equipment is in use; and
    (vi) An effective two-way voice communication system shall be 
provided between the equipment operators and persons stationed within 
the building being serviced. The communications facility shall be 
operable and shall be manned at all times by persons stationed within 
the building whenever the platform is being used.
    (f) Powered platform installations--Equipment--(1) General 
requirements. The following requirements apply to equipment which are 
part of a powered platform installation, such as platforms, stabilizing 
components, carriages, outriggers, davits, hoisting machines, wire ropes 
and electrical components.

[[Page 142]]

    (i) Equipment installations shall be designed by or under the 
direction of a registered professional engineer experienced in such 
design;
    (ii) The design shall provide for a minimum live load of 250 pounds 
(113.6 kg) for each occupant of a suspended or supported platform;
    (iii) Equipment that is exposed to wind when not in service shall be 
designed to withstand forces generated by winds of at least 100 miles 
per hour (44.7 m/s) at 30 feet (9.2 m) above grade; and
    (iv) Equipment that is exposed to wind when in service shall be 
designed to withstand forces generated by winds of at least 50 miles per 
hour (22.4 m/s) for all elevations.
    (2) Construction requirements. Bolted connections shall be self-
locking or shall otherwise be secured to prevent loss of the connections 
by vibration.
    (3) Suspension methods. Elevated building maintenance equipment 
shall be suspended by a carriage, outriggers, davits or an equivalent 
method.
    (i) Carriages. Carriages used for suspension of elevated building 
maintenance equipment shall comply with the following:
    (A) The horizontal movement of a carriage shall be controlled so as 
to ensure its safe movement and allow accurate positioning of the 
platform for vertical travel or storage;
    (B) Powered carriages shall not exceed a traversing speed of 50 feet 
per minute (0.3 m/s);
    (C) The initiation of a traversing movement for a manually propelled 
carriage on a smooth level surface shall not require a person to exert a 
horizontal force greater than 40 pounds (444.8 n);
    (D) Structural stops and curbs shall be provided to prevent the 
traversing of the carriage beyond its designed limits of travel;
    (E) Traversing controls for a powered carriage shall be of a 
continuous pressure weatherproof type. Multiple controls when provided 
shall be arranged to permit operation from only one control station at a 
time. An emergency stop device shall be provided on each end of a 
powered carriage for interrupting power to the carriage drive motors;
    (F) The operating controls(s) shall be so connected that in the case 
of suspended equipment, traversing of a carriage is not possible until 
the suspended portion of the equipment is located at its uppermost 
designed position for traversing; and is free of contact with the face 
of the building or building guides. In addition, all protective devices 
and interlocks are to be in the proper position to allow traversing of 
the carriage;
    (G) Stability for underfoot supported carriages shall be obtained by 
gravity, by an attachment to a structural support, or by a combination 
of gravity and a structural support. The use of flowing counterweights 
to achieve stability is prohibited.
    (1) The stability factor against overturning shall not be less than 
two for horizontal traversing of the carriage, including the effects of 
impact and wind.
    (2) The carriages and their anchorages shall be capable of resisting 
accidental over-tensioning of the wire ropes suspending the working 
platform, and this calculated value shall include the effect of one and 
one-half times the stall capacity of the hoist motor. All parts of the 
installation shall be capable of withstanding without damage to any part 
of the installation the forces resulting from the stall load of the 
hoist and one half the wind load.
    (3) Roof carriages which rely on having tie-down devices secured to 
the building to develop the required stability against overturning shall 
be provided with an interlock which will prevent vertical platform 
movement unless the tie-down is engaged;
    (H) An automatically applied braking or locking system, or 
equivalent, shall be provided that will prevent unintentional traversing 
of power traversed or power assisted carriages;
    (I) A manual or automatic braking or locking system or equivalent, 
shall be provided that will prevent unintentional traversing of manually 
propelled carriages;
    (J) A means to lock out the power supply for the carriage shall be 
provided;
    (K) Safe access to and egress from the carriage shall be provided 
from a safe surface. If the carriage traverses

[[Page 143]]

an elevated area, any operating area on the carriage shall be protected 
by a guardrail system in compliance with the provisions of paragraph 
(f)(5)(i)(F) of this section. Any access gate shall be self-closing and 
self-latching, or provided with an interlock;
    (L) Each carriage work station position shall be identified by 
location markings and/or position indicators; and
    (M) The motors shall stall if the load on the hoist motors is at any 
time in excess of three times that necessary for lifting the working 
platform with its rated load.
    (ii) Transportable outriggers. (A) Transportable outriggers may be 
used as a method of suspension for ground rigged working platforms where 
the point of suspension does not exceed 300 feet (91.5 m) above a safe 
surface. Tie-in guide system(s) shall be provided which meet the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
    (B) Transportable outriggers shall be used only with self-powered, 
ground rigged working platforms.
    (C) Each transportable outrigger shall be secured with a tie-down to 
a verified anchorage on the building during the entire period of its 
use. The anchorage shall be designed to have a stability factor of not 
less than four against overturning or upsetting of the outrigger.
    (D) Access to and egress from the working platform shall be from and 
to a safe surface below the point of suspension.
    (E) Each transportable outrigger shall be designed for lateral 
stability to prevent roll-over in the event an accidental lateral load 
is applied to the outrigger. The accidental lateral load to be 
considered in this design shall be not less than 70 percent of the rated 
load of the hoist.
    (F) Each transportable outrigger shall be designed to support an 
ultimate load of not less than four times the rated load of the hoist.
    (G) Each transportable outrigger shall be so located that the 
suspension wire ropes for two point suspended working platforms are hung 
parallel.
    (H) A transportable outrigger shall be tied-back to a verified 
anchorage on the building with a rope equivalent in strength to the 
suspension rope.
    (I) The tie-back rope shall be installed parallel to the centerline 
of the outrigger.
    (iii) Davits. (A) Every davit installation, fixed or transportable, 
rotatable or non-rotatable shall be designed and installed to insure 
that it has a stability factor against overturning of not less than 
four.
    (B) The following requirements apply to roof rigged davit systems:
    (1) Access to and egress from the working platform shall be from a 
safe surface. Access or egress shall not require persons to climb over a 
building's parapet or guard railing; and
    (2) The working platform shall be provided with wheels, casters or a 
carriage for traversing horizontally.
    (C) The following requirements apply to ground rigged davit systems:
    (1) The point of suspension shall not exceed 300 feet (91.5 m) above 
a safe surface. Guide system(s) shall be provided which meet the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(2) of this section;
    (2) Access and egress to and from the working platform shall only be 
from a safe surface below the point of suspension.
    (D) A rotating davit shall not require a horizontal force in excess 
of 40 pounds (177.9 n) per person to initiate a rotating movement.
    (E) The following requirements shall apply to transportable davits:
    (1) A davit or part of a davit weighing more than 80 pounds (36 kg) 
shall be provided with a means for its transport, which shall keep the 
center of gravity of the davit at or below 36 inches (914 mm) above the 
safe surface during transport;
    (2) A davit shall be provided with a pivoting socket or with a base 
that will allow the insertion or removal of a davit at a position of not 
more than 35 degrees above the horizontal, with the complete davit 
inboard of the building face being serviced; and
    (3) Means shall be provided to lock the davit to its socket or base 
before it is used to suspend the platform.
    (4) Hoisting machines. (i) Raising and lowering of suspended or 
supported equipment shall be performed only by a hoisting machine.

[[Page 144]]

    (ii) Each hoisting machine shall be capable of arresting any 
overspeed descent of the load.
    (iii) Each hoisting machine shall be powered only by air, electric 
or hydraulic sources.
    (iv) Flammable liquids shall not be carried on the working platform.
    (v) Each hoisting machine shall be capable of raising or lowering 
125 percent of the rated load of the hoist.
    (vi) Moving parts of a hoisting machine shall be enclosed or guarded 
in compliance with paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of Sec. 1910.212 of this 
part.
    (vii) Winding drums, traction drums and sheaves and directional 
sheaves used in conjunction with hoisting machines shall be compatible 
with, and sized for, the wire rope used.
    (viii) Each winding drum shall be provided with a positive means of 
attaching the wire rope to the drum. The attachment shall be capable of 
developing at least four times the rated load of the hoist.
    (ix) Each hoisting machine shall be provided with a primary brake 
and at least one independent secondary brake, each capable of stopping 
and holding not less than 125 percent of the lifting capacity of the 
hoist.
    (A) The primary brake shall be directly connected to the drive train 
of the hoisting machine, and shall not be connected through belts, 
chains, clutches, or set screw type devices. The brake shall 
automatically set when power to the prime mover is interrupted.
    (B)(1) The secondary brake shall be an automatic emergency type of 
brake that, if actuated during each stopping cycle, shall not engage 
before the hoist is stopped by the primary brake.
    (2) When a secondary brake is actuated, it shall stop and hold the 
platform within a vertical distance of 24 inches (609.6 mm).
    (x) Any component of a hoisting machine which requires lubrication 
for its protection and proper functioning shall be provided with a means 
for that lubrication to be applied.
    (5) Suspended equipment--(i) General requirements. (A) Each 
suspended unit component, except suspension ropes and guardrail systems, 
shall be capable of supporting, without failure, at least four times the 
maximum intended live load applied or transmitted to that component.
    (B) Each suspended unit component shall be constructed of materials 
that will withstand anticipated weather conditions.
    (C) Each suspended unit shall be provided with a load rating plate, 
conspicuously located, stating the unit weight and rated load of the 
suspended unit.
    (D) When the suspension points on a suspended unit are not at the 
unit ends, the unit shall be capable of remaining continuously stable 
under all conditions of use and position of the live load, and shall 
maintain at least a 1.5 to 1 stability factor against unit upset.
    (E) Guide rollers, guide shoes or building face rollers shall be 
provided, and shall compensate for variations in building dimensions and 
for minor horizontal out-of-level variations of each suspended unit.
    (F) Each working platform of a suspended unit shall be secured to 
the building facade by one or more of the following methods, or by an 
equivalent method:
    (1) Continuous engagement to building anchors as provided in 
paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section;
    (2) Intermittent engagement to building anchors as provided in 
paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(A) of this section;
    (3) Button guide engagement as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(B) 
of this section; or
    (4) Angulated roping and building face rollers as provided in 
paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(C) of this section.
    (G) Each working platform of a suspended unit shall be provided with 
a guardrail system on all sides which shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) The system shall consist of a top guardrail, midrail, and a 
toeboard;
    (2) The top guardrail shall not be less than 36 inches (914 mm) high 
and shall be able to withstand at least a 100-pound (444 n) force in any 
downward or outward direction;
    (3) The midrail shall be able to withstand at least a 75-pound (333 
n) force in any downward or outward direction; and

[[Page 145]]

    (4) The areas between the guardrail and toeboard on the ends and 
outboard side, and the area between the midrail and toeboard on the 
inboard side, shall be closed with a material that is capable of 
withstanding a load of 100 pounds (45.4 KG.) applied horizontally over 
any area of one square foot (.09 m\2\). The material shall have all 
openings small enough to reject passage of life lines and potential 
falling objects which may be hazardous to persons below.
    (5) Toeboards shall be capable of withstanding, without failure, a 
force of at least 50 pounds (222 n) applied in any downward or 
horizontal direction at any point along the toeboard.
    (6) Toeboards shall be three and one-half inches (9 cm) minimum in 
length from their top edge to the level of the platform floor.
    (7) Toeboards shall be securely fastened in place at the outermost 
edge of the platform and have no more than one-half inch (1.3 cm) 
clearance above the platform floor.
    (8) Toeboards shall be solid or with an opening not over one inch 
(2.5 cm) in the greatest dimension.
    (ii) Two and four-point suspended working platforms. (A) The working 
platform shall be not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide and shall be 
provided with a minimum of a 12 inch (305 mm) wide passage at or past 
any obstruction on the platform.
    (B) The flooring shall be of a slip-resistant type and shall contain 
no opening that would allow the passage of life lines, cables and other 
potential falling objects. If a larger opening is provided, it shall be 
protected by placing a material under the opening which shall prevent 
the passage of life lines, cables and potential falling objects.
    (C) The working platfrom shall be provided with a means of 
suspension that will restrict the platform's inboard to outboard roll 
about its longitudinal axis to a maximum of 15 degrees from a horizontal 
plane when moving the live load from the inboard to the outboard side of 
the platform.
    (D) Any cable suspended from above the platform shall be provided 
with a means for storage to prevent accumulation of the cable on the 
floor of the platform.
    (E) All operating controls for the vertical travel of the platform 
shall be of the continuous-pressure type, and shall be located on the 
platform.
    (F) Each operating station of every working platform shall be 
provided with a means of interrupting the power supply to all hoist 
motors to stop any further powered ascent or descent of the platform.
    (G) The maximum rated speed of the platform shall not exceed 50 feet 
per minute (0.3 ms) with single speed hoists, nor 75 feet per minute 
(0.4 ms) with multi-speed hoists.
    (H) Provisions shall be made for securing all tools, water tanks, 
and other accessories to prevent their movement or accumulation on the 
floor of the platform.
    (I) Portable fire extinguishers conforming to the provisions of 
Sec. 1910.155 and Sec. 1910.157 of this part shall be provided and 
securely attached on all working platforms.
    (J) Access to and egress from a working platfrom, except for those 
that land directly on a safe surface, shall be provided by stairs, 
ladders, platforms and runways conforming to the provisions of subpart D 
of this part. Access gates shall be self-closing and self-latching.
    (K) Means of access to or egress from a working platform which is 48 
inches (1.2 m) or more above a safe surface shall be provided with a 
guardrail system or ladder handrails that conform to the provisions of 
subpart D of this part.
    (L) The platform shall be provided with a secondary wire rope 
suspension system if the platform contains overhead structures which 
restrict the emergency egress of employees. A horizontal lifeline or a 
direct connection anchorage shall be provided, as part of a fall arrest 
system which meets the requirements of appendix C, for each employee on 
such a platform.
    (M) A vertical lifeline shall be provided as part of a fall arrest 
system which meets the requirements of appendix C, for each employee on 
a working platform suspended by two or more wire ropes, if the failure 
of one wire rope or suspension attachment will cause the platform to 
upset. If a secondary wire rope suspension is used, vertical lifelines 
are not required for

[[Page 146]]

the fall arrest system, provided that each employee is attached to a 
horizontal lifeline anchored to the platform.
    (N) An emergency electric operating device shall be provided on roof 
powered platforms near the hoisting machine for use in the event of 
failure of the normal operating device located on the working platform, 
or failure of the cable connected to the platform. The emergency 
electric operating device shall be mounted in a secured compartment, and 
the compartment shall be labeled with instructions for use. A means for 
opening the compartment shall be mounted in a break-glass receptable 
located near the emergency electric operating device or in an equivalent 
secure and accessible location.
    (iii) Single point suspended working platforms. (A) The requirements 
of paragraphs (f)(5)(ii) (A) through (K) of this section shall also 
apply to a single point working platform.
    (B) Each single point suspended working platform shall be provided 
with a secondary wire rope suspension system, which will prevent the 
working platform from falling should there be a failure of the primary 
means of support, or if the platform contains overhead structures which 
restrict the egress of the employees. A horizontal life line or a direct 
connection anchorage shall be provided, as part of a fall arrest system 
which meets the requirements of appendix C, for each employee on the 
platform.
    (iv) Ground-rigged working platforms. (A) Groundrigged working 
platforms shall comply with all the requirements of paragraphs 
(f)(5)(ii) (A) through (M) of this section.
    (B) After each day's use, the power supply within the building shall 
be disconnected from a ground-rigged working platform, and the platform 
shall be either disengaged from its suspension points or secured and 
stored at grade.
    (v) Intermittently stabilized platforms. (A) The platform shall 
comply with paragraphs (F)(5)(ii) (A) through (M) of this section.
    (B) Each stabilizer tie shall be equipped with a ``quick connect-
quick disconnect'' device which cannot be accidently disengaged, for 
attachment to the building anchor, and shall be resistant to adverse 
environmental conditions.
    (C) The platform shall be provided with a stopping device that will 
interrupt the hoist power supply in the event the platform contacts a 
stabilizer tie during its ascent.
    (D) Building face rollers shall not be placed at the anchor setting 
if exterior anchors are used on the building face.
    (E) Stabilizer ties used on intermittently stabilized platforms 
shall allow for the specific attachment length needed to effect the 
predetermined angulation of the suspended wire rope. The specific 
attachment length shall be maintained at all building anchor locations.
    (F) The platform shall be in continuous contact with the face of the 
building during ascent and descent.
    (G) The attachment and removal of stabilizer ties shall not require 
the horizontal movement of the platform.
    (H) The platform-mounted equipment and its suspension wire ropes 
shall not be physically damaged by the loads from the stabilizer tie or 
its building anchor. The platform, platform mounted equipment and wire 
ropes shall be able to withstand a load that is at least twice the 
ultimate strength of the stabilizer tie.


    Note: See Figure II in appendix B of this section for a description 
of a typical intermittent stabilization system.


    (vi) Button-guide stabilized platforms. (A) The platform shall 
comply with paragraphs (f)(5)(ii) (A) through (M) of this section.
    (B) Each guide track on the platform shall engage a minimum of two 
guide buttons during any vertical travel of the platform following the 
initial button engagement.
    (C) Each guide track on a platform that is part of a roof rigged 
system shall be provided with a storage position on the platform.
    (D) Each guide track on the platform shall be sufficiently 
maneuverable by platform occupants to permit easy engagement of the 
guide buttons, and easy movement into and out of its storage position on 
the platform.
    (E) Two guide tracks shall be mounted on the platform and shall 
provide

[[Page 147]]

continuous contact with the building face.
    (F) The load carrying components of the button guide stabilization 
system which transmit the load into the platform shall be capable of 
supporting the weight of the platform, or provision shall be made in the 
guide track connectors or platform attachments to prevent the weight of 
the platform from being transmitted to the platform attachments.


    Note: See Figure III in appendix B of this section for a description 
of a typical button guide stabilization system.


    (6) Supported equipment. (i) Supported equipment shall maintain a 
vertical position in respect to the face of the building by means other 
than friction.
    (ii) Cog wheels or equivalent means shall be incorporated to provide 
climbing traction between the supported equipment and the building 
guides. Additional guide wheels or shoes shall be incorporated as may be 
necessary to ensure that the drive wheels are continuously held in 
positive engagement with the building guides.
    (iii) Launch guide mullions indexed to the building guides and 
retained in alignment with the building guides shall be used to align 
drive wheels entering the building guides.
    (iv) Manned platforms used on supported equipment shall comply with 
the requirements of paragraphs (f)(5)(ii)(A), (f)(5)(ii)(B), and 
(f)(5)(ii) (D) through (K) of this section covering suspended equipment.
    (7) Suspension wire ropes and rope connections. (i) Each specific 
installation shall use suspension wire ropes or combination cable and 
connections meeting the specification recommended by the manufacturer of 
the hoisting machine used. Connections shall be capable of developing at 
least 80 percent of the rated breaking strength of the wire rope.
    (ii) Each suspension rope shall have a ``Design Factor'' of at least 
10. The ``Design Factor'' is the ratio of the rated strength of the 
suspension wire rope to the rated working load, and shall be calculated 
using the following formula:



Where:
F=Design factor
S=Manufacturer's rated strength of one suspension rope
N=Number of suspension ropes under load
W=Rated working load on all ropes at any point of travel

    (iii) Suspension wire rope grade shall be at least improved plow 
steel or equivalent.
    (iv) Suspension wire ropes shall be sized to conform with the 
required design factor, but shall not be less than 5/16 inch (7.94 mm) 
in diameter.
    (v) No more than one reverse bend in six wire rope lays shall be 
permitted.
    (vi) A corrosion-resistant tag shall be securely attached to one of 
the wire rope fastenings when a suspension wire rope is to be used at a 
specific location and will remain in that location. This tag shall bear 
the following wire rope data:

    (A) The diameter (inches and/or mm);
    (B) Construction classification;
    (C) Whether non-preformed or preformed;
    (D) The grade of material;
    (E) The manufacturer's rated strength;
    (F) The manufacturer's name;
    (G) The month and year the ropes were installed; and
    (H) The name of the person or company which installed the ropes.
    (vii) A new tag shall be installed at each rope renewal.
    (viii) The original tag shall be stamped with the date of the 
resocketing, or the original tag shall be retained and a supplemental 
tag shall be provided when ropes are resocketed. The supplemental tag 
shall show the date of resocketing and the name of the person or company 
that resocketed the rope.
    (ix) Winding drum type hoists shall contain at least three wraps of 
the suspension wire rope on the drum when the suspended unit has reached 
the lowest possible point of its vertical travel.
    (x) Traction drum and sheave type hoists shall be provided with a 
wire

[[Page 148]]

rope of sufficient length to reach the lowest possible point of vertical 
travel of the suspended unit, and an additional length of the wire rope 
of at least four feet (1.2 m).
    (xi) The lengthening or repairing of suspension wire ropes is 
prohibited.
    (xii) Babbitted fastenings for suspension wire rope are prohibited.
    (8) Control circuits, power circuits and their components. (i) 
Electrical wiring and equipment shall comply with subpart S of this 
part, except as otherwise required by this section.
    (ii) Electrical runway conductor systems shall be of a type designed 
for use in exterior locations, and shall be located so that they do not 
come into contact with accumulated snow or water.
    (iii) Cables shall be protected against damage resulting from 
overtensioning or from other causes.
    (iv) Devices shall be included in the control system for the 
equipment which will provide protection against electrical overloads, 
three phase reversal and phase failure. The control system shall have a 
separate method, independent of the direction control circuit, for 
breaking the power circuit in case of an emergency or malfunction.
    (v) Suspended or supported equipment shall have a control system 
which will require the operator of the equipment to follow predetermined 
procedures.
    (vi) The following requirements shall apply to electrical protection 
devices:
    (A) On installations where the carriage does not have a stability 
factor of at least four against overturning, electrical contact(s) shall 
be provided and so connected that the operating devices for the 
suspended or supported equipment shall be operative only when the 
carriage is located and mechanically retained at an established 
operating point.
    (B) Overload protection shall be provided in the hoisting or 
suspension system to protect against the equipment operating in the 
``up'' direction with a load in excess of 125 percent of the rated load 
of the platform; and
    (C) An automatic detector shall be provided for each suspension 
point that will interrupt power to all hoisting motors for travel in the 
``down'' direction, and apply the primary brakes if any suspension wire 
rope becomes slack. A continuous-pressure rigging-bypass switch designed 
for use during rigging is permitted. This switch shall only be used 
during rigging.
    (vii) Upper and lower directional switches designed to prevent the 
travel of suspended units beyond safe upward and downward levels shall 
be provided.
    (viii) Emergency stop switches shall be provided on remote 
controlled, roof-powered manned platforms adjacent to each control 
station on the platform.
    (ix) Cables which are in constant tension shall have overload 
devices which will prevent the tension in the cable from interfering 
with the load limiting device required in paragraph (f)(8)(vi)(B) of 
this section, or with the platform roll limiting device required in 
paragraph (f)(5)(ii)(C) of this section. The setting of these devices 
shall be coordinated with other overload settings at the time of design 
of the system, and shall be clearly indicated on or near the device. The 
device shall interrupt the equipment travel in the ``down'' direction.
    (g) Inspection and tests--(1) Installations and alterations. All 
completed building maintenance equipment installations shall be 
inspected and tested in the field before being placed in initial service 
to determine that all parts of the installation conform to applicable 
requirements of this standard, and that all safety and operating 
equipment is functioning as required. A similar inspection and test 
shall be made following any major alteration to an existing 
installation. No hoist in an installation shall be subjected to a load 
in excess of 125 percent of its rated load.
    (2) Periodic inspections and tests. (i) Related building supporting 
structures shall undergo periodic inspection by a competent person at 
intervals not exceeding 12 months.
    (ii) All parts of the equipment including control systems shall be 
inspected, and, where necessary, tested by a competent person at 
intervals specified by the manufacturer/supplier, but not to exceed 12 
months, to determine that they are in safe operating condition. Parts 
subject to wear, such as wire

[[Page 149]]

ropes, bearings, gears, and governors shall be inspected and/or tested 
to determine that they have not worn to such an extent as to affect the 
safe operation of the installation.
    (iii) The building owner shall keep a certification record of each 
inspection and test required under paragraphs (g)(2)(i) and (ii) of this 
section. The certification record shall include the date of the 
inspection, the signature of the person who performed the inspection, 
and the number, or other identifier, of the building support structure 
and equipment which was inspected. This certification record shall be 
kept readily available for review by the Assistant Secretary of Labor or 
the Assistant Secretary's representative and by the employer.
    (iv) Working platforms and their components shall be inspected by 
the employer for visible defects before every use and after each 
occurrence which could affect the platform's structural integrity.
    (3) Maintenance inspections and tests. (i) A maintenance inspection 
and, where necessary, a test shall be made of each platform installation 
every 30 days, or where the work cycle is less than 30 days such 
inspection and/or test shall be made prior to each work cycle. This 
inspection and test shall follow procedures recommended by the 
manufacturer, and shall be made by a competent person.
    (ii) The building owner shall keep a certification record of each 
inspection and test performed under paragraph (g)(3)(i) of this section. 
The certification record shall include the date of the inspection and 
test, the signature of the person who performed the inspection and/or 
test, and an identifier for the platform installation which was 
inspected. The certification record shall be kept readily available for 
review by the Assistant Secretary of Labor or the Assistant Secretary's 
representative and by the employer.
    (4) Special inspection of governors and secondary brakes. (i) 
Governors and secondary brakes shall be inspected and tested at 
intervals specified by the manufacturer/supplier but not to exceed every 
12 months.
    (ii) The results of the inspection and test shall confirm that the 
initiating device for the secondary braking system operates at the 
proper overspeed.
    (iii) The results of the inspection and test shall confirm that the 
secondary brake is functioning properly.
    (iv) If any hoisting machine or initiating device for the secondary 
brake system is removed from the equipment for testing, all reinstalled 
and directly related components shall be reinspected prior to returning 
the equipment installation to service.
    (v) Inspection of governors and secondary brakes shall be performed 
by a competent person.
    (vi) The secondary brake governor and actuation device shall be 
tested before each day's use. Where testing is not feasible, a visual 
inspection of the brake shall be made instead to ensure that it is free 
to operate.
    (5) Suspension wire rope maintenance, inspection and replacement. 
(i) Suspension wire rope shall be maintained and used in accordance with 
procedures recommended by the wire rope manufacturer.
    (ii) Suspension wire rope shall be inspected by a competent person 
for visible defects and gross damage to the rope before every use and 
after each occurrence which might affect the wire rope's integrity.
    (iii) A thorough inspection of suspension wire ropes in service 
shall be made once a month. Suspension wire ropes that have been 
inactive for 30 days or longer shall have a thorough inspection before 
they are placed into service. These thorough inspections of suspension 
wire ropes shall be performed by a competent person.
    (iv) The need for replacement of a suspension wire rope shall be 
determined by inspection and shall be based on the condition of the wire 
rope. Any of the following conditions or combination of conditions will 
be cause for removal of the wire rope:
    (A) Broken wires exceeding three wires in one strand or six wires in 
one rope lay;
    (B) Distortion of rope structure such as would result from crushing 
or kinking;
    (C) Evidence of heat damage;
    (D) Evidence of rope deterioration from corrosion;

[[Page 150]]

    (E) A broken wire within 18 inches (460.8 mm) of the end 
attachments;
    (F) Noticeable rusting and pitting;
    (G) Evidence of core failure (a lengthening of rope lay, protrusion 
of the rope core and a reduction in rope diameter suggests core 
failure); or
    (H) More than one valley break (broken wire).
    (I) Outer wire wear exceeds one-third of the original outer wire 
diameter.
    (J) Any other condition which the competent person determines has 
significantly affected the integrity of the rope.
    (v) The building owner shall keep a certification record of each 
monthly inspection of a suspension wire rope as required in paragraph 
(g)(5)(iii) of this section. The record shall include the date of the 
inspection, the signature of the person who performed the inspection, 
and a number, or other identifier, of the wire rope which was inspected. 
This record of inspection shall be made available for review by the 
Assistant Secretary of Labor or the Assistant Secretary's representative 
and by the employer.
    (6) Hoist inspection. Before lowering personnel below the top 
elevation of the building, the hoist shall be tested each day in the 
lifting direction with the intended load to make certain it has 
sufficient capacity to raise the personnel back to the boarding level.
    (h) Maintenance--(1) General maintenance. All parts of the equipment 
affecting safe operation shall be maintained in proper working order so 
that they may perform the functions for which they were intended. The 
equipment shall be taken out of service when it is not in proper working 
order.
    (2) Cleaning. (i) Control or power contactors and relays shall be 
kept clean.
    (ii) All other parts shall be kept clean if their proper functioning 
would be affected by the presence of dirt or other contaminants.
    (3) Periodic resocketing of wire rope fastenings. (i) Hoisting ropes 
utilizing poured socket fastenings shall be resocketed at the non-drum 
ends at intervals not exceeding 24 months. In resocketing the ropes, a 
sufficient length shall be cut from the end of the rope to remove 
damaged or fatigued portions.
    (ii) Resocketed ropes shall conform to the requirements of paragraph 
(f)(7) of this section.
    (iii) Limit switches affected by the resocketed ropes shall be 
reset, if necessary.
    (4) Periodic reshackling of suspension wire ropes. The hoisting 
ropes shall be reshackled at the nondrum ends at intervals not exceeding 
24 months. When reshackling the ropes, a sufficient length shall be cut 
from the end of the rope to remove damaged or fatigued portions.
    (5) Roof systems. Roof track systems, tie-downs, or similar 
equipment shall be maintained in proper working order so that they 
perform the function for which they were intended.
    (6)  Building  face  guiding  members.   T-rails, indented mullions, 
or equivalent guides located in the face of a building shall be 
maintained in proper working order so that they perform the functions 
for which they were intended. Brackets for cable stabilizers shall 
similarly be maintained in proper working order.
    (7) Inoperative safety devices. No person shall render a required 
safety device or electrical protective device inoperative, except as 
necessary for tests, inspections, and maintenance. Immediately upon 
completion of such tests, inspections and maintenance, the device shall 
be restored to its normal operating condition.
    (i) Operations--(1) Training. (i) Working platforms shall be 
operated only by persons who are proficient in the operation, safe use 
and inspection of the particular working platform to be operated.
    (ii) All employees who operate working platforms shall be trained in 
the following:
    (A) Recognition of, and preventive measures for, the safety hazards 
associated with their individual work tasks.
    (B) General recognition and prevention of safety hazards associated 
with the use of working platforms, including the provisions in the 
section relating to the particular working platform to be operated.

[[Page 151]]

    (C) Emergency action plan procedures required in paragraph (e)(9) of 
this section.
    (D) Work procedures required in paragraph (i)(1)(iv) of this 
section.
    (E) Personal fall arrest system inspection, care, use and system 
performance.
    (iii) Training of employees in the operation and inspection of 
working platforms shall be done by a competent person.
    (iv) Written work procedures for the operation, safe use and 
inspection of working platforms shall be provided for employee training. 
Pictorial methods of instruction, may be used, in lieu of written work 
procedures, if employee communication is improved using this method. The 
operating manuals supplied by manufacturers for platform system 
components can serve as the basis for these procedures.
    (v) The employer shall certify that employees have been trained in 
operating and inspecting a working platform by preparing a certification 
record which includes the identity of the person trained, the signature 
of the employer or the person who conducted the training and the date 
that training was completed. The certification record shall be prepared 
at the completion of the training required in paragraph (i)(1)(ii) of 
this section, and shall be maintained in a file for the duration of the 
employee's employment. The certification record shall be kept readily 
available for review by the Assistant Secretary of Labor or the 
Assistant Secretary's representative.
    (2) Use. (i) Working platforms shall not be loaded in excess of the 
rated load, as stated on the platform load rating plate.
    (ii) Employees shall be prohibited from working on snow, ice, or 
other slippery material covering platforms, except for the removal of 
such materials.
    (iii) Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect the platform, 
wire ropes and life lines from damage due to acids or other corrosive 
substances, in accordance with the recommendations of the corrosive 
substance producer, supplier, platform manufacturer or other equivalent 
information sources. Platform members which have been exposed to acids 
or other corrosive substances shall be washed down with a neutralizing 
solution, at a frequency recommended by the corrosive substance producer 
or supplier.
    (iv) Platform members, wire ropes and life lines shall be protected 
when using a heat producing process. Wire ropes and life lines which 
have been contacted by the heat producing process shall be considered to 
be permanently damaged and shall not be used.
    (v) The platform shall not be operated in winds in excess of 25 
miles per hour (40.2 km/hr) except to move it from an operating to a 
storage position. Wind speed shall be determined based on the best 
available information, which includes on-site anemometer readings and 
local weather forecasts which predict wind velocities for the area.
    (vi) On exterior installations, an anemometer shall be mounted on 
the platform to provide information of on-site wind velocities prior to 
and during the use of the platform. The anemometer may be a portable 
(hand held) unit which is temporarily mounted during platform use.
    (vii) Tools, materials and debris not related to the work in 
progress shall not be allowed to accumulate on platforms. Stabilizer 
ties shall be located so as to allow unencumbered passage along the full 
length of the platform and shall be of such length so as not to become 
entangled in rollers, hoists or other machinery.
    (j) Personal fall protection. Employees on working platforms shall 
be protected by a personal fall arrest system meeting the requirements 
of appendix C, section I, of this standard, and as otherwise provided by 
this standard.

            Appendix A to Sec. 1910.66, Guidelines (Advisory)

    1. Use of the Appendix. Appendix A provides examples of equipment 
and methods to assist the employer in meeting the requirements of the 
indicated provision of the standard. Employers may use other equipment 
or procedures which conform to the requirements of the standard. This 
appendix neither adds to nor detracts from the mandatory requirements 
set forth in Sec. 1910.66.
    2. Assurance. Paragraph (c) of the standard requires the building 
owner to inform the

[[Page 152]]

employer in writing that the powered platform installation complies with 
certain requirements of the standard, since the employer may not have 
the necessary information to make these determinations. The employer, 
however, remains responsible for meeting these requirements which have 
not been set off in paragraph (c)(1).
    3. Design Requirements. The design requirements for each 
installation should be based on the limitations (stresses, deflections, 
etc.), established by nationally recognized standards as promulgated by 
the following organizations, or to equivalent standards:

AA--The Aluminum Association, 818 Connecticut Avenue, NW., Washington, 
          DC, 20006
Aluminum Construction Manual
Specifications For Aluminum Structures
Aluminum Standards and Data
AGMA--American Gear Manufacturers Association, 101 North Fort Meyer Dr., 
          Suite 1000, Arlington, VA 22209
AISC--American Institute of Steel Construction, 400 North Michigan 
          Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611
ANSI--American National Standards Institute, Inc., 1430 Broadway, New 
          York, NY 10018
ASCE--American Society of Civil Engineers, 345 East 47th Street, New 
          York, NY 10017
ASME--American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 345 East 47th Street, 
          New York, NY 10017
ASTM--American Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street, 
          Philadelphia, PA 19103
AWS--American Welding Society, Inc., Box 351040, 550 NW. LeJeunne Road, 
          Miami, FL 33126
JIC--Joint Industrial Council, 2139 Wisconsin Avenue NW., Washington, DC 
          20007
NEMA--National Electric Manufacturers Association, 2101 L Street, NW., 
          Washington, DC 20037

    4. Tie-in-guides. Indented mullions, T-rails or other equivalent 
guides are acceptable as tie-in guides in a building face for a 
continuous stabilization system. Internal guides are embedded in other 
building members with only the opening exposed (see Figure 1 of appendix 
B). External guides, however, are installed external to the other 
building members and so are fully exposed. The minimum opening for tie-
in guides is three-quarters of an inch (19 mm), and the minimum inside 
dimensions are one-inch (25 mm) deep and two inches (50 mm) wide.
    Employers should be aware of the hazards associated with tie-in 
guides in a continuous stabilization system which was not designed 
properly. For example, joints in these track systems may become extended 
or discontinuous due to installation or building settlement. If this 
alignment problem is not corrected, the system could jam when a guide 
roller or guide shoe strikes a joint and this would cause a hazardous 
situation for employees. In another instance, faulty design will result 
in guide rollers being mounted in a line so they will jam in the track 
at the slightest misalignment.
    5. Building anchors (intermittent stabilization system). In the 
selection of the vertical distance between building anchors, certain 
factors should be given consideration. These factors include building 
height and architectural design, platform length and weight, wire rope 
angulation, and the wind velocities in the building area. Another factor 
to consider is the material of the building face, since this material 
may be adversely affected by the building rollers.
    External or indented type building anchors are acceptable. 
Receptacles in the building facade used for the indented type should be 
kept clear of extraneous materials which will hinder their use. During 
the inspection of the platform installation, evidence of a failure or 
abuse of the anchors should be brought to the attention of the employer.
    6. Stabilizer tie length. A stabilizer tie should be long enough to 
provide for the planned angulation of the suspension cables. However, 
the length of the tie should not be excessive and become a problem by 
possibly becoming entangled in the building face rollers or parts of the 
platform machinery.
    The attachment length may vary due to material elongation and this 
should be considered when selecting the material to be used. 
Consideration should also be given to the use of ties which are easily 
installed by employees, since this will encourage their use.
    7. Intermittent stabilization system. Intermittent stabilization 
systems may use different equipment, tie-in devices and methods to 
restrict the horizontal movement of a powered platform with respect to 
the face of the building. One acceptable method employs corrosion-
resistant building anchors secured in the face of the building in 
vertical rows every third floor or 50 feet (15.3 m), whichever is less. 
The anchors are spaced horizontally to allow a stabilization attachment 
(stabilizer tie) for each of the two platform suspension wire ropes. The 
stabilizer tie consists of two parts. One part is a quick connect-quick 
disconnect device which utilizes a corrosion-resistant yoke and retainer 
spring that is designed to fit over the building anchors. The second 
part of the stabilizer tie is a lanyard which is used to maintain a 
fixed distance between the suspension wire rope and the face of the 
building.
    In this method, as the suspended powered platform descends past the 
elevation of each anchor, the descent is halted and each of the platform 
occupants secures a stabilizer tie between a suspension wire rope and a 
building anchor. The procedure is repeated as each elevation of a 
building anchor is

[[Page 153]]

reached during the descent of the powered platform.
    As the platform ascends, the procedure is reversed; that is, the 
stabilizer ties are removed as each elevation of a building anchor is 
reached. The removal of each stabilizer tie is assured since the 
platform is provided with stopping devices which will interrupt power to 
its hoist(s) in the event either stopping device contacts a stabilizer 
during the ascent of the platform.
    Figure 2 of appendix B illustrates another type of acceptable 
intermittent stabilization system which utilizes retaining pins as the 
quick connect-quick disconnect device in the stabilizer tie.
    8. Wire Rope Inspection. The inspection of the suspension wire rope 
is important since the rope gradually loses strength during its useful 
life. The purpose of the inspection is to determine whether the wire 
rope has sufficient integrity to support a platform with the required 
design factor.
    If there is any doubt concerning the condition of a wire rope or its 
ability to perform the required work, the rope should be replaced. The 
cost of wire rope replacement is quite small if compared to the cost in 
terms of human injuries, equipment down time and replacement.
    No listing of critical inspection factors, which serve as a basis 
for wire rope replacement in the standard, can be a substitute for an 
experienced inspector of wire rope. The listing serves as a user's guide 
to the accepted standards by which ropes must be judged.
    Rope life can be prolonged if preventive maintenance is performed 
regularly. Cutting off an appropriate length of rope at the end 
termination before the core degrades and valley breaks appear minimizes 
degradation at these sections.
    9. General Maintenance. In meeting the general maintenance 
requirement in paragraph (h)(1) of the standard, the employer should 
undertake the prompt replacement of broken, worn and damaged parts, 
switch contacts, brushes, and short flexible conductors of electrical 
devices. The components of the electrical service system and traveling 
cables should be replaced when damaged or significantly abraded. In 
addition, gears, shafts, bearings, brakes and hoisting drums should be 
kept in proper alignment.
    10. Training. In meeting the training requirement of paragraph 
(i)(1) of the standard, employers should use both on the job training 
and formal classroom training. The written work procedures used for this 
training should be obtained from the manufacturer, if possible, or 
prepared as necessary for the employee's information and use.
    Employees who will operate powered platforms with intermittent 
stabilization systems should receive instruction in the specific ascent 
and descent procedures involving the assembly and disassembly of the 
stabilizer ties.
    An acceptable training program should also include employee 
instruction in basic inspection procedures for the purpose of 
determining the need for repair and replacement of platform equipment. 
In addition, the program should cover the inspection, care and use of 
the personal fall protection equipment required in paragraph (j)(1) of 
the standard.
    In addition, the training program should also include emergency 
action plan elements. OSHA brochure 1B3088 (Rev.) 1985, ``How to 
Prepare for Workplace Emergencies,'' details the basic steps needed to 
prepare to handle emergencies in the workplace.
    Following the completion of a training program, the employee should 
be required to demonstrate competency in operating the equipment safely. 
Supplemental training of the employee should be provided by the 
employer, as necessary, if the equipment used or other working 
conditions should change.
    An employee who is required to work with chemical products on a 
platform should receive training in proper cleaning procedures, and in 
the hazards, care and handling of these products. In addition, the 
employee should be supplied with the appropriate personal protective 
equipment, such as gloves and eye and face protection.
    11. Suspension and Securing of Powered Platforms (Equivalency). One 
acceptable method of demonstrating the equivalency of a method of 
suspending or securing a powered platform, as required in paragraphs 
(e)(2)(iii), (f)(3) and (f)(5)(i)(F), is to provide an engineering 
analysis by a registered professional engineer. The analysis should 
demonstrate that the proposed method will provide an equal or greater 
degree of safety for employees than any one of the methods specified in 
the standard.

             Appendix B to Sec. 1910.66, Exhibits (Advisory)

    The three drawings in appendix B illustrate typical platform 
stabilization systems which are addressed in the standard. The drawings 
are to be used for reference purposes only, and do not illustrate all 
the mandatory requirements for each system.

[[Page 154]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.012


[[Page 155]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.013


[[Page 156]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.014


[[Page 157]]



  Appendix C to Sec. 1910.66, Personal Fall Arrest System (Section I--
             Mandatory; Sections II and III--Non-Mandatory)

                           Use of the Appendix

    Section I of appendix C sets out the mandatory criteria for personal 
fall arrest systems used by all employees using powered platforms, as 
required by paragraph (j)(1) of this standard. Section II sets out 
nonmandatory test procedures which may be used to determine compliance 
with applicable requirements contained in section I of this appendix. 
Section III provides nonmandatory guidelines which are intended to 
assist employers in complying with these provisions.
    I. Personal fall arrest systems--(a) Scope and application. This 
section establishes the application of and performance criteria for 
personal fall arrest systems which are required for use by all employees 
using powered platforms under paragraph 1910.66(j).
    (b) Definitions. Anchorage means a secure point of attachment for 
lifelines, lanyards or deceleration devices, and which is independent of 
the means of supporting or suspending the employee.
    Body belt means a strap with means both for securing it about the 
waist and for attaching it to a lanyard, lifeline, or deceleration 
device.
    Body harness means a design of straps which may be secured about the 
employee in a manner to distribute the fall arrest forces over at least 
the thighs, pelvis, waist, chest and shoulders with means for attaching 
it to other components of a personal fall arrest system.
    Buckle means any device for holding the body belt or body harness 
closed around the employee's body.
    Competent person means a person who is capable of identifying 
hazardous or dangerous conditions in the personal fall arrest system or 
any component thereof, as well as in their application and use with 
related equipment.
    Connector means a device which is used to couple (connect) parts of 
the system together. It may be an independent component of the system 
(such as a carabiner), or an integral component of part of the system 
(such as a buckle or dee-ring sewn into a body belt or body harness, or 
a snap-hook spliced or sewn to a lanyard or self-retracting lanyard).
    Deceleration device means any mechanism, such as a rope grab, 
ripstitch lanyard, specially woven lanyard, tearing or deforming 
lanyard, or automatic self retracting-lifeline/lanyard, which serves to 
dissipate a substantial amount of energy during a fall arrest, or 
otherwise limits the energy imposed on an employee during fall arrest.
    Deceleration distance means the additional vertical distance a 
falling employee travels, excluding lifeline elongation and free fall 
distance, before stopping, from the point at which the deceleration 
device begins to operate. It is measured as the distance between the 
location of an employee's body belt or body harness attachment point at 
the moment of activation (at the onset of fall arrest forces) of the 
deceleration device during a fall, and the location of that attachment 
point after the employee comes to a full stop.
    Equivalent means alternative designs, materials or methods which the 
employer can demonstrate will provide an equal or greater degree of 
safety for employees than the methods, materials or designs specified in 
the standard.
    Free fall means the act of falling before the personal fall arrest 
system begins to apply force to arrest the fall.
    Free fall distance means the vertical displacement of the fall 
arrest attachment point on the employee's body belt or body harness 
between onset of the fall and just before the system begins to apply 
force to arrest the fall. This distance excludes deceleration distance, 
lifeline and lanyard elongation but includes any deceleration device 
slide distance or self-retracting lifeline/lanyard extension before they 
operate and fall arrest forces occur.
    Lanyard means a flexible line of rope, wire rope, or strap which is 
used to secure the body belt or body harness to a deceleration device, 
lifeline, or anchorage.
    Lifeline means a component consisting of a flexible line for 
connection to an anchorage at one end to hang vertically (vertical 
lifeline), or for connection to anchorages at both ends to stretch 
horizontally (horizontal lifeline), and which serves as a means for 
connecting other components of a personal fall arrest system to the 
anchorage.
    Personal fall arrest system means a system used to arrest an 
employee in a fall from a working level. It consists of an anchorage, 
connectors, a body belt or body harness and may include a lanyard, 
deceleration device, lifeline, or suitable combinations of these.
    Qualified person means one with a recognized degree or professional 
certificate and extensive knowledge and experience in the subject field 
who is capable of design, analysis, evaluation and specifications in the 
subject work, project, or product.
    Rope grab means a deceleration device which travels on a lifeline 
and automatically frictionally engages the lifeline and locks so as to 
arrest the fall of an employee. A rope grab usually employs the 
principle of inertial locking, cam/lever locking, or both.
    Self-retracting lifeline/lanyard means a deceleration device which 
contains a drum-wound line which may be slowly extracted from, or 
retracted onto, the drum under slight tension during normal employee 
movement, and which, after onset of a fall,

[[Page 158]]

automatically locks the drum and arrests the fall.
    Snap-hook means a connector comprised of a hookshaped member with a 
normally closed keeper, or similar arrangement, which may be opened to 
permit the hook to receive an object and, when released, automatically 
closes to retain the object. Snap-hooks are generally one of two types:
    1. The locking type with a self-closing, self-locking keeper which 
remains closed and locked until unlocked and pressed open for connection 
or disconnection, or
    2. The non-locking type with a self-closing keeper which remains 
closed until pressed open for connection or disconnection.
    Tie-off means the act of an employee, wearing personal fall 
protection equipment, connecting directly or indirectly to an anchorage. 
It also means the condition of an employee being connected to an 
anchorage.
    (c) Design for system components. (1) Connectors shall be drop 
forged, pressed or formed steel, or made of equivalent materials.
    (2) Connectors shall have a corrosion-resistant finish, and all 
surfaces and edges shall be smooth to prevent damage to interfacing 
parts of the system.
    (3) Lanyards and vertical lifelines which tie-off one employee shall 
have a minimum breaking strength of 5,000 pounds (22.2 kN).
    (4) Self-retracting lifelines and lanyards which automatically limit 
free fall distance to two feet (0.61 m) or less shall have components 
capable of sustaining a minimum static tensile load of 3,000 pounds 
(13.3 kN) applied to the device with the lifeline or lanyard in the 
fully extended position.
    (5) Self-retracting lifelines and lanyards which do not limit free 
fall distance to two feet (0.61 m) or less, ripstitch lanyards, and 
tearing and deforming lanyards shall be capable of sustaining a minimum 
tensile load of 5,000 pounds (22.2 kN) applied to the device with the 
lifeline or lanyard in the fully extended position.
    (6) Dee-rings and snap-hooks shall be capable of sustaining a 
minimum tensile load of 5,000 pounds (22.2 kN).
    (7) Dee-rings and snap-hooks shall be 100 percent proof-tested to a 
minimum tensile load of 3,600 pounds (16 kN) without cracking, breaking, 
or taking permanent deformation.
    (8) Snap-hooks shall be sized to be compatible with the member to 
which they are connected so as to prevent unintentional disengagement of 
the snap-hook by depression of the snap-hook keeper by the connected 
member, or shall be a locking type snap-hook designed and used to 
prevent disengagement of the snap-hook by the contact of the snaphook 
keeper by the connected member.
    (9) Horizontal lifelines, where used, shall be designed, and 
installed as part of a complete personal fall arrest system, which 
maintains a safety factor of at least two, under the supervision of a 
qualified person.
    (10) Anchorages to which personal fall arrest equipment is attached 
shall be capable of supporting at least 5,000 pounds (22.2 kN) per 
employee attached, or shall be designed, installed, and used as part of 
a complete personal fall arrest system which maintains a safety factor 
of at least two, under the supervision of a qualified person.
    (11) Ropes and straps (webbing) used in lanyards, lifelines, and 
strength components of body belts and body harnesses, shall be made from 
synthetic fibers or wire rope.
    (d) System performance criteria. (1) Personal fall arrest systems 
shall, when stopping a fall:
    (i) Limit maximum arresting force on an employee to 900 pounds (4 
kN) when used with a body belt;
    (ii) Limit maximum arresting force on an employee to 1,800 pounds (8 
kN) when used with a body harness;
    (iii) Bring an employee to a complete stop and limit maximum 
deceleration distance an employee travels to 3.5 feet (1.07 m); and
    (iv) Shall have sufficient strength to withstand twice the potential 
impact energy of an employee free falling a distance of six feet (1.8 
m), or the free fall distance permitted by the system, whichever is 
less.
    (2)(i) When used by employees having a combined person and tool 
weight of less than 310 pounds (140 kg), personal fall arrest systems 
which meet the criteria and protocols contained in paragraphs (b), (c) 
and (d) in section II of this appendix shall be considered as complying 
with the provisions of paragraphs (d)(1)(i) through (d)(1)(iv) above.
    (ii) When used by employees having a combined tool and body weight 
of 310 pounds (140 kg) or more, personal fall arrest systems which meet 
the criteria and protocols contained in paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) in 
section II may be considered as complying with the provisions of 
paragraphs (d)(1)(i) through (d)(1)(iv) provided that the criteria and 
protocols are modified appropriately to provide proper protection for 
such heavier weights.
    (e) Care and use. (1) Snap-hooks, unless of a locking type designed 
and used to prevent disengagement from the following connections, shall 
not be engaged:
    (i) Directly to webbing, rope or wire rope;
    (ii) To each other;
    (iii) To a dee-ring to which another snap-hook or other connector is 
attached;
    (iv) To a horizontal lifeline; or
    (v) To any object which is incompatibly shaped or dimensioned in 
relation to the snap-hook such that the connected object could depress 
the snap-hook keeper a sufficient amount to release itself.
    (2) Devices used to connect to a horizontal lifeline which may 
become a vertical lifeline shall be capable of locking in either 
direction on the lifeline.

[[Page 159]]

    (3) Personal fall arrest systems shall be rigged such that an 
employee can neither free fall more than six feet (1.8 m), nor contact 
any lower level.
    (4) The attachment point of the body belt shall be located in the 
center of the wearer's back. The attachment point of the body harness 
shall be located in the center of the wearer's back near shoulder level, 
or above the wearer's head.
    (5) When vertical lifelines are used, each employee shall be 
provided with a separate lifeline.
    (6) Personal fall arrest systems or components shall be used only 
for employee fall protection.
    (7) Personal fall arrest systems or components subjected to impact 
loading shall be immediately removed from service and shall not be used 
again for employee protection unless inspected and determined by a 
competent person to be undamaged and suitable for reuse.
    (8) The employer shall provide for prompt rescue of employees in the 
event of a fall or shall assure the self-rescue capability of employees.
    (9) Before using a personal fall arrest system, and after any 
component or system is changed, employees shall be trained in accordance 
with the requirements of paragraph 1910.66(i)(1), in the safe use of the 
system.
    (f) Inspections. Personal fall arrest systems shall be inspected 
prior to each use for mildew, wear, damage and other deterioration, and 
defective components shall be removed from service if their strength or 
function may be adversely affected.
    II. Test methods for personal fall arrest systems (non-mandatory)--
(a) General. Paragraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e), of this section II set 
forth test procedures which may be used to determine compliance with the 
requirements in paragraph (d)(1)(i) through (d)(1)(iv) of section I of 
this appendix.
    (b) General conditions for all tests in section II. (1) Lifelines, 
lanyards and deceleration devices should be attached to an anchorage and 
connected to the body-belt or body harness in the same manner as they 
would be when used to protect employees.
    (2) The anchorage should be rigid, and should not have a deflection 
greater than .04 inches (1 mm) when a force of 2,250 pounds (10 kN) is 
applied.
    (3) The frequency response of the load measuring instrumentation 
should be 120 Hz.
    (4) The test weight used in the strength and force tests should be a 
rigid, metal, cylindrical or torso-shaped object with a girth of 38 
inches plus or minus four inches (96 cm plus or minus 10 cm).
    (5) The lanyard or lifeline used to create the free fall distance 
should be supplied with the system, or in its absence, the least elastic 
lanyard or lifeline available to be used with the system.
    (6) The test weight for each test should be hoisted to the required 
level and should be quickly released without having any appreciable 
motion imparted to it.
    (7) The system's performance should be evaluated taking into account 
the range of environmental conditions for which it is designed to be 
used.
    (8) Following the test, the system need not be capable of further 
operation.
    (c) Strength test. (1) During the testing of all systems, a test 
weight of 300 pounds plus or minus five pounds (135 kg plus or minus 2.5 
kg) should be used. (See paragraph (b)(4), above.)
    (2) The test consists of dropping the test weight once. A new unused 
system should be used for each test.
    (3) For lanyard systems, the lanyard length should be six feet plus 
or minus two inches (1.83 m plus or minus 5 cm) as measured from the 
fixed anchorage to the attachment on the body belt or body harness.
    (4) For rope-grab-type deceleration systems, the length of the 
lifeline above the centerline of the grabbing mechanism to the 
lifeline's anchorage point should not exceed two feet (0.61 m).
    (5) For lanyard systems, for systems with deceleration devices which 
do not automatically limit free fall distance to two feet (0.61 m) or 
less, and for systems with deceleration devices which have a connection 
distance in excess of one foot (0.3 m) (measured between the centerline 
of the lifeline and the attachment point to the body belt or harness), 
the test weight should be rigged to free fall a distance of 7.5 feet 
(2.3 m) from a point that is 1.5 feet (46 cm) above the anchorage point, 
to its hanging location (six feet below the anchorage). The test weight 
should fall without interference, obstruction, or hitting the floor or 
ground during the test. In some cases a non-elastic wire lanyard of 
sufficient length may need to be added to the system (for test purposes) 
to create the necessary free fall distance.
    (6) For deceleration device systems with integral lifelines or 
lanyards which automatically limit free fall distance to two feet (0.61 
m) or less, the test weight should be rigged to free fall a distance of 
four feet (1.22 m).
    (7) Any weight which detaches from the belt or harness should 
constitute failure for the strength test.
    (d) Force test--(1) General. The test consists of dropping the 
respective test weight specified in (d)(2)(i) or (d)(3)(i) once. A new, 
unused system should be used for each test.
    (2) For lanyard systems. (i) A test weight of 220 pounds plus or 
minus three pounds (100 kg plus or minus 1.6 kg) should be used. (See 
paragraph (b)(4), above.)
    (ii) Lanyard length should be six feet plus or minus two inches 
(1.83 m plus or minus 5 cm) as measured from the fixed anchorage to

[[Page 160]]

the attachment on the body belt or body harness.
    (iii) The test weight should fall free from the anchorage level to 
its hanging location (a total of six feet (1.83 m) free fall distance) 
without interference, obstruction, or hitting the floor or ground during 
the test.
    (3) For all other systems. (i) A test weight of 220 pounds plus or 
minus three pounds (100 kg plus or minus 1.6 kg) should be used. (See 
paragraph (b)(4), above.)
    (ii) The free fall distance to be used in the test should be the 
maximum fall distance physically permitted by the system during normal 
use conditions, up to a maximum free fall distance for the test weight 
of six feet (1.83 m), except as follows:
    (A) For deceleration systems which have a connection link or 
lanyard, the test weight should free fall a distance equal to the 
connection distance (measured between the centerline of the lifeline and 
the attachment point to the body belt or harness).
    (B) For deceleration device systems with integral lifelines or 
lanyards which automatically limit free fall distance to two feet (0.61 
m) or less, the test weight should free fall a distance equal to that 
permitted by the system in normal use. (For example, to test a system 
with a self-retracting lifeline or lanyard, the test weight should be 
supported and the system allowed to retract the lifeline or lanyard as 
it would in normal use. The test weight would then be released and the 
force and deceleration distance measured).
    (4) A system fails the force test if the recorded maximum arresting 
force exceeds 1,260 pounds (15.6 kN) when using a body belt, and/or 
exceeds 2,520 pounds (11.2 kN) when using a body harness.
    (5) The maximum elongation and deceleration distance should be 
recorded during the force test.
    (e) Deceleration device tests--(1) General. The device should be 
evaluated or tested under the environmental conditions, (such as rain, 
ice, grease, dirt, type of lifeline, etc.), for which the device is 
designed.
    (2) Rope-grab-type deceleration devices. (i) Devices should be moved 
on a lifeline 1,000 times over the same length of line a distance of not 
less than one foot (30.5 cm), and the mechanism should lock each time.
    (ii) Unless the device is permanently marked to indicate the type(s) 
of lifeline which must be used, several types (different diameters and 
different materials), of lifelines should be used to test the device.
    (3) Other self-activatinq-type deceleration devices. The locking 
mechanisms of other self-activating-type deceleration devices designed 
for more than one arrest should lock each of 1,000 times as they would 
in normal service.
    III. Additional non-mandatory guidelines for personal fall arrest 
systems. The following information constitutes additional guidelines for 
use in complying with requirements for a personal fall arrest system.
    (a) Selection and use considerations. The kind of personal fall 
arrest system selected should match the particular work situation, and 
any possible free fall distance should be kept to a minimum. 
Consideration should be given to the particular work environment. For 
example, the presence of acids, dirt, moisture, oil, grease, etc., and 
their effect on the system, should be evaluated. Hot or cold 
environments may also have an adverse affect on the system. Wire rope 
should not be used where an electrical hazard is anticipated. As 
required by the standard, the employer must plan to have means available 
to promptly rescue an employee should a fall occur, since the suspended 
employee may not be able to reach a work level independently.
    Where lanyards, connectors, and lifelines are subject to damage by 
work operations such as welding, chemical cleaning, and sandblasting, 
the component should be protected, or other securing systems should be 
used. The employer should fully evaluate the work conditions and 
environment (including seasonal weather changes) before selecting the 
appropriate personal fall protection system. Once in use, the system's 
effectiveness should be monitored. In some cases, a program for cleaning 
and maintenance of the system may be necessary.
    (b) Testing considerations. Before purchasing or putting into use a 
personal fall arrest system, an employer should obtain from the supplier 
information about the system based on its performance during testing so 
that the employer can know if the system meets this standard. Testing 
should be done using recognized test methods. Section II of this 
appendix C contains test methods recognized for evaluating the 
performance of fall arrest systems. Not all systems may need to be 
individually tested; the performance of some systems may be based on 
data and calculations derived from testing of similar systems, provided 
that enough information is available to demonstrate similarity of 
function and design.
    (c) Component compatibility considerations. Ideally, a personal fall 
arrest system is designed, tested, and supplied as a complete system. 
However, it is common practice for lanyards, connectors, lifelines, 
deceleration devices, body belts and body harnesses to be interchanged 
since some components wear out before others. The employer and employee 
should realize that not all components are interchangeable. For 
instance, a lanyard should not be connected between a body belt (or 
harness) and a deceleration device of the self-retracting type since 
this can result in additional free fall for which the system was not 
designed. Any substitution or change to a personal fall arrest system

[[Page 161]]

should be fully evaluated or tested by a competent person to determine 
that it meets the standard, before the modified system is put in use.
    (d) Employee training considerations. Thorough employee training in 
the selection and use of personal fall arrest systems is imperative. As 
stated in the standard, before the equipment is used, employees must be 
trained in the safe use of the system. This should include the 
following: Application limits; proper anchoring and tie-off techniques; 
estimation of free fall distance, including determination of 
deceleration distance, and total fall distance to prevent striking a 
lower level; methods of use; and inspection and storage of the system. 
Careless or improper use of the equipment can result in serious injury 
or death. Employers and employees should become familiar with the 
material in this appendix, as well as manufacturer's recommendations, 
before a system is used. Of uppermost importance is the reduction in 
strength caused by certain tie-offs (such as using knots, tying around 
sharp edges, etc.) and maximum permitted free fall distance. Also, to be 
stressed are the importance of inspections prior to use, the limitations 
of the equipment, and unique conditions at the worksite which may be 
important in determining the type of system to use.
    (e) Instruction considerations. Employers should obtain 
comprehensive instructions from the supplier as to the system's proper 
use and application, including, where applicable:
    (1) The force measured during the sample force test;
    (2) The maximum elongation measured for lanyards during the force 
test;
    (3) The deceleration distance measured for deceleration devices 
during the force test;
    (4) Caution statements on critical use limitations;
    (5) Application limits;
    (6) Proper hook-up, anchoring and tie-off techniques, including the 
proper dee-ring or other attachment point to use on the body belt and 
harness for fall arrest;
    (7) Proper climbing techniques;
    (8) Methods of inspection, use, cleaning, and storage; and
    (9) Specific lifelines which may be used. This information should be 
provided to employees during training.
    (f) Inspection considerations. As stated in the standard (section I, 
Paragraph (f)), personal fall arrest systems must be regularly 
inspected. Any component with any significant defect, such as cuts, 
tears, abrasions, mold, or undue stretching; alterations or additions 
which might affect its efficiency; damage due to deterioration; contact 
with fire, acids, or other corrosives; distorted hooks or faulty hook 
springs; tongues unfitted to the shoulder of buckles; loose or damaged 
mountings; non-functioning parts; or wearing or internal deterioration 
in the ropes must be withdrawn from service immediately, and should be 
tagged or marked as unusable, or destroyed.
    (g) Rescue considerations. As required by the standard (section I, 
Paragraph (e)(8)), when personal fall arrest systems are used, the 
employer must assure that employees can be promptly rescued or can 
rescue themselves should a fall occur. The availability of rescue 
personnel, ladders or other rescue equipment should be evaluated. In 
some situations, equipment which allows employees to rescue themselves 
after the fall has been arrested may be desirable, such as devices which 
have descent capability.
    (h) Tie-off considerations. (1) One of the most important aspects of 
personal fall protection systems is fully planning the system before it 
is put into use. Probably the most overlooked component is planning for 
suitable anchorage points. Such planning should ideally be done before 
the structure or building is constructed so that anchorage points can be 
incorporated during construction for use later for window cleaning or 
other building maintenance. If properly planned, these anchorage points 
may be used during construction, as well as afterwards.
    (2) Employers and employees should at all times be aware that the 
strength of a personal fall arrest system is based on its being attached 
to an anchoring system which does not significantly reduce the strength 
of the system (such as a properly dimensioned eye-bolt/snap-hook 
anchorage). Therefore, if a means of attachment is used that will reduce 
the strength of the system, that component should be replaced by a 
stronger one, but one that will also maintain the appropriate maximum 
arrest force characteristics.
    (3) Tie-off using a knot in a rope lanyard or lifeline (at any 
location) can reduce the lifeline or lanyard strength by 50 percent or 
more. Therefore, a stronger lanyard or lifeline should be used to 
compensate for the weakening effect of the knot, or the lanyard length 
should be reduced (or the tie-off location raised) to minimize free fall 
distance, or the lanyard or lifeline should be replaced by one which has 
an appropriately incorporated connector to eliminate the need for a 
knot.
    (4) Tie-off of a rope lanyard or lifeline around an ``H'' or ``I'' 
beam or similar support can reduce its strength as much as 70 percent 
due to the cutting action of the beam edges. Therefore, use should be 
made of a webbing lanyard or wire core lifeline around the beam; or the 
lanyard or lifeline should be protected from the edge; or free fall 
distance should be greatly minimized.
    (5) Tie-off where the line passes over or around rough or sharp 
surfaces reduces strength drastically. Such a tie-off should be avoided 
or an alternative tie-off rigging

[[Page 162]]

should be used. Such alternatives may include use of a snap-hook/dee 
ring connection, wire rope tie-off, an effective padding of the 
surfaces, or an abrasion-resistance strap around or over the problem 
surface.
    (6) Horizontal lifelines may, depending on their geometry and angle 
of sag, be subjected to greater loads than the impact load imposed by an 
attached component. When the angle of horizontal lifeline sag is less 
than 30 degrees, the impact force imparted to the lifeline by an 
attached lanyard is greatly amplified. For example, with a sag angle of 
15 degrees, the force amplification is about 2:1 and at 5 degrees sag, 
it is about 6:1. Depending on the angle of sag, and the line's 
elasticity, the strength of the horizontal lifeline and the anchorages 
to which it is attached should be increased a number of times over that 
of the lanyard. Extreme care should be taken in considering a horizontal 
lifeline for multiple tie-offs. The reason for this is that in multiple 
tie-offs to a horizontal lifeline, if one employee falls, the movement 
of the falling employee and the horizontal lifeline during arrest of the 
fall may cause other employees to also fall. Horizontal lifeline and 
anchorage strength should be increased for each additional employee to 
be tied-off. For these and other reasons, the design of systems using 
horizontal lifelines must only be done by qualified persons. Testing of 
installed lifelines and anchors prior to use is recommended.
    (7) The strength of an eye-bolt is rated along the axis of the bolt 
and its strength is greatly reduced if the force is applied at an angle 
to this axis (in the direction of shear). Also, care should be exercised 
in selecting the proper diameter of the eye to avoid accidental 
disengagement of snap-hooks not designed to be compatible for the 
connection.
    (8) Due to the significant reduction in the strength of the 
lifeline/lanyard (in some cases, as much as a 70 percent reduction), the 
sliding hitch knot should not be used for lifeline/lanyard connections 
except in emergency situations where no other available system is 
practical. The ``one-and-one'' sliding hitch knot should never be used 
because it is unreliable in stopping a fall. The ``two-and-two,'' or 
``three-and-three'' knot (preferable), may be used in emergency situa-
tions; however, care should be taken to limit free fall distance to a 
minimum because of reduced lifeline/lanyard strength.
    (i) Vertical lifeline considerations. As required by the standard, 
each employee must have a separate lifeline when the lifeline is 
vertical. The reason for this is that in multiple tie-offs to a single 
lifeline, if one employee falls, the movement of the lifeline during the 
arrest of the fall may pull other employees' lanyards, causing them to 
fall as well.
    (j) Snap-hook considerations. Although not required by this standard 
for all connections, locking snap-hooks designed for connection to 
suitable objects (of sufficient strength) are highly recommended in lieu 
of the non-locking type. Locking snap-hooks incorporate a positive 
locking mechanism in addition to the spring loaded keeper, which will 
not allow the keeper to open under moderate pressure without someone 
first releasing the mechanism. Such a feature, properly designed, 
effectively prevents roll-out from occurring.
    As required by the standard (section I, paragraph (e)(1)) the 
following connections must be avoided (unless properly designed locking 
snap-hooks are used) because they are conditions which can result in 
roll-out when a nonlocking snap-hook is used:
    <bullet> Direct connection of a snap-hook to a horizontal lifeline.
    <bullet> Two (or more) snap-hooks connected to one dee-ring.
    <bullet> Two snap-hooks connected to each other.
    <bullet> A snap-hook connected back on its integral lanyard.
    <bullet> A snap-hook connected to a webbing loop or webbing lanyard.
    <bullet> Improper dimensions of the dee-ring, rebar, or other 
connection point in relation to the snap-hook dimensions which would 
allow the snap-hook keeper to be depressed by a turning motion of the 
snap-hook.
    (k) Free fall considerations. The employer and employee should at 
all times be aware that a system's maximum arresting force is evaluated 
under normal use conditions established by the manufacturer, and in no 
case using a free fall distance in excess of six feet (1.8 m). A few 
extra feet of free fall can significantly increase the arresting force 
on the employee, possibly to the point of causing injury. Because of 
this, the free fall distance should be kept at a minimum, and, as 
required by the standard, in no case greater than six feet (1.8 m). To 
help assure this, the tie-off attachment point to the lifeline or anchor 
should be located at or above the connection point of the fall arrest 
equipment to belt or harness. (Since otherwise additional free fall 
distance is added to the length of the connecting means (i.e. lanyard)). 
Attaching to the working surface will often result in a free fall 
greater than six feet (1.8 m). For instance, if a six foot (1.8 m) 
lanyard is used, the total free fall distance will be the distance from 
the working level to the body belt (or harness) attachment point plus 
the six feet (1.8 m) of lanyard length. Another important consideration 
is that the arresting force which the fall system must withstand also 
goes up with greater distances of free fall, possibly exceeding the 
strength of the system.
    (l) Elongation and deceleration distance considerations. Other 
factors involved in a proper tie-off are elongation and deceleration 
distance. During the arresting of a fall, a lanyard will experience a 
length of stretching or

[[Page 163]]

elongation, whereas activation of a deceleration device will result in a 
certain stopping distance. These distances should be available with the 
lanyard or device's instructions and must be added to the free fall 
distance to arrive at the total fall distance before an employee is 
fully stopped. The additional stopping distance may be very significant 
if the lanyard or deceleration device is attached near or at the end of 
a long lifeline, which may itself add considerable distance due to its 
own elongation. As required by the standard, sufficient distance to 
allow for all of these factors must also be maintained between the 
employee and obstructions below, to prevent an injury due to impact 
before the system fully arrests the fall. In addition, a minimum of 12 
feet (3.7 m) of lifeline should be allowed below the securing point of a 
rope grab type deceleration device, and the end terminated to prevent 
the device from sliding off the lifeline. Alternatively, the lifeline 
should extend to the ground or the next working level below. These 
measures are suggested to prevent the worker from inadvertently moving 
past the end of the lifeline and having the rope grab become disengaged 
from the lifeline.
    (m) Obstruction considerations. The location of the tie-off should 
also consider the hazard of obstructions in the potential fall path of 
the employee. Tie-offs which minimize the possibilities of exaggerated 
swinging should be considered. In addition, when a body belt is used, 
the employee's body will go through a horizontal position to a jack-
knifed position during the arrest of all falls. Thus, obstructions which 
might interfere with this motion should be avoided or a severe injury 
could occur.
    (n) Other considerations. Because of the design of some personal 
fall arrest systems, additional considerations may be required for 
proper tie-off. For example, heavy deceleration devices of the self-
retracting type should be secured overhead in order to avoid the weight 
of the device having to be supported by the employee. Also, if 
selfretracting equipment is connected to a horizontal lifeline, the sag 
in the lifeline should be minimized to prevent the device from sliding 
down the lifeline to a position which creates a swing hazard during fall 
arrest. In all cases, manufacturer's instructions should be followed.

     Appendix D to Sec. 1910.66, Existing Installations (Mandatory)

                           Use of the Appendix

    Appendix D sets out the mandatory building and equipment 
requirements for applicable permanent installations completed after 
August 27, 1971, and no later than July 23, 1990 which are exempt from 
the paragraphs (a), (b)(1), (b)(2), (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this 
standard. The requirements in appendix D are essentially the same as 
unrevised building and equipment provisions which previously were 
designated as 29 CFR 1910.66 (a), (b), (c) and (d) and which were 
effective on August 27, 1971.


    Note: All existing installations subject to this appendix shall also 
comply with paragraphs (g), (h), (i), (j) and appendix C of the standard 
29 CFR 1910.66.


    (a) Definitions applicable to this appendix--(1) Angulated roping. A 
system of platform suspension in which the upper wire rope sheaves or 
suspension points are closer to the plane of the building face than the 
corresponding attachment points on the platform, thus causing the 
platform to press against the face of the building during its vertical 
travel.
    (2) ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
    (3) Babbitted fastenings. The method of providing wire rope 
attachments in which the ends of the wire strands are bent back and are 
held in a tapered socket by means of poured molten babbitt metal.
    (4) Brake--disc type. A brake in which the holding effect is 
obtained by frictional resistance between one or more faces of discs 
keyed to the rotating member to be held and fixed discs keyed to the 
stationary or housing member (pressure between the discs being applied 
axially).
    (5) Brake--self-energizing band type. An essentially undirectional 
brake in which the holding effect is obtained by the snubbing action of 
a flexible band wrapped about a cylindrical wheel or drum affixed to the 
rotating member to be held, the connections and linkages being so 
arranged that the motion of the brake wheel or drum will act to increase 
the tension or holding force of the band.
    (6) Brake--shoe type. A brake in which the holding effect is 
obtained by applying the direct pressure of two or more segmental 
friction elements held to a stationary member against a cylindrical 
wheel or drum affixed to the rotating member to be held.
    (7) Building face rollers. A specialized form of guide roller 
designed to contact a portion of the outer face or wall structure of the 
building, and to assist in stabilizing the operators' platform during 
vertical travel.
    (8) Continuous pressure. Operation by means of buttons or switches, 
any one of which may be used to control the movement of the working 
platform or roof car, only as long as the button or switch is manually 
maintained in the actuating position.
    (9) Control. A system governing starting, stopping, direction, 
acceleration, speed, and retardation of moving members.
    (10) Controller. A device or group of devices, usually contained in 
a single enclosure,

[[Page 164]]

which serves to control in some predetermined manner the apparatus to 
which it is connected.
    (11) Electrical ground. A conducting connection between an 
electrical circuit or equipment and the earth, or some conducting body 
which serves in place of the earth.
    (12) Guide roller. A rotating, bearing-mounted, generally 
cylindrical member, operating separately or as part of a guide shoe 
assembly, attached to the platform, and providing rolling contact with 
building guideways, or other building contact members.
    (13) Guide shoe. An assembly of rollers, slide members, or the 
equivalent, attached as a unit to the operators' platform, and designed 
to engage with the building members provided for the vertical guidance 
of the operators' platform.
    (14) Interlock. A device actuated by the operation of some other 
device with which it is directly associated, to govern succeeding 
operations of the same or allied devices.
    (15) Operating device. A pushbutton, lever, or other manual device 
used to actuate a control.
    (16) Powered platform. Equipment to provide access to the exterior 
of a building for maintenance, consisting of a suspended power-operated 
working platform, a roof car, or other suspension means, and the 
requisite operating and control devices.
    (17) Rated load. The combined weight of employees, tools, equipment, 
and other material which the working platform is designed and installed 
to lift.
    (18) Relay, direction. An electrically energized contactor 
responsive to an initiating control circuit, which in turn causes a 
moving member to travel in a particular direction.
    (19) Relay, potential for vertical travel. An electrically energized 
contactor responsive to initiating control circuit, which in turn 
controls the operation of a moving member in both directions. This relay 
usually operates in conjunction with direction relays, as covered under 
the definition, ``relay, direction.''
    (20) Roof car. A structure for the suspension of a working platform, 
providing for its horizontal movement to working positions.
    (21) Roof-powered platform. A powered platform having the raising 
and lowering mechanism located on a roof car.
    (22) Self-powered platform. A powered platform having the raising 
and lowering mechanism located on the working platform.
    (23) Traveling cable. A cable made up of electrical or communication 
conductors or both, and providing electrical connection between the 
working platform and the roof car or other fixed point.
    (24) Weatherproof. Equipment so constructed or protected that 
exposure to the weather will not interfere with its proper operation.
    (25) Working platform. The suspended structure arranged for vertical 
travel which provides access to the exterior of the building or 
structure.
    (26) Yield point. The stress at which the material exhibits a 
permanent set of 0.2 percent.
    (27) Zinced fastenings. The method of providing wire rope 
attachments in which the splayed or fanned wire ends are held in a 
tapered socket by means of poured molten zinc.
    (b) General requirements. (1) Design requirements. All powered 
platform installations for exterior building maintenance completed as of 
August 27, 1971, but no later than [insert date, 180 days after the 
effective date], shall meet all of the design, construction and 
installation requirements of Part II and III of the ``American National 
Standard Safety Requirements for Powered Platforms for Exterior Building 
Maintenance ANSI A120.1-1970'' and of this appendix. References shall be 
made to appropriate parts of ANSI A120.1-1970 for detail specifications 
for equipment and special installations.
    (2) Limitation. The requirements of this appendix apply only to 
electric powered platforms. It is not the intent of this appendix to 
prohibit the use of other types of power. Installation of powered 
platforms using other types of power is permitted, provided such 
platforms have adequate protective devices for the type of power used, 
and otherwise provide for reasonable safety of life and limb to users of 
equipment and to others who may be exposed.
    (3) Types of powered platforms. (i) For the purpose of applying this 
appendix, powered platforms are divided into two basic types, Type F and 
Type T.
    (ii) Powered platforms designated as Type F shall meet all the 
requirements in Part II of ANSI A 120.1-1970, American National Standard 
Safety Requirements for Powered Platforms for Exterior Building 
Maintenance. A basic requirement of Type F equipment is that the work 
platform is suspended by at least four wire ropes and designed so that 
failure of any one wire rope will not substantially alter the normal 
position of the working platform. Another basic requirement of Type F 
equipment is that only one layer of hoisting rope is permitted on 
winding drums. Type F powered platforms may be either roof-powered or 
self-powered.
    (iii) Powered platforms designated as Type T shall meet all the 
requirements in Part III of ANSI A120.1-1970 American National Standard 
Safety Requirements for Powered Platforms for Exterior Building 
Maintenance, except for section 28, Safety Belts and Life Lines. A basic 
requirement of Type T equipment is that the working platform is 
suspended by at least two wire ropes. Failure of one wire rope would not 
permit the working platform to fall to the ground, but would

[[Page 165]]

upset its normal position. Type T powered platforms may be either roof-
powered or self-powered.
    (iv) The requirements of this section apply to powered platforms 
with winding drum type hoisting machines. It is not the intent of this 
section to prohibit powered platforms using other types of hoisting 
machines such as, but not limited to, traction drum hoisting machines, 
air powered machines, hydraulic powered machines, and internal 
combustion machines. Installation of powered platforms with other types 
of hoisting machines is permitted, provided adequate protective devices 
are used, and provided reasonable safety of life and limb to users of 
the equipment and to others who may be exposed is assured.
    (v) Both Type F and Type T powered platforms shall comply with the 
requirements of appendix C of this standard.
    (c) Type F powered platforms--(1) Roof car, general. (i) A roof car 
shall be provided whenever it is necessary to move the working platform 
horizontally to working or storage positions.
    (ii) The maximum rated speed at which a power traversed roof car may 
be moved in a horizontal direction shall be 50 feet per minute.
    (2) Movement and positioning of roof car. (i) Provision shall be 
made to protect against having the roof car leave the roof or enter roof 
areas not designed for travel.
    (ii) The horizontal motion of the roof cars shall be positively 
controlled so as to insure proper movement and positioning of the roof 
car.
    (iii) Roof car positioning devices shall be provided to insure that 
the working platform is placed and retained in proper position for 
vertical travel and during storage.
    (iv) Mechanical stops shall be provided to prevent the traversing of 
the roof car beyond its normal limits of travel. Such stops shall be 
capable of withstanding a force equal to 100 percent of the inertial 
effect of the roof car in motion with traversing power applied.
    (v)(a) The operating device of a power-operated roof car for 
traversing shall be located on the roof car, the working platform, or 
both, and shall be of the continuous pressure weather-proof electric 
type. If more than one operating device is provided, they shall be so 
arranged that traversing is possible only from one operating device at a 
time.
    (b) The operating device shall be so connected that it is not 
operable until:
    (1) The working platform is located at its uppermost position of 
travel and is not in contact with the building face or fixed vertical 
guides in the face of the building; and
    (2) All protective devices and interlocks are in a position for 
traversing.
    (3) Roof car stability. Roof car stability shall be determined by 
either paragraph (c)(3) (i) or (ii) of this appendix, whichever is 
greater.
    (i) The roof car shall be continuously stable, considering 
overturning moment as determined by 125 percent rated load, plus maximum 
dead load and the prescribed wind loading.
    (ii) The roof car and its anchorages shall be capable of resisting 
accidental over-tensioning of the wire ropes suspending the working 
platform and this calculated value shall include the effect of one and 
one-half times the value. For this calculation, the simultaneous effect 
of one-half wind load shall be included, and the design stresses shall 
not exceed those referred to in paragraph (b)(1) of this appendix.
    (iii) If the load on the motors is at any time in excess of three 
times that required for lifting the working platform with its rated load 
the motor shall stall.
    (4) Access to the roof car. Safe access to the roof car and from the 
roof car to the working platform shall be provided. If the access to the 
roof car at any point of its travel is not over the roof area or where 
otherwise necessary for safety, self-closing, self-locking gates shall 
be provided. Applicable provisions of the American National Standard 
Safety Requirements for Floor and Wall Openings, Railings and Toeboard, 
A12.1-1967, shall apply.
    (5) Means for maintenance, repair, and storage. Means shall be 
provided to run the roof car away from the roof perimeter, where 
necessary, and to provide a safe area for maintenance, repairs, and 
storage. Provisions shall be made to secure the machine in the stored 
position. For stored machines subject to wind forces, see special design 
and anchorage requirements for ``wind forces'' in Part II, section 
10.5.1.1 of ANSI A120.1-1970 American National Standard Safety 
Requirements for Powered Platforms for Exterior Building Maintenance.
    (6) General requirements for working platforms. The working platform 
shall be of girder or truss construction and shall be adequate to 
support its rated load under any position of loading, and comply with 
the provisions set forth in section 10 of ANSI A120.1-1970, American 
National Standard Safety Requirements for Powered Platforms for Exterior 
Building Maintenance.
    (7) Load rating plate. Each working platform shall bear a 
manufacturer's load rating plate, conspicuously posted; stating the 
maximum permissible rated load. Load rating plates shall be made of 
noncorrosive material and shall have letters and figures stamped, 
etched, or cast on the surface. The minimum height of the letters and 
figures shall be one-fourth inch.
    (8) Minimum size. The working platform shall have a minimum net 
width of 24 inches.
    (9) Guardrails. Working platforms shall be furnished with permanent 
guard rails not

[[Page 166]]

less than 36 inches high, and not more than 42 inches high at the front 
(building side). At the rear, and on the sides, the rail shall not be 
less than 42 inches high. An intermediate guardrail shall be provided 
around the entire platform between the top guardrail and the toeboard.
    (10) Toeboards. A four-inch toeboard shall be provided along all 
sides of the working platform.
    (11) Open spaces between guardrails and toeboards. The spaces 
between the intermediate guardrail and platform toeboard on the building 
side of the working platform, and between the top guardrail and the 
toeboard on other sides of the platform, shall be filled with metalic 
mesh or similar material that will reject a ball one inch in diameter. 
The installed mesh shall be capable of withstanding a load of 100 pounds 
applied horizontally over any area of 144 square inches. If the space 
between the platform and the building face does not exceed eight inches, 
and the platform is restrained by guides, the mesh may be omitted on the 
front side.
    (12) Flooring. The platform flooring shall be of the nonskid type, 
and if of open construction, shall reject a \9/16\-inch diameter ball, 
or be provided with a screen below the floor to reject a \9/16\-inch 
diameter ball.
    (13) Access gates. Where access gates are provided, they shall be 
self-closing and self-locking.
    (14) Operating device for vertical movement of the working platform. 
(i) The normal operating device for the working platform shall be 
located on the working platform and shall be of the continuous pressure 
weatherproof electric type.
    (ii) The operating device shall be operable only when all electrical 
protective devices and interlocks on the working platform are in 
position for normal service and, the roof car, if provided, is at an 
established operating point.
    (15) Emergency electric operative device. (i) In addition, on roof-
powered platforms, an emergency electric operating device shall be 
provided near the hoisting machine for use in the event of failure of 
the normal operating device for the working platform, or failure of the 
traveling cable system. The emergency operating device shall be mounted 
in a locked compartment and shall have a legend mounted thereon reading: 
``For Emergency Operation Only. Establish Communication With Personnel 
on Working Platform Before Use.''
    (ii) A key for unlocking the compartment housing the emergency 
operating device shall be mounted in a break-glass receptacle located 
near the emergency operating device.
    (16) Manual cranking for emergency operation. Emergency operation of 
the main drive machine may be provided to allow manual cranking. This 
provision for manual operation shall be designed so that not more than 
two persons will be required to perform this operation. The access to 
this provision shall include a means to automatically make the machine 
inoperative electrically while under the emergency manual operation. The 
design shall be such that the emergency brake is operative at or below 
governor tripping speed during manual operation.
    (17) Arrangement and guarding of hoisting equipment.
    (i) Hoisting equipment shall consist of a power-driven drum or drum 
contained in the roof car (roof-powered platforms) or contained on the 
working platform (self-powered platform).
    (ii) The hoisting equipment shall be power-operated in both up and 
down directions.
    (iii) Guard or other protective devices shall be installed wherever 
rotating shafts or other mechanisms or gears may expose personnel to a 
hazard.
    (iv) Friction devices or clutches shall not be used for connecting 
the main driving mechanism to the drum or drums. Belt or chain-driven 
machines are prohibited.
    (18) Hoisting motors. (i) Hoisting motors shall be electric and of 
weather-proof construction.
    (ii) Hoisting motors shall be in conformance with applicable 
provisions of paragraph (c)(22) of this appendix, Electric Wiring and 
Equipment.
    (iii) Hoisting motors shall be directly connected to the hoisting 
machinery. Motor couplings, if used, shall be of steel construction.
    (19) Brakes. The hoisting machine(s) shall have two independent 
braking means, each designed to stop and hold the working platform with 
125 percent of rated load.
    (20) Hoisting ropes and rope connections. (i) Working platforms 
shall be suspended by wire ropes of either 6 x 19 or 6 x 37 
classification, preformed or nonpreformed.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) The minimum factor of safety shall be 10, and shall be 
calculated by the following formula:

F=S x N/W

Where
S=Manufacturer's rated breaking strength of one rope.
N=Number of ropes under load.
W=Maximum static load on all ropes with the platform and its rated load 
          at any point of its travel.

    (iv) Hoisting ropes shall be sized to conform with the required 
factor of safety, but in no case shall the size be less than \5/16\ inch 
diameter.
    (v) Winding drums shall have at least three turns of rope remaining 
when the platform has landed at the lowest possible point of its travel.

[[Page 167]]

    (vi) The lengthening or repairing of wire rope by the joining of two 
or more lengths is prohibited.
    (vii) The nondrum ends of the hoisting ropes shall be provided with 
individual shackle rods which will permit individual adjustment of rope 
lengths, if required.
    (viii) More than two reverse bends in each rope is prohibited.
    (21) Rope tag data. (i) A metal data tag shall be securely attached 
to one of the wire rope fastenings. This data tag shall bear the 
following wire rope data:
    (a) The diameter in inches.
    (b) Construction classification.
    (c) Whether nonpreformed or preformed.
    (d) The grade of material used.
    (e) The manufacturer's rated breaking strength.
    (f) Name of the manufacturer of the rope.
    (g) The month and year the ropes were installed.
    (22) Electrical wiring and equipment. (i) All electrical equipment 
and wiring shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical 
Code, NFPA 70-1971; ANSI C1-1971 (Rev. of C1-1968), except as modified 
by ANSI A120.1-1970 ``American National Standard Safety Requirements for 
Powered Platforms for Exterior Building Maintenance.'' For detail design 
specifications for electrical equipment, see Part 2, ANSI A120.1-1970.
    (ii) All motors and operation and control equipment shall be 
supplied from a single power source.
    (iii) The power supply for the powered platform shall be an 
independent circuit supplied through a fused disconnect switch.
    (iv) Electrical conductor parts of the power supply system shall be 
protected against accidental contact.
    (v) Electrical grounding shall be provided.
    (a) Provisions for electrical grounding shall be included with the 
power-supply system.
    (b) Controller cabinets, motor frames, hoisting machines, the 
working platform, roof car and roof car track system, and noncurrent 
carrying parts of electrical equipment, where provided, shall be 
grounded.
    (c) The controller, where used, shall be so designed and installed 
that a single ground or short circuit will not prevent both the normal 
and final stopping device from stopping the working platform.
    (d) Means shall be provided on the roof car and working platform for 
grounding portable electric tools.
    (e) The working platform shall be grounded through a grounding 
connection in a traveling cable. Electrically powered tools utilized on 
the working platform shall be grounded.
    (vi) Electrical receptacles located on the roof or other exterior 
location shall be of a weatherproof type and shall be located so as not 
to be subject to contact with water or accumulated snow. The receptacles 
shall be grounded and the electric cable shall include a grounding 
conductor. The receptacle and plug shall be a type designed to avoid 
hazard to persons inserting or withdrawing the plug. Provision shall be 
made to prevent application of cable strain directly to the plug and 
receptacle.
    (vii) Electric runway conductor systems shall be of the type 
designed for use in exterior locations and shall be located so as not to 
be subject to contact with water or accumulated snow. The conductors, 
collectors, and disconnecting means shall conform to the same 
requirements as those for cranes and hoists in Article 610 of the 
National Electrical Code, NFPA 70-1971; ANSI C1-1971 (Rev. of C1-1968). 
A grounded conductor shall parallel the power conductors and be so 
connected that it cannot be opened by the disconnecting means. The 
system shall be designed to avoid hazard to persons in the area.
    (viii) Electrical protective devices and interlocks of the 
weatherproof type shall be provided.
    (ix) Where the installation includes a roof car, electric contact(s) 
shall be provided and so connected that the operating devices for the 
working platform shall be operative only when the roof car is located 
and mechanically retained at an established operating point.
    (x) Where the powered platform includes a powered-operated roof car, 
the operating device for the roof car shall be inoperative when the roof 
car is mechanically retained at an established operating point.
    (xi) An electric contact shall be provided and so connected that it 
will cause the down direction relay for vertical travel to open if the 
tension in the traveling cable exceeds safe limits.
    (xii) An automatic overload device shall be provided to cut off the 
electrical power to the circuit in all hoisting motors for travel in the 
up direction, should the load applied to the hoisting ropes at either 
end of the working platform exceed 125 percent of its normal tension 
with rated load, as shown on the manufacturer's data plate on the 
working platform.
    (xiii) An automatic device shall be provided for each hoisting rope 
which will cut off the electrical power to the hoisting motor or motors 
in the down direction and apply the brakes if any hoisting rope becomes 
slack.
    (xiv) Upper and lower directional limit devices shall be provided to 
prevent the travel of the working platform beyond the normal upper and 
lower limits of travel.
    (xv) Operation of a directional limit device shall prevent further 
motion in the appropriate direction, if the normal limit of travel has 
been reached.
    (xvi) Directional limit devices, if driven from the hoisting machine 
by chains, tapes,

[[Page 168]]

or cables, shall incorporate a device to disconnect the electric power 
from the hoisting machine and apply both the primary and secondary 
brakes in the event of failure of the driving means.
    (xvii) Final terminal stopping devices of the working platform:
    (a) Final terminal stopping devices for the working platform shall 
be provided as a secondary means of preventing the working platform from 
over-traveling at the terminals.
    (b) The device shall be set to function as close to each terminal 
landing as practical, but in such a way that under normal operating 
conditions it will not function when the working platform is stopped by 
the normal terminal stopping device.
    (c) Operation of the final terminal stopping device shall open the 
potential relay for vertical travel, thereby disconnecting the electric 
power from the hoisting machine, and applying both the primary and 
secondary brakes.
    (d) The final terminal stopping device for the upper limit of travel 
shall be mounted so that it is operated directly by the motion of the 
working platform itself.
    (xviii) Emergency stop switches shall be provided in or adjacent to 
each operating device.
    (xix) Emergency stop switches shall:
    (a) Have red operating buttons or handles.
    (b) Be conspicuously and permanently marked ``Stop.''
    (c) Be the manually opened and manually closed type.
    (d) Be positively opened with the opening not solely dependent on 
springs.
    (xx) The manual operation of an emergency stop switch associated 
with an operating device for the working platform shall open the 
potential relay for vertical travel, thereby disconnecting the electric 
power from the hoisting machine and applying both the primary and 
secondary brakes.
    (xxi) The manual operation of the emergency stop switch associated 
with the operating device for a power-driven roof car shall cause the 
electrical power to the traverse machine to be interrupted, and the 
traverse machine brake to apply.
    (23) Requirements for emergency communications. (i) Communication 
equipment shall be provided for each powered platform for use in an 
emergency.
    (ii) Two-way communication shall be established between personnel on 
the roof and personnel on the stalled working platform before any 
emergency operation of the working platform is undertaken by personnel 
on the roof.
    (iii) The equipment shall permit two-way voice communication between 
the working platform and
    (a) Designated personnel continuously available while the powered 
platform is in use; and
    (b) Designated personnel on roof-powered platforms, undertaking 
emergency operation of the working platform by means of the emergency 
operating device located near the hoisting machine.
    (iv) The emergency communication equipment shall be one of the 
following types:
    (a) Telephone connected to the central telephone exchange system; or
    (b) Telephones on a limited system or an approved two-way radio 
system, provided designated personnel are available to receive a message 
during the time the powered platform is in use.
    (d) Type T powered platforms--(1) Roof car. The requirements of 
paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(5) of this appendix shall apply to Type T 
powered platforms.
    (2) Working platform. The requirements of paragraphs (c)(6) through 
(c)(16) of this appendix apply to Type T powered platforms.
    (i) The working platform shall be suspended by at least two wire 
ropes.
    (ii) The maximum rated speed at which the working platform of self-
powered platforms may be moved in a vertical direction shall not exceed 
35 feet per minute.
    (3) Hoisting equipment. The requirements of paragraphs (c) (17) and 
(18) of this appendix shall apply to Type T powered platforms.
    (4) Brakes. Brakes requirements of paragraph (c)(19) of this 
appendix shall apply.
    (5) Hoisting ropes and rope connections. (i) Paragraphs (c)(20) (i) 
through (vi) and (viii) of this appendix shall apply to Type T powered 
platforms.
    (ii) Adjustable shackle rods in subparagraph (c)(20)(vii) of this 
appendix shall apply to Type T powered platforms, if the working 
platform is suspended by more than two wire ropes.
    (6) Electrical wiring and equipment. (i) The requirements of 
paragraphs (c)(22) (i) through (vi) of this appendix shall apply to Type 
T powered platforms. ``Circuit protection limitation,'' ``powered 
platform electrical service system,'' all operating services and control 
equipment shall comply with the specifications contained in Part 2, 
section 26, ANSI A120.1-1970.
    (ii) For electrical protective devices the requirements of 
paragraphs (c)(22) (i) through (viii) of this appendix shall apply to 
Type T powered platforms. Requirements for the ``circuit potential 
limitation'' shall be in accordance with specifications contained in 
Part 2, section 26, of ANSI A120.1-1970.
    (7) Emergency communications. All the requirements of paragraph 
(c)(23) of this appendix shall apply to Type T powered platforms.
[54 FR 31456, July 28, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 9235, Mar. 7, 1996]

[[Page 169]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.67  Vehicle-mounted elevating and rotating work platforms.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section--(1) Aerial device. Any 
vehicle--mounted device, telescoping or articulating, or both, which is 
used to position personnel.
    (2) Aerial ladder. An aerial device consisting of a single- or 
multiple-section extensible ladder.
    (3) Articulating boom platform. An aerial device with two or more 
hinged boom sections.
    (4) Extensible boom platform. An aerial device (except ladders) with 
a telescopic or extensible boom. Telescopic derricks with personnel 
platform attachments shall be considered to be extensible boom platforms 
when used with a personnel platform.
    (5) Insulated aerial device. An aerial device designed for work on 
energized lines and apparatus.
    (6) Mobile unit. A combination of an aerial device, its vehicle, and 
related equipment.
    (7) Platform. Any personnel-carrying device (basket or bucket) which 
is a component of an aerial device.
    (8) Vehicle. Any carrier that is not manually propelled.
    (9) Vertical tower. An aerial device designed to elevate a platform 
in a substantially vertical axis.
    (b) General requirements. (1) Unless otherwise provided in this 
section, aerial devices (aerial lifts) acquired on or after July 1, 
1975, shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the 
applicable requirements of the American National Standard for ``Vehicle 
Mounted Elevating and Rotating Work Platforms,'' ANSI A92.2--1969, 
including appendix, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6. Aerial lifts acquired for use before July 1, 1975 which do 
not meet the requirements of ANSI A92.2--1969, may not be used after 
July 1, 1976, unless they shall have been modified so as to conform with 
the applicable design and construction requirements of ANSI A92.2--1969. 
Aerial devices include the following types of vehicle-mounted aerial 
devices used to elevate personnel to jobsites above ground: (i) 
Extensible boom platforms, (ii) aerial ladders, (iii) articulating boom 
platforms, (iv) vertical towers, and (v) a combination of any of the 
above. Aerial equipment may be made of metal, wood, fiberglass 
reinforced plastic (FRP), or other material; may be powered or manually 
operated; and are deemed to be aerial lifts whether or not they are 
capable of rotating about a substantially vertical axis.
    (2) Aerial lifts may be ``field modified'' for uses other than those 
intended by the manufacturer, provided the modification has been 
certified in writing by the manufacturer or by any other equivalent 
entity, such as a nationally recognized testing laboratory, to be in 
conformity with all applicable provisions of ANSI A92.2--1969 and this 
section, and to be at least as safe as the equipment was before 
modification.
    (3) The requirements of this section do not apply to firefighting 
equipment or to the vehicles upon which aerial devices are mounted, 
except with respect to the requirement that a vehicle be a stable 
support for the aerial device.
    (4) For operations near overhead electric lines, see 
Sec. 1910.333(c)(3).
    (c) Specific requirements--(1) Ladder trucks and tower trucks. 
Before the truck is moved for highway travel, aerial ladders shall be 
secured in the lower traveling position by the locking device above the 
truck cab, and the manually operated device at the base of the ladder, 
or by other equally effective means (e.g., cradles which prevent 
rotation of the ladder in combination with positive acting linear 
actuators).
    (2) Extensible and articulating boom platforms. (i) Lift controls 
shall be tested each day prior to use to determine that such controls 
are in safe working condition.
    (ii) Only trained persons shall operate an aerial lift.
    (iii) Belting off to an adjacent pole, structure, or equipment while 
working from an aerial lift shall not be permitted.
    (iv) Employees shall always stand firmly on the floor of the basket, 
and shall not sit or climb on the edge of the basket or use planks, 
ladders, or other devices for a work position.
    (v) A body belt shall be worn and a lanyard attached to the boom or 
basket when working from an aerial lift.
    (vi) Boom and basket load limits specified by the manufacturer shall 
not be exceeded.

[[Page 170]]

    (vii) The brakes shall be set and outriggers, when used, shall be 
positioned on pads or a solid surface. Wheel chocks shall be installed 
before using an aerial lift on an incline.
    (viii) An aerial lift truck may not be moved when the boom is 
elevated in a working position with men in the basket, except for 
equipment which is specifically designed for this type of operation in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (ix) Articulating boom and extensible boom platforms, primarily 
designed as personnel carriers, shall have both platform (upper) and 
lower controls. Upper controls shall be in or beside the platform within 
easy reach of the operator. Lower controls shall provide for overriding 
the upper controls. Controls shall be plainly marked as to their 
function. Lower level controls shall not be operated unless permission 
has been obtained from the employee in the lift, except in case of 
emergency.
    (x) Climbers shall not be worn while performing work from an aerial 
lift.
    (xi) The insulated portion of an aerial lift shall not be altered in 
any manner that might reduce its insulating value.
    (xii) Before moving an aerial lift for travel, the boom(s) shall be 
inspected to see that it is properly cradled and outriggers are in 
stowed position, except as provided in paragraph (c)(2)(viii) of this 
section.
    (3) Electrical tests. Electrical tests shall be made in conformance 
with the requirements of ANSI A92.2--1969, Section 5. However, 
equivalent DC voltage tests may be used in lieu of the AC voltage test 
specified in A92.2--1969. DC voltage tests which are approved by the 
equipment manufacturer or equivalent entity shall be considered an 
equivalent test for the purpose of this paragraph (c)(3).
    (4) Bursting safety factor. All critical hydraulic and pneumatic 
components shall comply with the provisions of the American National 
Standards Institute standard, ANSI A92.2--1969, Section 4.9 Bursting 
Safety Factor. Critical components are those in which a failure would 
result in a free fall or free rotation of the boom. All noncritical 
components shall have a bursting safety factor of at least two to one.
    (5) Welding standards. All welding shall conform to the following 
Automotive Welding Society (AWS) Standards, which are incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, as applicable:
    (i) Standard Qualification Procedure, AWS B3.0--41.
    (ii) Recommended Practices for Automotive Welding Design, AWS D8.4-
61.
    (iii) Standard Qualification of Welding Procedures and Welders for 
Piping and Tubing, AWS D10.9-69.
    (iv) Specifications for Welding Highway and Railway Bridges, AWS 
D2.0-69.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 13439, Mar. 26, 1975; 
55 FR 32014, Aug. 6, 1990; 61 FR 9235, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.68  Manlifts.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section--(1) Handhold (Handgrip). 
A handhold is a device attached to the belt which can be grasped by the 
passenger to provide a means of maintaining balance.
    (2) Open type. One which has a handgrip surface fully exposed and 
capable of being encircled by the passenger's fingers.
    (3) Closed type. A cup-shaped device, open at the top in the 
direction of travel of the step for which it is to be used, and closed 
at the bottom, into which the passenger may place his fingers.
    (4) Limit switch. A device, the purpose of which is to cut off the 
power to the motor and apply the brake to stop the carrier in the event 
that a loaded step passes the terminal landing.
    (5) Manlift. A device consisting of a power-driven endless belt 
moving in one direction only, and provided with steps or platforms and 
handholds attached to it for the transportation of personnel from floor 
to floor.
    (6) Rated speed. Rated speed is the speed for which the device is 
designed and installed.
    (7) Split-rail switch. An electric limit switch operated 
mechanically by the rollers on the manlift steps. It consists of an 
additional hinged or ``split'' rail, mounted on the regular guide rail, 
over which the step rollers pass. It is springloaded in the ``split'' 
position. If the step supports no load, the rollers

[[Page 171]]

will ``bump'' over the switch; if a loaded step should pass over the 
section, the split rail will be forced straight, tripping the switch and 
opening the electrical circuit.
    (8) Step (platform). A step is a passenger carrying unit.
    (9) Travel. The travel is the distance between the centers of the 
top and bottom pulleys.
    (b) General requirements--(1) Application. This section applies to 
the construction, maintenance, inspection, and operation of manlifts in 
relation to accident hazards. Manlifts covered by this section consist 
of platforms or brackets and accompanying handholds mounted on, or 
attached to an endless belt, operating vertically in one direction only 
and being supported by, and driven through pulleys, at the top and 
bottom. These manlifts are intended for conveyance of persons only. It 
is not intended that this section cover moving stairways, elevators with 
enclosed platforms (``Paternoster'' elevators), gravity lifts, nor 
conveyors used only for conveying material. This section applies to 
manlifts used to carry only personnel trained and authorized by the 
employer in their use.
    (2) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable 
safety for life and limb.
    (3) Design requirements. All new manlift installations and equipment 
installed after the effective date of these regulations shall meet the 
design requirements of the ``American National Safety Standard for 
Manlifts ANSI A90.1-1969'', which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6, and the requirements of this section.
    (4) Reference to other codes and subparts. The following codes, and 
subparts of this part, are applicable to this section: Safety Code for 
Mechanical Power Transmission Apparatus, ANSI B15.1-1953 (R 1958), and 
subpart O; subpart S; Safety Code for Fixed Ladders, ANSI A14.3-1956, 
and Safety Requirements for Floor and Wall Openings, Railings and 
Toeboards, ANSI A12.1-1967, and subpart D. The preceding ANSI standards 
are incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (5) Floor openings--(i) Allowable size. Floor openings for both the 
``up'' and ``down'' runs shall be not less than 28 inches nor more than 
36 inches in width for a 12-inch belt; not less than 34 inches nor more 
than 38 inches for a 14-inch belt; and not less than 36 inches nor more 
than 40 inches for a 16-inch belt and shall extend not less than 24 
inches, nor more than 28 inches from the face of the belt.
    (ii) Uniformity. All floor openings for a given manlift shall be 
uniform in size and shall be approximately circular, and each shall be 
located vertically above the opening below it.
    (6) Landing--(i) Vertical clearance. The clearanace between the 
floor or mounting platform and the lower edge for the conical guard 
above it required by subparagraph (7) of this paragraph shall not be 
less than 7 feet 6 inches. Where this clearance cannot be obtained no 
access to the manlift shall be provided and the manlift runway shall be 
enclosed where it passes through such floor.
    (ii) Clear landing space. The landing space adjacent to the floor 
openings shall be free from obstruction and kept clear at all times. 
This landing space shall be at least 2 feet in width from the edge of 
the floor opening used for mounting and dismounting.
    (iii) Lighting and landing. Adequate lighting, not less than 5-foot 
candles, shall be provided at each floor landing at all times when the 
lift is in operation.
    (iv) Landing surface. The landing surfaces at the entrances and 
exits to the manlift shall be constructed and maintained as to provide 
safe footing at all times.
    (v) Emergency landings. Where there is a travel of 50 feet or more 
between floor landings, one or more emergency landings shall be provided 
so that there will be a landing (either floor or emergency) for every 25 
feet or less of manlift travel.
    (a) Emergency landings shall be accessible from both the ``up'' and 
``down'' rungs of the manlift and shall give access to the ladder 
required in subparagraph (12) of this paragraph.
    (b) Emergency landings shall be completely enclosed with a standard 
railing and toeboard.

[[Page 172]]

    (c) Platforms constructed to give access to bucket elevators or 
other equipment for the purpose of inspection, lubrication, and repair 
may also serve as emergency landings under this rule. All such platforms 
will then be considered part of the emergency landing and shall be 
provided with standard railings and toeboards.
    (7) Guards on underside of floor openings--(i) Fixed type. On the 
ascending side of the manlift floor openings shall be provided with a 
bevel guard or cone meeting the following requirements:
    (a) The cone shall make an angle of not less than 45 deg. with the 
horizontal. An angle of 60 deg. or greater shall be used where ceiling 
heights permit.
    (b) The lower edge of this guard shall extend at least 42 inches 
outward from any handhold on the belt. It shall not extend beyond the 
upper surface of the floor above.
    (c) The cone shall be made of not less than No. 18 U.S. gauge sheet 
steel or material of equivalent strength or stiffness. The lower edge 
shall be rolled to a minimum diameter of one-half inch and the interior 
shall be smooth with no rivets, bolts or screws protruding.
    (ii) Floating type. In lieu of the fixed guards specified in 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph a floating type safety cone may be 
used, such floating cones to be mounted on hinges at least 6 inches 
below the underside of the floor and so constructed as to actuate a 
limit switch should a force of 2 pounds be applied on the edge of the 
cone closest to the hinge. The depth of this floating cone need not 
exceed 12 inches.
    (8) Protection of entrances and exits--(i) Guard rail requirement. 
The entrances and exits at all floor landings affording access to the 
manlift shall be guarded by a maze (staggered railing) or a handrail 
equipped with self-closing gates.
    (ii) Construction. The rails shall be standard guardrails with 
toeboards meeting the provisions of the Safety Requirements for Floor 
and Wall Openings, Railings and Toeboards, ANSI A12.1-1967 and 
Sec. 1910.23.
    (iii) Gates. Gates, if used, shall open outward and shall be self-
closing. Corners of gates shall be rounded.
    (iv) Maze. Maze or staggered openings shall offer no direct passage 
between enclosure and outer floor space.
    (v) Except where building layout prevents, entrances at all landings 
shall be in the same relative position.
    (9) Guards for openings--(i) Construction. The floor opening at each 
landing shall be guarded on sides not used for entrance or exit by a 
wall, a railing and toeboard or by panels of wire mesh of suitable 
strength.
    (ii) Height and location. Such rails or guards shall be at least 42 
inches in height on the up-running side and 66 inches on the down-
running side.
    (10) Bottom arrangement--(i) Bottom landing. At the bottom landing 
the clear area shall be not smaller than the area enclosed by the 
guardrails on the floors above, and any wall in front of the down-
running side of the belt shall be not less than 48 inches from the face 
of the belt. This space shall not be encroached upon by stairs or 
ladders.
    (ii) Location of lower pulley. The lower (boot) pulley shall be 
installed so that it is supported by the lowest landing served. The 
sides of the pulley support shall be guarded to prevent contact with the 
pulley or the steps.
    (iii) Mounting platform. A mounting platform shall be provided in 
front or to one side of the uprun at the lowest landing, unless the 
floor level is such that the following requirement can be met: The floor 
or platform shall be at or above the point at which the upper surface of 
the ascending step completes its turn and assumes a horizontal position.
    (iv) Guardrails. To guard against persons walking under a descending 
step, the area on the downside of the manlift shall be guarded in 
accordance with subparagraph (8) of this paragraph. To guard against a 
person getting between the mounting platform and an ascending step, the 
area between the belt and the platform shall be protected by a 
guardrail.
    (11) Top arrangements--(i) Clearance from floor. A top clearance 
shall be provided of at least 11 feet above the top terminal landing. 
This clearance shall be maintained from a plane through each face of the 
belt to a vertical cylindrical plane having a diameter 2 feet greater 
than the diameter of the floor

[[Page 173]]

opening, extending upward from the top floor to the ceiling on the up-
running side of the belt. No encroachment of structural or machine 
supporting members within this space will be permitted.
    (ii) Pulley clearance. (a) There shall be a clearance of at least 5 
feet between the center of the head pulley shaft and any ceiling 
obstruction.
    (b) The center of the head pulley shaft shall be not less than 6 
feet above the top terminal landing.
    (iii) Emergency grab rail. An emergency grab bar or rail and 
platform shall be provided at the head pulley when the distance to the 
head pulley is over 6 feet above the top landing, otherwise only a grab 
bar or rail is to be provided to permit the rider to swing free should 
the emergency stops become inoperative.
    (12) Emergency exit ladder. A fixed metal ladder accessible from 
both the ``up'' and ``down'' run of the manlift shall be provided for 
the entire travel of the manlift. Such ladder shall be in accordance 
with the existing ANSI A14.3-1956 Safety Code for Fixed Ladders and 
Sec. 1910.27.
    (13) Superstructure bracing. Manlift rails shall be secured in such 
a manner as to avoid spreading, vibration, and misalinement.
    (14) Illumination--(i) General. Both runs of the manlift shall be 
illuminated at all times when the lift is in operation. An intensity of 
not less than 1-foot candle shall be maintained at all points. (However, 
see subparagraph (6)(iii) of this paragraph for illumination 
requirements at landings.)
    (ii) Control of illumination. Lighting of manlift runways shall be 
by means of circuits permanently tied in to the building circuits (no 
switches), or shall be controlled by switches at each landing. Where 
separate switches are provided at each landing, any switch shall turn on 
all lights necessary to illuminate the entire runway.
    (15) Weather protection. The entire manlift and its driving 
mechanism shall be protected from the weather at all times.
    (c) Mechanical requirements--(1) Machines, general--(i) Brakes. 
Brakes provided for stopping and holding a manlift shall be inherently 
self-engaging, by requiring power or force from an external source to 
cause disengagement. The brake shall be electrically released, and shall 
be applied to the motor shaft for direct-connected units or to the input 
shaft for belt-driven units. The brake shall be capable of stopping and 
holding the manlift when the descending side is loaded with 250 lb on 
each step.
    (ii) Belt. (a) The belts shall be of hard-woven canvas, rubber-
coated canvas, leather, or other material meeting the strength 
requirements of paragraph (b)(3) of this section and having a 
coefficient of friction such that when used in conjunction with an 
adequate tension device it will meet the brake test specified in 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (b) The width of the belt shall be not less than 12 inches for a 
travel not exceeding 100 feet, not less than 14 inches for a travel 
greater than 100 feet but not exceeding 150 feet and 16 inches for a 
travel exceeding 150 feet.
    (c) A belt that has become torn while in use on a manlift shall not 
be spliced and put back in service.
    (2) Speed--(i) Maximum speed. No manlift designed for a speed in 
excess of 80 feet per minute shall be installed.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (3) Platforms or steps--(i) Minimum depth. Steps or platforms shall 
be not less than 12 inches nor more than 14 inches deep, measured from 
the belt to the edge of the step or platform.
    (ii) Width. The width of the step or platform shall be not less than 
the width of the belt to which it is attached.
    (iii) Distance between steps. The distance between steps shall be 
equally spaced and not less than 16 feet measured from the upper surface 
of one step to the upper surface of the next step above it.
    (iv) Angle of step. The surface of the step shall make approximately 
a right angle with the ``up'' and ``down'' run of the belt, and shall 
travel in the approximate horizontal position with the ``up'' and 
``down'' run of the belt.
    (v) Surfaces. The upper or working surfaces of the step shall be of 
a material having inherent nonslip characteristics (coefficient of 
friction not less than 0.5) or shall be covered completely

[[Page 174]]

by a nonslip tread securely fastened to it.
    (vi) Strength of step supports. When subjected to a load of 400 
pounds applied at the approximate center of the step, step frames, or 
supports and their guides shall be of adequate strength to:
    (a) Prevent the disengagement of any step roller.
    (b) Prevent any appreciable misalinement.
    (c) Prevent any visible deformation of the steps or its support.
    (vii) Prohibition of steps without handholds. No steps shall be 
provided unless there is a corresponding handhold above or below it 
meeting the requirements of paragraph (c)(4) of this section. If a step 
is removed for repairs or permanently, the handholds immediately above 
and below it shall be removed before the lift is again placed in 
service.
    (4) Handholds--(i) Location. Handholds attached to the belt shall be 
provided and installed so that they are not less than 4 feet nor more 
than 4 feet 8 inches above the step tread. These shall be so located as 
to be available on the both ``up'' and ``down'' run of the belt.
    (ii) Size. The grab surface of the handhold shall be not less than 
4\1/2\ inches in width, not less than 3 inches in depth, and shall 
provide 2 inches of clearance from the belt. Fastenings for handholds 
shall be located not less than 1 inch from the edge of the belt.
    (iii) Strength. The handhold shall be capable of withstanding, 
without damage, a load of 300 pounds applied parallel to the run of the 
belt.
    (iv) Prohibition of handhold without steps. No handhold shall be 
provided without a corresponding step. If a handhold is removed 
permanently or temporarily, the corresponding step and handhold for the 
opposite direction of travel shall also be removed before the lift is 
again placed in service.
    (v) Type. All handholds shall be of the closed type.
    (5) Up limit stops--(i) Requirements. Two separate automatic stop 
devices shall be provided to cut off the power and apply the brake when 
a loaded step passes the upper terminal landing. One of these shall 
consist of a split-rail switch mechanically operated by the step roller 
and located not more than 6 inches above the top terminal landing. The 
second automatic stop device may consist of any of the following:
    (a) Any split-rail switch placed 6 inches above and on the side 
opposite the first limit switch.
    (b) An electronic device.
    (c) A switch actuated by a lever, rod, or plate, the latter to be 
placed on the ``up'' side of the head pulley so as to just clear a 
passing step.
    (ii) Manual reset location. After the manlift has been stopped by a 
stop device it shall be necessary to reset the automatic stop manually. 
The device shall be so located that a person resetting it shall have a 
clear view of both the ``up'' and ``down'' runs of the manlift. It shall 
not be possible to reset the device from any step or platform.
    (iii) Cut-off point. The initial limit stop device shall function so 
that the manlift will be stopped before the loaded step has reached a 
point 24 inches above the top terminal landing.
    (iv) Electrical requirements. (a) Where such switches open the main 
motor circuit directly they shall be of the multipole type.
    (b) Where electronic devices are used they shall be so designed and 
installed that failure will result in shutting off the power to the 
driving motor.
    (c) Where flammable vapors or combustible dusts may be present, 
electrical installations shall be in accordance with the requirements of 
subpart S of this part for such locations.
    (d) Unless of the oil-immersed type controller contacts carrying the 
main motor current shall be copper to carbon or equal, except where the 
circuit is broken at two or more points simultaneously.
    (6) Emergency stop--(i) General. An emergency stop means shall be 
provided.
    (ii) Location. This stop means shall be within easy reach of the 
ascending and descending runs of the belt.
    (iii) Operation. This stop means shall be so connected with the 
control lever or operating mechanism that it will cut off the power and 
apply the brake when pulled in the direction of travel.

[[Page 175]]

    (iv) Rope. If rope is used, it shall be not less than three-eights 
inch in diameter. Wire rope, unless marlin-covered, shall not be used.
    (7) Instruction and warning signs--(i) Instruction signs at landings 
or belts. Signs of conspicuous and easily read style giving instructions 
for the use of the manlift shall be posted at each landing or stenciled 
on the belt.
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) The instructions shall read approximately as follows:

Face the Belt.
Use the Handholds.
To Stop--Pull Rope.

    (ii) Top floor warning sign and light. (a) At the top floor an 
illuminated sign shall be displayed bearing the following wording:

                         ``TOP FLOOR--GET OFF''

Signs shall be in block letters not less than 2 inches in height. This 
sign shall be located within easy view of an ascending passenger and not 
more than 2 feet above the top terminal landing.
    (b) In addition to the sign required by paragraph (c)(7)(ii)(a) of 
this section, a red warning light of not less than 40- watt rating shall 
be provided immediately below the upper landing terminal and so located 
as to shine in the passenger's face.
    (iii) Visitor warning. A conspicuous sign having the following 
legend--AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY--shall be displayed at each landing.
    (d) Operating rules--(1) Proper use of manlifts. No freight, 
packaged goods, pipe, lumber, or construction materials of any kind 
shall be handled on any manlift.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (e) Periodic inspection--(1) Frequency. All manlifts shall be 
inspected by a competent designated person at intervals of not more than 
30 days. Limit switches shall be checked weekly. Manlifts found to be 
unsafe shall not be operated until properly repaired.
    (2) Items covered. This periodic inspection shall cover but is not 
limited to the following items:

Steps.
Step Fastenings.
Rails.
Rail Supports and Fastenings.
Rollers and Slides.
Belt and Belt Tension.
Handholds and Fastenings.
Floor Landings.
Guardrails.
Lubrication.
Limit Switches.
Warning Signs and Lights.
Illumination.
Drive Pulley.
Bottom (boot) Pulley and Clearance.
Pulley Supports.
Motor.
Driving Mechanism.
Brake.
Electrical Switches.
Vibration and Misalignment.
``Skip'' on up or down run when mounting step (indicating worn gears).

    (3) Inspection record. A certification record shall be kept of each 
inspection which includes the date of the inspection, the signature of 
the person who performed the inspection and the serial number, or other 
identifier, of the manlift which was inspected. This record of 
inspection shall be made available to the Assistant Secretary of Labor 
or a duly authorized representative.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49746, Oct. 24, 1978; 
51 FR 34560, Sept. 29, 1986; 54 FR 24334, June 7, 1989; 55 FR 32014, 
Aug. 6, 1990; 61 FR 9235, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R04>
        Subpart G--Occupational Health and Environmental Control

    Authority:  Secs. 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Orders 12-71 
(36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), 1-90 (55 FR 9033), 
or 6-96 (62 FR 111), as applicable; and 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.94  Ventilation.

    (a) Abrasive blasting--(1) Definitions applicable to this 
paragraph--(i) Abrasive. A solid substance used in an abrasive blasting 
operation.
    (ii) Abrasive-blasting respirator. A respirator constructed so that 
it covers the wearer's head, neck, and shoulders to protect the wearer 
from rebounding abrasive.
    (iii) Blast cleaning barrel. A complete enclosure which rotates on 
an axis, or which has an internal moving tread to tumble the parts, in 
order to expose various surfaces of the parts to the action of an 
automatic blast spray.

[[Page 176]]

    (iv) Blast cleaning room. A complete enclosure in which blasting 
operations are performed and where the operator works inside of the room 
to operate the blasting nozzle and direct the flow of the abrasive 
material.
    (v) Blasting cabinet. An enclosure where the operator stands outside 
and operates the blasting nozzle through an opening or openings in the 
enclosure.
    (vi) Clean air. Air of such purity that it will not cause harm or 
discomfort to an individual if it is inhaled for extended periods of 
time.
    (vii) Dust collector. A device or combination of devices for 
separating dust from the air handled by an exhaust ventilation system.
    (viii) Exhaust ventilation system. A system for removing 
contaminated air from a space, comprising two or more of the following 
elements (a) enclosure or hood, (b) duct work, (c) dust collecting 
equipment, (d) exhauster, and (e) discharge stack.
    (ix) Particulate-filter respirator. An air purifying respirator, 
commonly referred to as a dust or a fume respirator, which removes most 
of the dust or fume from the air passing through the device.
    (x) Respirable dust. Airborne dust in sizes capable of passing 
through the upper respiratory system to reach the lower lung passages.
    (xi) Rotary blast cleaning table. An enclosure where the pieces to 
be cleaned are positioned on a rotating table and are passed 
automatically through a series of blast sprays.
    (xii) Abrasive blasting. The forcible application of an abrasive to 
a surface by pneumatic pressure, hydraulic pressure, or centrifugal 
force.
    (2) Dust hazards from abrasive blasting. (i) Abrasives and the 
surface coatings on the materials blasted are shattered and pulverized 
during blasting operations and the dust formed will contain particles of 
respirable size. The composition and toxicity of the dust from these 
sources shall be considered in making an evaluation of the potential 
health hazards.
    (ii) The concentration of respirable dust or fume in the breathing 
zone of the abrasive-blasting operator or any other worker shall be kept 
below the levels specified in Sec. 1910.1000.
    (iii) Organic abrasives which are combustible shall be used only in 
automatic systems. Where flammable or explosive dust mixtures may be 
present, the construction of the equipment, including the exhaust system 
and all electric wiring, shall conform to the requirements of American 
National Standard Installation of Blower and Exhaust Systems for Dust, 
Stock, and Vapor Removal or Conveying, Z33.1-1961 (NFPA 91-1961), which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, and subpart S 
of this part. The blast nozzle shall be bonded and grounded to prevent 
the build up of static charges. Where flammable or explosive dust 
mixtures may be present, the abrasive blasting enclosure, the ducts, and 
the dust collector shall be constructed with loose panels or explosion 
venting areas, located on sides away from any occupied area, to provide 
for pressure relief in case of explosion, following the principles set 
forth in the National Fire Protection Association Explosion Venting 
Guide, NFPA 68-1954, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (3) Blast-cleaning enclosures. (i) Blast-cleaning enclosures shall 
be exhaust ventilated in such a way that a continuous inward flow of air 
will be maintained at all openings in the enclosure during the blasting 
operation.
    (a) All air inlets and access openings shall be baffled or so 
arranged that by the combination of inward air flow and baffling the 
escape of abrasive or dust particules into an adjacent work area will be 
minimized and visible spurts of dust will not be observed.
    (b) The rate of exhaust shall be sufficient to provide prompt 
clearance of the dust-laden air within the enclosure after the cessation 
of blasting.
    (c) Before the enclosure is opened, the blast shall be turned off 
and the exhaust system shall be run for a sufficient period of time to 
remove the dusty air within the enclosure.
    (d) Safety glass protected by screening shall be used in observation 
windows, where hard deep-cutting abrasives are used.
    (e) Slit abrasive-resistant baffles shall be installed in multiple 
sets at all small access openings where dust

[[Page 177]]

might escape, and shall be inspected regularly and replaced when needed.
    (1) Doors shall be flanged and tight when closed.
    (2) Doors on blast-cleaning rooms shall be operable from both inside 
and outside, except that where there is a small operator access door, 
the large work access door may be closed or opened from the outside 
only.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (4) Exhaust ventilation systems. (i) The construction, installation, 
inspection, and maintenance of exhaust systems shall conform to the 
principles and requirements set forth in American National Standard 
Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of Local Exhaust 
Systems, Z9.2-1960, and ANSI Z33.1-1961, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (a) When dust leaks are noted, repairs shall be made as soon as 
possible.
    (b) The static pressure drop at the exhaust ducts leading from the 
equipment shall be checked when the installation is completed and 
periodically thereafter to assure continued satisfactory operation. 
Whenever an appreciable change in the pressure drop indicates a partial 
blockage, the system shall be cleaned and returned to normal operating 
condition.
    (ii) In installations where the abrasive is recirculated, the 
exhaust ventilation system for the blasting enclosure shall not be 
relied upon for the removal of fines from the spent abrasive instead of 
an abrasive separator. An abrasive separator shall be provided for the 
purpose.
    (iii) The air exhausted from blast-cleaning equipment shall be 
discharged through dust collecting equipment. Dust collectors shall be 
set up so that the accumulated dust can be emptied and removed without 
contaminating other working areas.
    (5) Personal protective equipment. (i) Employers must use only 
respirators approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH) under 42 CFR part 84 to protect employees from dusts 
produced during abrasive-blasting operations.
    (ii) Abrasive-blasting respirators shall be worn by all abrasive-
blasting operators:
    (a) When working inside of blast-cleaning rooms, or
    (b) When using silica sand in manual blasting operations where the 
nozzle and blast are not physically separated from the operator in an 
exhaust ventilated enclosure, or
    (c) Where concentrations of toxic dust dispersed by the abrasive 
blasting may exceed the limits set in Sec. 1910.1000 and the nozzle and 
blast are not physically separated from the operator in an exhaust-
ventilated enclosure.
    (iii) Properly fitted particulate-filter respirators, commonly 
referred to as dust-filter respirators, may be used for short, 
intermittent, or occasional dust exposures such as cleanup, dumping of 
dust collectors, or unloading shipments of sand at a receiving point 
when it is not feasible to control the dust by enclosure, exhaust 
ventilation, or other means. The respirators used must be approved by 
NIOSH under 42 CFR part 84 for protection against the specific type of 
dust encountered.
    (a) Dust-filter respirators may be used to protect the operator of 
outside abrasive-blasting operations where nonsilica abrasives are used 
on materials having low toxicities.
    (b) Dust-filter respirators shall not be used for continuous 
protection where silica sand is used as the blasting abrasive, or toxic 
materials are blasted.
    (iv) For employees who use respirators required by this section, the 
employer must implement a respiratory protection program in accordance 
with 29 CFR 1910.134.
    (v) Operators shall be equipped with heavy canvas or leather gloves 
and aprons or equivalent protection to protect them from the impact of 
abrasives. Safety shoes shall be worn to protect against foot injury 
where heavy pieces of work are handled.
    (a) Safety shoes shall conform to the requirements of American 
National Standard for Men's Safety-Toe Footwear, Z41.1-1967, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (b) Equipment for protection of the eyes and face shall be supplied 
to the operator when the respirator design does not provide such 
protection and to any other personnel working in the vicinity of 
abrasive blasting operations.

[[Page 178]]

This equipment shall conform to the requirements of Sec. 1910.133.
    (6) Air supply and air compressors. Air for abrasive-blasting 
respirators must be free of harmful quantities of dusts, mists, or 
noxious gases, and must meet the requirements for supplied-air quality 
and use specified in 29 CFR 1910.134(i).
    (7) Operational procedures and general safety. Dust shall not be 
permitted to accumulate on the floor or on ledges outside of an 
abrasive-blasting enclosure, and dust spills shall be cleaned up 
promptly. Aisles and walkways shall be kept clear of steel shot or 
similar abrasive which may create a slipping hazard.
    (8) Scope. This paragraph (a) applies to all operations where an 
abrasive is forcibly applied to a surface by pneumatic or hydraulic 
pressure, or by centrifugal force. It does not apply to steam blasting, 
or steam cleaning, or hydraulic cleaning methods where work is done 
without the aid of abrasives.
    (b) Grinding, polishing, and buffing operations--(1) Definitions 
applicable to this paragraph--(i) Abrasive cutting-off wheels. Organic-
bonded wheels, the thickness of which is not more than one forty-eighth 
of their diameter for those up to, and including, 20 inches in diameter, 
and not more than one-sixtieth of their diameter for those larger than 
20 inches in diameter, used for a multitude of operations variously 
known as cutting, cutting off, grooving, slotting, coping, and jointing, 
and the like. The wheels may be ``solid'' consisting of organic-bonded 
abrasive material throughout, ``steel centered'' consisting of a steel 
disc with a rim of organic-bonded material moulded around the periphery, 
or of the ``inserted tooth'' type consisting of a steel disc with 
organic-bonded abrasive teeth or inserts mechanically secured around the 
periphery.
    (ii) Belts. All power-driven, flexible, coated bands used for 
grinding, polishing, or buffing purposes.
    (iii) Branch pipe. The part of an exhaust system piping that is 
connected directly to the hood or enclosure.
    (iv) Cradle. A movable fixture, upon which the part to be ground or 
polished is placed.
    (v) Disc wheels. All power-driven rotatable discs faced with 
abrasive materials, artificial or natural, and used for grinding or 
polishing on the side of the assembled disc.
    (vi) Entry loss. The loss in static pressure caused by air flowing 
into a duct or hood. It is usually expressed in inches of water gauge.
    (vii) Exhaust system. A system consisting of branch pipes connected 
to hoods or enclosures, one or more header pipes, an exhaust fan, means 
for separating solid contaminants from the air flowing in the system, 
and a discharge stack to outside.
    (viii) Grinding wheels. All power-driven rotatable grinding or 
abrasive wheels, except disc wheels as defined in this standard, 
consisting of abrasive particles held together by artificial or natural 
bonds and used for peripheral grinding.
    (ix) Header pipe (main pipe). A pipe into which one or more branch 
pipes enter and which connects such branch pipes to the remainder of the 
exhaust system.
    (x) Hoods and enclosures. The partial or complete enclosure around 
the wheel or disc through which air enters an exhaust system during 
operation.
    (xi) Horizontal double-spindle disc grinder. A grinding machine 
carrying two power-driven, rotatable, coaxial, horizontal spindles upon 
the inside ends of which are mounted abrasive disc wheels used for 
grinding two surfaces simultaneously.
    (xii) Horizontal single-spindle disc grinder. A grinding machine 
carrying an abrasive disc wheel upon one or both ends of a power-driven, 
rotatable single horizontal spindle.
    (xiii) Polishing and buffing wheels. All power-driven rotatable 
wheels composed all or in part of textile fabrics, wood, felt, leather, 
paper, and may be coated with abrasives on the periphery of the wheel 
for purposes of polishing, buffing, and light grinding.
    (xiv) Portable grinder. Any power-driven rotatable grinding, 
polishing, or buffing wheel mounted in such manner that it may be 
manually manipulated.
    (xv) Scratch brush wheels. All power-driven rotatable wheels made 
from wire or bristles, and used for scratch cleaning and brushing 
purposes.

[[Page 179]]

    (xvi) Swing-frame grinder. Any power-driven rotatable grinding, 
polishing, or buffing wheel mounted in such a manner that the wheel with 
its supporting framework can be manipulated over stationary objects.
    (xvii) Velocity pressure (vp). The kinetic pressure in the direction 
of flow necessary to cause a fluid at rest to flow at a given velocity. 
It is usually expressed in inches of water gauge.
    (xviii) Vertical spindle disc grinder. A grinding machine having a 
vertical, rotatable power-driven spindle carrying a horizontal abrasive 
disc wheel.
    (2) Application. Wherever dry grinding, dry polishing or buffing is 
performed, and employee exposure, without regard to the use of 
respirators, exceeds the permissible exposure limits prescribed in 
Sec. 1910.1000 or other sections of this part, a local exhaust 
ventilation system shall be provided and used to maintain employee 
exposures within the prescribed limits.
    (3) Hood and branch pipe requirements. (i) Hoods connected to 
exhaust systems shall be used, and such hoods shall be designed, 
located, and placed so that the dust or dirt particles shall fall or be 
projected into the hoods in the direction of the air flow. No wheels, 
discs, straps, or belts shall be operated in such manner and in such 
direction as to cause the dust and dirt particles to be thrown into the 
operator's breathing zone.
    (ii) Grinding wheels on floor stands, pedestals, benches, and 
special-purpose grinding machines and abrasive cutting-off wheels shall 
have not less than the minimum exhaust volumes shown in Table G-4 with a 
recommended minimum duct velocity of 4,500 feet per minute in the branch 
and 3,500 feet per minute in the main. The entry losses from all hoods 
except the vertical-spindle disc grinder hood, shall equal 0.65 velocity 
pressure for a straight takeoff and 0.45 velocity pressure for a tapered 
takeoff. The entry loss for the vertical-spindle disc grinder hood is 
shown in figure G-1 (following Sec. 1910.94(b)).

           Table G-4--Grinding and Abrasive Cutting-Off Wheels
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Minimum
                                                     Wheel      exhaust
             Wheel diameter (inches)                 width      volume
                                                   (inches)    (feet <SUP>3/
                                                                 min.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
To 9............................................      1\1/2\         220
Over 9 to 16....................................           2         390
Over 16 to 19...................................           3         500
Over 19 to 24...................................           4         610
Over 24 to 30...................................           5         880
Over 30 to 36...................................           6       1,200
------------------------------------------------------------------------


For any wheel wider than wheel diameters shown in Table G-4, increase 
the exhaust volume by the ratio of the new width to the width shown.


Example:
    If wheel width=4\1/2\ inches, then

                4.5<divide>4 x 610=686 (rounded to 690).

    (iii) Scratch-brush wheels and all buffing and polishing wheels 
mounted on floor stands, pedestals, benches, or special-purpose machines 
shall have not less than the minimum exhaust volume shown in Table G-5.

                 Table G-5--Buffing and Polishing Wheels
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Minimum
                                                     Wheel      exhaust
             Wheel diameter (inches)                 width      volume
                                                   (inches)    (feet <SUP>3/
                                                                 min.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
To 9............................................           2         300
Over 9 to 16....................................           3         500
Over 16 to 19...................................           4         610
Over 19 to 24...................................           5         740
Over 24 to 30...................................           6       1,040
Over 30 to 36...................................           6       1,200
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iv) Grinding wheels or discs for horizontal single-spindle disc 
grinders shall be hooded to collect the dust or dirt generated by the 
grinding operation and the hoods shall be connected to branch pipes 
having exhaust volumes as shown in Table G-6.

            Table G-6--Horizontal Single-Spindle Disc Grinder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Exhaust
                                                                volume
                   Disc diameter (inches)                       (ft. <SUP>3/
                                                                 min.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 12....................................................         220
Over 12 to 19...............................................         390
Over 19 to 30...............................................         610

[[Page 180]]

Over 30 to 36...............................................         880
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (v) Grinding wheels or discs for horizontal double-spindle disc 
grinders shall have a hood enclosing the grinding chamber and the hood 
shall be connected to one or more branch pipes having exhaust volumes as 
shown in Table G-7.

            Table G-7--Horizontal Double-Spindle Disc Grinder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Exhaust
                                                                volume
                   Disc diameter (inches)                       (ft. <SUP>3/
                                                                 min.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 19....................................................         610
Over 19 to 25...............................................         880
Over 25 to 30...............................................       1,200
Over 30 to 53...............................................       1,770
Over 53 to 72...............................................       6,280
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (vi) Grinding wheels or discs for vertical single-spindle disc 
grinders shall be encircled with hoods to remove the dust generated in 
the operation. The hoods shall be connected to one or more branch pipes 
having exhaust volumes as shown in Table G-8.

                Table G-8--Vertical Spindle Disc Grinder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                One-half or more of    Disc not covered
                                    disc covered    --------------------
                               ---------------------
    Disc diameter (inches)                  Exhaust              Exhaust
                                Number \1\  foot <SUP>3/  Number \1\  foot <SUP>3/
                                              min.                 min.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 20......................          1       500          2       780
Over 20 to 30.................          2       780          2     1,480
Over 30 to 53.................          2     1,770          4     3,530
Over 53 to 72.................          2     3,140          5     6,010
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Number of exhaust outlets around periphery of hood, or equal
  distribution provided by other means.

    (vii) Grinding and polishing belts shall be provided with hoods to 
remove dust and dirt generated in the operations and the hoods shall be 
connected to branch pipes having exhaust volumes as shown in Table G-9.

                 Table G-9--Grinding and Polishing Belts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Exhaust
                                                                volume
                    Belts width (inches)                        (ft. <SUP>3/
                                                                 min.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 3.....................................................         220
Over 3 to 5.................................................         300
Over 5 to 7.................................................         390
Over 7 to 9.................................................         500
Over 9 to 11................................................         610
Over 11 to 13...............................................         740
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (viii) Cradles and swing-frame grinders. Where cradles are used for 
handling the parts to be ground, polished, or buffed, requiring large 
partial enclosures to house the complete operation, a minimum average 
air velocity of 150 feet per minute shall be maintained over the entire 
opening of the enclosure. Swing-frame grinders shall also be exhausted 
in the same manner as provided for cradles. (See fig. G-3)
    (ix) Where the work is outside the hood, air volumes must be 
increased as shown in American Standard Fundamentals Governing the 
Design and Operation of Local Exhaust Systems, Z9.2-1960 (section 4, 
exhaust hoods).
    (4) Exhaust systems. (i) Exhaust systems for grinding, polishing, 
and buffing operations should be designed in accordance with American 
Standard Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of Local 
Exhaust Systems, Z9.2-1960.
    (ii) Exhaust systems for grinding, polishing, and buffing operations 
shall be tested in the manner described in American Standard 
Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of Local Exhaust 
Systems, Z9.2-1960.
    (iii) All exhaust systems shall be provided with suitable dust 
collectors.
    (5) Hood and enclosure design. (i)(a) It is the dual function of 
grinding and abrasive cutting-off wheel hoods to protect the operator 
from the hazards of bursting wheels as well as to provide a means for 
the removal of dust and dirt generated. All hoods shall be not less in 
structural strength than specified in the American National Standard 
Safety Code for the Use, Care, and Protection of Abrasive Wheels, B7.1-
1970, which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (b) Due to the variety of work and types of grinding machines 
employed,

[[Page 181]]

it is necessary to develop hoods adaptable to the particular machine in 
question, and such hoods shall be located as close as possible to the 
operation.
    (ii) Exhaust hoods for floor stands, pedestals, and bench grinders 
shall be designed in accordance with figure G-2. The adjustable tongue 
shown in the figure shall be kept in working order and shall be adjusted 
within one-fourth inch of the wheel periphery at all times.
    (iii) Swing-frame grinders shall be provided with exhaust booths as 
indicated in figure G-3.
    (iv) Portable grinding operations, whenever the nature of the work 
permits, shall be conducted within a partial enclosure. The opening in 
the enclosure shall be no larger than is actually required in the 
operation and an average face air velocity of not less than 200 feet per 
minute shall be maintained.
    (v) Hoods for polishing and buffing and scratch-brush wheels shall 
be constructed to conform as closely to figure G-4 as the nature of the 
work will permit.
    (vi) Cradle grinding and polishing operations shall be performed 
within a partial enclosure similar to figure G-5. The operator shall be 
positioned outside the working face of the opening of the enclosure. The 
face opening of the enclosure should not be any greater in area than 
that actually required for the performance of the operation and the 
average air velocity into the working face of the enclosure shall not be 
less than 150 feet per minute.
    (vii) Hoods for horizontal single-spindle disc grinders shall be 
constructed to conform as closely as possible to the hood shown in 
figure G-6. It is essential that there be a space between the back of 
the wheel and the hood, and a space around the periphery of the wheel of 
at least 1 inch in order to permit the suction to act around the wheel 
periphery. The opening on the side of the disc shall be no larger than 
is required for the grinding operation, but must never be less than 
twice the area of the branch outlet.
    (viii) Horizontal double-spindle disc grinders shall have a hood 
encircling the wheels and grinding chamber similar to that illustrated 
in figure G-7. The openings for passing the work into the grinding 
chamber should be kept as small as possible, but must never be less than 
twice the area of the branch outlets.
    (ix) Vertical-spindle disc grinders shall be encircled with a hood 
so constructed that the heavy dust is drawn off a surface of the disc 
and the lighter dust exhausted through a continuous slot at the top of 
the hood as shown in figure G-1.
    (x) Grinding and polishing belt hoods shall be constructed as close 
to the operation as possible. The hood should extend almost to the belt, 
and 1-inch wide openings should be provided on either side. Figure G-8 
shows a typical hood for a belt operation.

[[Page 182]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.015


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Dia D. inches                        Exhaust E       Volume
--------------------------------------------------------------------  Exhausted
                                                                      at 4,500                 Note
                  Min.                      Max.      No      Dia.   ft/min ft<SUP>3/
                                                    Pipes                min
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               20        1   4\1/4\         500  When one-half or more of the
                                                                                  disc can be hooded, use
                                                                                  exhaust ducts as shown at the
                                                                                  left.
Over 20.................................       30        2        4         780
Over 30.................................       72        2        6       1,770
Over 53.................................       72        2        8       3,140
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               20        2        4         780  When no hood can be used over
                                                                                  disc, use exhaust ducts as
                                                                                  shown at left.
Over 20.................................       20        2        4         780
Over 30.................................       30        2   5\1/2\       1,480
Over 53.................................       53        4        6       3,530
                                               72        5        7       6,010
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Entry loss=1.0 slot velocity pressure + 0.5 branch velocity pressure.
Minimum slot velocity=2,000 ft/min--\1/2\-inch slot width.


[[Page 183]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.016


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Wheel dimension, inches
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   Exhaust    Volume of
                                  Diameter                                                  outlet,     air at
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- Width, Max   inches E    4,500 ft/
                              Min=d                                  Max=D                                min
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           9      1\1/2\           3         220
Over 9..........................................................          16           2           4         390
Over 16.........................................................          19           3      4\1/2\         500
Over 19.........................................................          24           4           5         610
Over 24.........................................................          30           5           6         880
Over 30.........................................................          36           6           7       1,200
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Entry loss = 0.45 velocity pressure for tapered takeoff 0.65 velocity pressure for straight takeoff.


[[Page 184]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.017


[[Page 185]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.018


                                       Standard Buffing and Polishing Hood
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Wheel dimension, inches
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   Exhaust    Volume of
                                  Diameter                                                  outlet,     air at
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- Width, Max   inches E    4,500 ft/
                              Min=d                                  Max=D                                min
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           9           2      3\1/2\         300
Over 9..........................................................          16           3           4         500
Over 16.........................................................          19           4           5         610
Over 19.........................................................          24           5      5\1/2\         740
Over 24.........................................................          30           6      6\1/2\       1.040
Over 30.........................................................          36           6           7       1.200
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Entry loss = 0.15 velocity pressure for tapered takeoff; 0.65 velocity pressure for straight takeoff.


[[Page 186]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.019


[[Page 187]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.020


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Dia D, inches                                  Volume
------------------------------------------------ Exhaust E,   exhausted
                                                    dia.     at 4,500 ft/
                Min.                    Max.       inches     min ft <SUP>3/
                                                                 min
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             12           3          220
Over 12............................          19           4          390
Over 19............................          30           5          610
Over 30............................          36           6          880
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: If grinding wheels are used for disc grinding purposes, hoods must
  conform to structural strength and materials as described in 9.1.
Entry loss = 0.45 velocity pressure for tapered takeoff.


[[Page 188]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.021


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Disc dia. inches                        Exhaust E          Volume
------------------------------------------------------------------------ exhaust at
                                                                          4,500 ft/              Note
                Min.                    Max.      No Pipes      Dia.     min. ft  <SUP>3/
                                                                             min
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             19           1           5         610
Over 19............................          25           1           6         880  When width ``W'' permits,
                                                                                      exhaust ducts should be as
                                                                                      near heaviest grinding as
                                                                                      possible.
Over 25............................          30           1           7       1,200
Over 30............................          53           2           6       1,770
Over 53............................          72           4           8       6,280
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Entry loss = 0.45 velocity pressure for tapered takeoff.


[[Page 189]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.022


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Exhaust
                    Belt width W. Inches                        volume.
                                                               ft.<SUP>1/min
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 3.....................................................         220
3 to 5......................................................         300
5 to 7......................................................         390
7 to 9......................................................         500
9 to 11.....................................................         610
11 to 13....................................................         740
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minimum duct velocity = 4,500 ft/min branch, 3,500 ft/min main.
Entry loss = 0.45 velocity pressure for tapered takeoff; 0.65 velocity
  pressure for straight takeoff.

    (6) Scope. This paragraph (b), prescribes the use of exhaust hood 
enclosures and systems in removing dust, dirt, fumes, and gases 
generated through the grinding, polishing, or buffing of ferrous and 
nonferrous metals.
    (c) Spray finishing operations--(1) Definitions applicable to this 
paragraph--(i) Spray-finishing operations. Spray-finishing operations 
are employment of methods wherein organic or inorganic materials are 
utilized in dispersed form for deposit on surfaces to be coated, 
treated, or cleaned. Such methods of deposit may involve either 
automatic, manual, or electrostatic deposition but do not include metal 
spraying or metallizing, dipping, flow coating, roller coating, 
tumbling, centrifuging, or spray washing and degreasing as conducted in 
self-contained washing and degreasing machines or systems.
    (ii) Spray booth. Spray booths are defined and described in 
Sec. 1910.107(a). (See sections 103, 104, and 105 of the Standard for 
Spray Finishing Using Flammable and Combustible Materials, NFPA No. 33-
1969, which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6).
    (iii) Spray room. A spray room is a room in which spray-finishing 
operations not conducted in a spray booth are performed separately from 
other areas.
    (iv) Minimum maintained velocity. Minimum maintained velocity is the 
velocity of air movement which must be maintained in order to meet 
minimum specified requirements for health and safety.
    (2) Location and application. Spray booths or spray rooms are to be 
used to enclose or confine all operations. Spray-finishing operations 
shall be located as provided in sections 201 through 206 of the Standard 
for Spray Finishing Using Flammable and Combustible Materials, NFPA No. 
33-1969.
    (3) Design and construction of spray booths. (i) Spray booths shall 
be designed and constructed in accordance with Sec. 1910.107(b) (1) 
through (4) and (6) through (10) (see sections 301-304 and 306-310 of 
the Standard for Spray Finishing Using Flammable and Combustible 
Materials, NFPA No. 33-1969), for general construction specifications. 
For a more detailed discussion of fundamentals relating to this subject, 
see ANSI Z9.2-1960
    (a) Lights, motors, electrical equipment, and other sources of 
ignition shall conform to the requirements of Sec. 1910.107 (b)(10) and 
(c). (See section 310 and chapter 4 of the Standard for Spray Finishing 
Using Flammable and Combustible Materials NFPA No. 33-1969.)
    (b) In no case shall combustible material be used in the 
construction of a spray booth and supply or exhaust duct connected to 
it.

[[Page 190]]

    (ii) Unobstructed walkways shall not be less than 6\1/2\ feet high 
and shall be maintained clear of obstruction from any work location in 
the booth to a booth exit or open booth front. In booths where the open 
front is the only exit, such exits shall be not less than 3 feet wide. 
In booths having multiple exits, such exits shall not be less than 2 
feet wide, provided that the maximum distance from the work location to 
the exit is 25 feet or less. Where booth exits are provided with doors, 
such doors shall open outward from the booth.
    (iii) Baffles, distribution plates, and dry-type overspray 
collectors shall conform to the requirements of Sec. 1910.107(b) (4) and 
(5). (See sections 304 and 305 of the Standard for Spray Finishing Using 
Flammable and Combustible Materials, NFPA No. 33-1969.)
    (a) Overspray filters shall be installed and maintained in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 1910.107 (b)(5), (see section 
305 of the Standard for Spray Finishing Using Flammable and Combustible 
Materials, NFPA No. 33-1969), and shall only be in a location easily 
accessible for inspection, cleaning, or replacement.
    (b) Where effective means, independent of the overspray filters, are 
installed which will result in design air distribution across the booth 
cross section, it is permissible to operate the booth without the 
filters in place.
    (iv) (a) For wet or water-wash spray booths, the water-chamber 
enclosure, within which intimate contact of contaminated air and 
cleaning water or other cleaning medium is maintained, if made of steel, 
shall be 18 gage or heavier and adequately protected against corrosion.
    (b) Chambers may include scrubber spray nozzles, headers, troughs, 
or other devices. Chambers shall be provided with adequate means for 
creating and maintaining scrubbing action for removal of particulate 
matter from the exhaust air stream.
    (v) Collecting tanks shall be of welded steel construction or other 
suitable non-combustible material. If pits are used as collecting tanks, 
they shall be concrete, masonry, or other material having similar 
properties.
    (a) Tanks shall be provided with weirs, skimmer plates, or screens 
to prevent sludge and floating paint from entering the pump suction box. 
Means for automatically maintaining the proper water level shall also be 
provided. Fresh water inlets shall not be submerged. They shall 
terminate at least one pipe diameter above the safety overflow level of 
the tank.
    (b) Tanks shall be so constructed as to discourage accumulation of 
hazardous deposits.
    (vi) Pump manifolds, risers, and headers shall be adequately sized 
to insure sufficient water flow to provide efficient operation of the 
water chamber.
    (4) Design and construction of spray rooms. (i) Spray rooms, 
including floors, shall be constructed of masonry, concrete, or other 
noncombustible material.
    (ii) Spray rooms shall have noncombustible fire doors and shutters.
    (iii) Spray rooms shall be adequately ventilated so that the 
atmosphere in the breathing zone of the operator shall be maintained in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraph (c)(6)(ii) of this 
section.
    (iv) Spray rooms used for production spray-finishing operations 
shall conform to the requirements for spray booths.
    (5) Ventilation. (i) Ventilation shall be provided in accordance 
with provisions of Sec. 1910.107(d) (see chapter 5 of the Standard for 
Spray Finishing Using Flammable or Combustible Materials, NFPA No. 33-
1969), and in accordance with the following:
    (a) Where a fan plenum is used to equalize or control the 
distribution of exhaust air movement through the booth, it shall be of 
sufficient strength or rigidity to withstand the differential air 
pressure or other superficially imposed loads for which the equipment is 
designed and also to facilitate cleaning. Construction specifications 
shall be at least equivalent to those of paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this 
section.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (ii) Inlet or supply ductwork used to transport makeup air to spray 
booths or surrounding areas shall be constructed of noncombustible 
materials.
    (a) If negative pressure exists within inlet ductwork, all seams and 
joints

[[Page 191]]

shall be sealed if there is a possibility of infiltration of harmful 
quantities of noxious gases, fumes, or mists from areas through which 
ductwork passes.
    (b) Inlet ductwork shall be sized in accordance with volume flow 
requirements and provide design air requirements at the spray booth.
    (c) Inlet ductwork shall be adequately supported throughout its 
length to sustain at least its own weight plus any negative pressure 
which is exerted upon it under normal operating conditions.
    (iii)(a) Exhaust ductwork shall be adequately supported throughout 
its length to sustain its weight plus any normal accumulation in 
interior during normal operating conditions and any negative pressure 
exerted upon it.
    (b) Exhaust ductwork shall be sized in accordance with good design 
practice which shall include consideration of fan capacity, length of 
duct, number of turns and elbows, variation in size, volume, and 
character of materials being exhausted. See American National Standard 
Z9.2-1960 for further details and explanation concerning elements of 
design.
    (c) Longitudinal joints in sheet steel ductwork shall be either 
lock-seamed, riveted, or welded. For other than steel construction, 
equivalent securing of joints shall be provided.
    (d) Circumferential joints in ductwork shall be substantially 
fastened together and lapped in the direction of airflow. At least every 
fourth joint shall be provided with connecting flanges, bolted together, 
or of equivalent fastening security.
    (e) Inspection or clean-out doors shall be provided for every 9 to 
12 feet of running length for ducts up to 12 inches in diameter, but the 
distance between cleanout doors may be greater for larger pipes. (See 
8.3.21 of American National Standard Z9.1-1951, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.) A clean-out door or doors shall 
be provided for servicing the fan, and where necessary, a drain shall be 
provided.
    (f) Where ductwork passes through a combustible roof or wall, the 
roof or wall shall be protected at the point of penetration by open 
space or fire-resistive material between the duct and the roof or wall. 
When ducts pass through firewalls, they shall be provided with automatic 
fire dampers on both sides of the wall, except that three-eighth-inch 
steel plates may be used in lieu of automatic fire dampers for ducts not 
exceeding 18 inches in diameter.
    (g) Ductwork used for ventilating any process covered in this 
standard shall not be connected to ducts ventilating any other process 
or any chimney or flue used for conveying any products of combustion.
    (6) Velocity and air flow requirements. (i) Except where a spray 
booth has an adequate air replacement system, the velocity of air into 
all openings of a spray booth shall be not less than that specified in 
Table G-10 for the operating conditions specified. An adequate air 
replacement system is one which introduces replacement air upstream or 
above the object being sprayed and is so designed that the velocity of 
air in the booth cross section is not less than that specified in Table 
G-10 when measured upstream or above the object being sprayed.

                           Table G-10--Minimum Maintained Velocities Into Spray Booths
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                Airflow velocities, f.p.m.
     Operating conditions for objects            Crossdraft, f.p.m.     ----------------------------------------
          completely inside booth                                                   Design               Range
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Electrostatic and automatic airless         Negligible.................  50 large booth.............       50-75
 operation contained in booth without
 operator.
                                                                         100 small booth............      75-125
Air-operated guns, manual or automatic....  Up to 50...................  100 large booth............      75-125
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                         150 small booth............     125-175
Air-operated guns, manual or automatic....  Up to 100..................  150 large booth............     125-175
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                         200 small booth............     150-250
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:
  (1) Attention is invited to the fact that the effectiveness of the spray booth is dependent upon the
  relationship of the depth of the booth to its height and width.

[[Page 192]]

  (2) Crossdrafts can be eliminated through proper design and such design should be sought. Crossdrafts in
  excess of 100fpm (feet per minute) should not be permitted.
  (3) Excessive air pressures result in loss of both efficiency and material waste in addition to creating a
  backlash that may carry overspray and fumes into adjacent work areas.
  (4) Booths should be designed with velocities shown in the column headed ``Design.'' However, booths operating
  with velocities shown in the column headed ``Range'' are in compliance with this standard.

    (ii) In addition to the requirements in paragraph (c)(6)(i) of this 
section the total air volume exhausted through a spray booth shall be 
such as to dilute solvent vapor to at least 25 percent of the lower 
explosive limit of the solvent being sprayed. An example of the method 
of calculating this volume is given below.

    Example: To determine the lower explosive limits of the most common 
solvents used in spray finishing, see Table G-11. Column 1 gives the 
number of cubic feet of vapor per gallon of solvent and column 2 gives 
the lower explosive limit (LEL) in percentage by volume of air. Note 
that the quantity of solvent will be diminished by the quantity of 
solids and nonflammables contained in the finish.
    To determine the volume of air in cubic feet necessary to dilute the 
vapor from 1 gallon of solvent to 25 percent of the lower explosive 
limit, apply the following formula:

 Dilution volume required per gallon of solvent=4 (100-LEL) (cubic feet 
                    of vapor per gallon)<divide> LEL

Using toluene as the solvent.
    (1) LEL of toluene from Table G-11, column 2, is 1.4 percent.
    (2) Cubic feet of vapor per gallon from Table G-11, column 1, is 
30.4 cubic feet per gallon.
    (3) Dilution volume required=

             4 (100-1.4) 30.4<divide> 1.4=8,564 cubic feet.

    (4) To convert to cubic feet per minute of required ventilation, 
multiply the dilution volume required per gallon of solvent by the 
number of gallons of solvent evaporated per minute.

    Table G-11--Lower Explosive Limit of Some Commonly Used Solvents
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Lower
                                                  Cubic feet   explosive
                                                  per gallon   limit in
                     Solvent                       of vapor   percent by
                                                   of liquid   volume of
                                                  at 70 deg.   air at 70
                                                      F.        deg. F
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Column 1    Column 2
Acetone.........................................        44.0         2.6
Amyl Acetate (iso)..............................        21.6     \1\ 1.0
Amyl Alcohol (n)................................        29.6         1.2
Amyl Alcohol (iso)..............................        29.6         1.2
Benzene.........................................        36.8     \1\ 1.4
Butyl Acetate (n)...............................        24.8         1.7
Butyl Alcohol (n)...............................        35.2         1.4
Butyl Cellosolve................................        24.8         1.1
Cellosolve......................................        33.6         1.8
Cellosolve Acetate..............................        23.2         1.7
Cyclohexanone...................................        31.2     \1\ 1.1
1,1 Dichloroethylene............................        42.4         5.9
1,2 Dichloroethylene............................        42.4         9.7
Ethyl Acetate...................................        32.8         2.5
Ethyl Alcohol...................................        55.2         4.3
Ethyl Lactate...................................        28.0     \1\ 1.5
Methyl Acetate..................................        40.0         3.1
Methyl Alcohol..................................        80.8         7.3
Methyl Cellosolve...............................        40.8         2.5
Methyl Ethyl Ketone.............................        36.0         1.8
Methyl n-Propyl Ketone..........................        30.4         1.5
Naphtha (VM&P) (76 deg. Naphtha)................        22.4         0.9
Naphtha (100 deg. Flash) Safety Solvent--
 Stoddard Solvent...............................        23.2         1.0
Propyl Acetate (n)..............................        27.2         2.8
Propyl Acetate (iso)............................        28.0         1.1
Propyl Alcohol (n)..............................        44.8         2.1
Propyl Alcohol (iso)............................        44.0         2.0
Toluene.........................................        30.4         1.4
Turpentine......................................        20.8         0.8
Xylene (o)......................................        26.4         1.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ At 212 deg. F.

    (iii)(a) When an operator is in a booth downstream from the object 
being sprayed, an air-supplied respirator or other type of respirator 
must be used by employees that has been approved by NIOSH under 42 CFR 
part 84 for the material being sprayed.
    (b) Where downdraft booths are provided with doors, such doors shall 
be closed when spray painting.
    (7) Make-up air. (i) Clean fresh air, free of contamination from 
adjacent industrial exhaust systems, chimneys, stacks, or vents, shall 
be supplied to a spray booth or room in quantities equal to the volume 
of air exhausted through the spray booth.
    (ii) Where a spray booth or room receives make-up air through self-
closing doors, dampers, or louvers, they shall be fully open at all 
times when the booth or room is in use for spraying.

[[Page 193]]

The velocity of air through such doors, dampers, or louvers shall not 
exceed 200 feet per minute. If the fan characteristics are such that the 
required air flow through the booth will be provided, higher velocities 
through the doors, dampers, or louvers may be used.
    (iii)(a) Where the air supply to a spray booth or room is filtered, 
the fan static pressure shall be calculated on the assumption that the 
filters are dirty to the extent that they require cleaning or 
replacement.
    (b) The rating of filters shall be governed by test data supplied by 
the manufacturer of the filter. A pressure gage shall be installed to 
show the pressure drop across the filters. This gage shall be marked to 
show the pressure drop at which the filters require cleaning or 
replacement. Filters shall be replaced or cleaned whenever the pressure 
drop across them becomes excessive or whenever the air flow through the 
face of the booth falls below that specified in Table G-10.
    (iv)(a) Means for heating make-up air to any spray booth or room, 
before or at the time spraying is normally performed, shall be provided 
in all places where the outdoor temperature may be expected to remain 
below 55 deg. F. for appreciable periods of time during the operation of 
the booth except where adequate and safe means of radiant heating for 
all operating personnel affected is provided. The replacement air during 
the heating seasons shall be maintained at not less than 65 deg. F. at 
the point of entry into the spray booth or spray room. When otherwise 
unheated make-up air would be at a temperature of more than 10 deg. F. 
below room temperature, its temperature shall be regulated as provided 
in section 3.6.3 of ANSI Z9.2-1960.
    (b) As an alternative to an air replacement system complying with 
the preceding section, general heating of the building in which the 
spray room or booth is located may be employed provided that all 
occupied parts of the building are maintained at not less than 65 deg. 
F. when the exhaust system is in operation or the general heating system 
supplemented by other sources of heat may be employed to meet this 
requirement.
    (c) No means of heating make-up air shall be located in a spray 
booth.
    (d) Where make-up air is heated by coal or oil, the products of 
combustion shall not be allowed to mix with the make-up air, and the 
products of combustion shall be conducted outside the building through a 
flue terminating at a point remote from all points where make-up air 
enters the building.
    (e) Where make-up air is heated by gas, and the products of 
combustion are not mixed with the make-up air but are conducted through 
an independent flue to a point outside the building remote from all 
points where make-up air enters the building, it is not necessary to 
comply with paragraph (c)(7)(iv)(f) of this section.
    (f) Where make-up air to any manually operated spray booth or room 
is heated by gas and the products of combustion are allowed to mix with 
the supply air, the following precautions must be taken:
    (1) The gas must have a distinctive and strong enough odor to warn 
workmen in a spray booth or room of its presence if in an unburned state 
in the make-up air.
    (2) The maximum rate of gas supply to the make-up air heater burners 
must not exceed that which would yield in excess of 200 p.p.m. (parts 
per million) of carbon monoxide or 2,000 p.p.m. of total combustible 
gases in the mixture if the unburned gas upon the occurrence of flame 
failure were mixed with all of the make-up air supplied.
    (3) A fan must be provided to deliver the mixture of heated air and 
products of combustion from the plenum chamber housing the gas burners 
to the spray booth or room.
    (8) Scope. Spray booths or spray rooms are to be used to enclose or 
confine all spray finishing operations covered by this paragraph (c). 
This paragraph does not apply to the spraying of the exteriors of 
buildings, fixed tanks, or similar structures, nor to small portable 
spraying apparatus not used repeatedly in the same location.
    (d) Open surface tanks--(1) General. (i) This paragraph applies to 
all operations involving the immersion of materials in liquids, or in 
the vapors of such liquids, for the purpose of cleaning or altering the 
surface or adding to

[[Page 194]]

or imparting a finish thereto or changing the character of the 
materials, and their subsequent removal from the liquid or vapor, 
draining, and drying. These operations include washing, electroplating, 
anodizing, pickling, quenching, dying, dipping, tanning, dressing, 
bleaching, degreasing, alkaline cleaning, stripping, rinsing, digesting, 
and other similar operations.
    (ii) Except where specific construction specifications are 
prescribed in this section, hoods, ducts, elbows, fans, blowers, and all 
other exhaust system parts, components, and supports thereof shall be so 
constructed as to meet conditions of service and to facilitate 
maintenance and shall conform in construction to the specifications 
contained in American National Standard Fundamentals Governing the 
Design and Operation of Local Exhaust Systems, Z9.2-1960.
    (2) Classification of open-surface tank operations. (i) Open-surface 
tank operations shall be classified into 16 classes, numbered A-1 to D-
4, inclusive.
    (ii) Determination of class. Class is determined by two factors, 
hazard potential designated by a letter from A to D, inclusive, and rate 
of gas, vapor, or mist evolution designated by a number from 1 to 4, 
inclusive (for example, B.3).
    (iii) Hazard potential is an index, on a scale of from A to D, 
inclusive, of the severity of the hazard associated with the substance 
contained in the tank because of the toxic, flammable, or explosive 
nature of the vapor, gas, or mist produced therefrom. The toxic hazard 
is determined from the concentration, measured in parts by volume of a 
gas or vapor, per million parts by volume of contaminated air (p.p.m.), 
or in milligrams of mist per cubic meter of air (mg./m. <SUP>3</SUP>), 
below which ill effects are unlikely to occur to the exposed worker. The 
concentrations shall be those in Sec. 1910.1000.
    (iv) The relative fire or explosion hazard is measured in degrees 
Fahrenheit in terms of the closed-cup flash point of the substance in 
the tank. Detailed information on the prevention of fire hazards in dip 
tanks may be found in Dip Tanks Containing Flammable or Combustible 
Liquids, NFPA No. 34-1966, National Fire Protection Association, which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. Where the tank 
contains a mixture of liquids, other than organic solvents, whose 
effects are additive, the hygienic standard of the most toxic component 
(for example, the one having the lowest p.p.m. or mg./m. <SUP>3</SUP>) 
shall be used, except where such substance constitutes an 
insignificantly small fraction of the mixture. For mixtures of organic 
solvents, their combined effect, rather than that of either 
individually, shall determine the hazard potential. In the absence of 
information to the contrary, the effects shall be considered as 
additive. If the sum of the ratios of the airborne concentration of each 
contaminant to the toxic concentration of that contaminant exceeds 
unity, the toxic concentration shall be considered to have been 
exceeded. (See Note A to subdivision (v) of this subparagraph.)
    (v) Hazard potential shall be determined from Table G-12, with the 
value indicating greater hazard being used. When the hazardous material 
may be either a vapor with a threshhold limit value (TLV) in p.p.m. or a 
mist with a TLV in mg./m.<INF>3</INF>, the TLV indicating the greater 
hazard shall be used (for example, A takes precedence over B or C; B 
over C; C over D).


    Note A:

(c<INF>1</INF><divide>TLV<INF>1</INF>)+(c<INF>2</INF><divide>TLV<INF>2</INF>)
            +(c<INF>3</INF><divide>TLV<INF>3</INF>)+; . . . 
                 (c<INF>N</INF><divide>TLV<INF>N</INF>)1

where:

    c=Concentration measured at the operation in p.p.m.

              Table G-12--Determination of Hazard Potential
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Toxicity group
                                        --------------------------------
                                                                 Flash
            Hazard potential               Gas or   Mist (mg./ point (in
                                           vapor       m<SUP>3)      degrees
                                          (p.p.m.)                F.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A......................................       0-10      0-0.1  .........
B......................................     11-100   0.11-1.0  Under 100
C......................................    101-500     1.1-10    100-200
D......................................   Over 500    Over 10   Over 200
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (vi) Rate of gas, vapor, or mist evolution is a numerical index, on 
a scale of from 1 to 4, inclusive, both of the relative capacity of the 
tank to produce gas, vapor, or mist and of the

[[Page 195]]

relative energy with which it is projected or carried upwards from the 
tank. Rate is evaluated in terms of
    (a) The temperature of the liquid in the tank in degrees Fahrenheit;
    (b) The number of degrees Fahrenheit that this temperature is below 
the boiling point of the liquid in degrees Fahrenheit;
    (c) The relative evaporation of the liquid in still air at room 
temperature in an arbitrary scale--fast, medium, slow, or nil; and
    (d) The extent that the tank gases or produces mist in an arbitrary 
scale--high, medium, low, and nil. (See Table G-13, Note 2.) Gassing 
depends upon electrochemical or mechanical processes, the effects of 
which have to be individually evaluated for each installation (see Table 
G-13, Note 3).
    (vii) Rate of evolution shall be determined from Table G-13. When 
evaporation and gassing yield different rates, the lowest numerical 
value shall be used.

                     Table G-13--Determination of Rate of Gas, Vapor, or Mist Evolution \1\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Degrees
                                           Liquid         below    Relative evaporation
                Rate                 temperature, deg.   boiling            \2\                 Gassing \3\
                                             F.           point
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..................................       Over 200          0-20  Fast..................  High.
2..................................        150-200         21-50  Medium................  Medium.
3..................................         94-149        51-100  Slow..................  Low.
4..................................       Under 94      Over 100  Nil...................  Nil.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In certain classes of equipment, specifically vapor degreasers, an internal condenser or vapor level
  thermostat is used to prevent the vapor from leaving the tank during normal operation. In such cases, rate of
  vapor evolution from the tank into the workroom is not dependent upon the factors listed in the table, but
  rather upon abnormalities of operating procedure, such as carryout of vapors from excessively fast action,
  dragout of liquid by entrainment in parts, contamination of solvent by water and other materials, or improper
  heat balance. When operating procedure is excellent, effective rate of evolution may be taken as 4. When
  operating procedure is average, the effective rate of evolution may be taken as 3. When operation is poor, a
  rate of 2 or 1 is indicated, depending upon observed conditions.
\2\ Relative evaporation rate is determined according to the methods described by A. K. Doolittle in Industrial
  and Engineering Chemistry, vol. 27, p. 1169, (3) where time for 100-percent evaporation is as follows: Fast: 0-
  3 hours; Medium: 3-12 hours; Slow: 12-50 hours; Nil: more than 50 hours.
\3\ Gassing means the formation by chemical or electrochemical action of minute bubbles of gas under the surface
  of the liquid in the tank and is generally limited to aqueous solutions.

    (3) Ventilation. Where ventilation is used to control potential 
exposures to workers as defined in subparagraph (2)(iii) of this 
paragraph, it shall be adequate to reduce the concentration of the air 
contaminant to the degree that a hazard to the worker does not exist. 
Methods of ventilation are discussed in American National Standard 
Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of Local Exhaust 
Systems, Z9.2-1960.
    (4) Control requirements. (i) Control velocities shall conform to 
Table G-14 in all cases where the flow of air past the breathing or 
working zone of the operator and into the hoods is undisturbed by local 
environmental conditions, such as open windows, wall fans, unit heaters, 
or moving machinery.
    (ii) All tanks exhausted by means of hoods which
    (a) Project over the entire tank;
    (b) Are fixed in position in such a location that the head of the 
workman, in all his normal operating positions while working at the 
tank, is in front of all hood openings; and
    (c) Are completely enclosed on at least two sides, shall be 
considered to be exhausted through an enclosing hood.
    (d) The quantity of air in cubic feet per minute necessary to be 
exhausted through an enclosing hood shall be not less than the product 
of the control velocity times the net area of all openings in the 
enclosure through which air can flow into the hood.

              Table G-14--Control Velocities in Feet Per Minute (f.p.m.) for Undisturbed Locations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Enclosing hood                       Canopy hood \2\
                                                    ------------------------   Lateral   -----------------------
                       Class                          One open    Two open   exhaust \1\  Three open   Four open
                                                        side        sides                    sides       sides
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
B-1 and A-2........................................         100         150          150  Do not use  Do not use
A-3 \2\, B-1, B-2, and C-1.........................          75         100          100         125         175
A-3, C-2, and D-1 \3\..............................          65          90           75         100         150
B-4 \2\, C-3, and D-2 \3\..........................          50          75           50          75         125
A-4, C-4, D-3 \3\, and D-4 \4\.....................  ..........  ..........  ...........  ..........  ..........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Table G-15 for computation of ventilation rate.
\2\ Do not use canopy hood for Hazard Potential A processes.

[[Page 196]]

\3\ Where complete control of hot water is desired, design as next highest class.
\4\ General room ventilation required.

    (iii) All tanks exhausted by means of hoods which do not project 
over the entire tank, and in which the direction of air movement into 
the hood or hoods is substantially horizontal, shall be considered to be 
laterally exhausted. The quantity of air in cubic feet per minute 
necessary to be laterally exhausted per square foot of tank area in 
order to maintain the required control velocity shall be determined from 
Table G-15 for all variations in ratio of tank width (W) to tank length 
(L). The total quantity of air in cubic feet per minute required to be 
exhausted per tank shall be not less than the product of the area of 
tank surface times the cubic feet per minute per square foot of tank 
area, determined from Table G-15.
    (a) For lateral exhaust hoods over 42 inches wide, or where it is 
desirable to reduce the amount of air removed from the workroom, air 
supply slots or orifices shall be provided along the side or the center 
of the tank opposite from the exhaust slots. The design of such systems 
shall meet the following criteria:
    (1) The supply air volume plus the entrained air shall not exceed 50 
percent of the exhaust volume.
    (2) The velocity of the supply airstream as it reaches the effective 
control area of the exhaust slot shall be less than the effective 
velocity over the exhaust slot area.

  Table G-15--Minimum Ventilation Rate in Cubic Feet of Air Per Minute Per Square Foot of Tank Area for Lateral
                                                     Exhaust
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                      C.f.m. per sq. ft. to maintain required minimum velocities
                                                       at following ratios (tank width (W)/tank length (L)).\1\,
   Required minimum control velocity, f.p.m. (from                                \2\
                     Table G-14)                     -----------------------------------------------------------
                                                       0.0-0.09    0.1-0.24    0.25-0.49   0.5-0.99     1.0-2.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hood along one side or two parallel sides of tank when one hood is against a wall or baffle.\2\
Also for a manifold along tank centerline.\3\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
50..................................................          50          60          75          90         100
75..................................................          75          90         110         130         150
100.................................................         100         125         150         175         200
150.................................................         150         190         225         260         300
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hood along one side or two parallel sides of free standing tank not against wall or baffle.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
50..................................................          75          90         100         110         125
75..................................................         110         130         150         170         190
100.................................................         150         175         200         225         250
150.................................................         225         260         300         340         375
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ It is not practicable to ventilate across the long dimension of a tank whose ratio W/L exceeds 2.0.
It is undesirable to do so when W/L exceeds 1.0. For circular tanks with lateral exhaust along up to 1/2 the
  circumference, use W/L=1.0; for over one-half the circumference use W/L=0.5.
\2\ Baffle is a vertical plate the same length as the tank, and with the top of the plate as high as the tank is
  wide. If he exhaust hood is on the side of a tank against a building wall or close to it, it is perfectly
  baffled.
\3\ Use W/2 as tank width in computing when manifold is along centerline, or when hoods are used on two parallel
  sides of a tank.
Tank Width (W) means the effective width over which the hood must pull air to operate (for example, where the
  hood face is set back from the edge of the tank, this set back must be added in measuring tank width). The
  surface area of tanks can frequently be reduced and better control obtained (particularly on conveyorized
  systems) by using covers extending from the upper edges of the slots toward the center of the tank.

    (3) The vertical height of the receiving exhaust hood, including any 
baffle, shall not be less than one-quarter the width of the tank.
    (4) The supply airstream shall not be allowed to impinge on 
obstructions between it and the exhaust slot in such a manner as to 
significantly interfere with the performance of the exhaust hood.
    (5) Since most failure of push-pull systems result from excessive 
supply air volumes and pressures, methods of measuring and adjusting the 
supply air shall be provided. When satisfactory

[[Page 197]]

control has been achieved, the adjustable features of the hood shall be 
fixed so that they will not be altered.
    (iv) All tanks exhausted by means of hoods which project over the 
entire tank, and which do not conform to the definition of enclosing 
hoods, shall be considered to be overhead canopy hoods. The quantity of 
air in cubic feet per minute necessary to be exhausted through a canopy 
hood shall be not less than the product of the control velocity times 
the net area of all openings between the bottom edges of the hood and 
the top edges of the tank.
    (v) The rate of vapor evolution (including steam or products of 
combustion) from the process shall be estimated. If the rate of vapor 
evolution is equal to or greater than 10 percent of the calculated 
exhaust volume required, the exhaust volume shall be increased in equal 
amount.
    (5) Spray cleaning and degreasing. Wherever spraying or other 
mechanical means are used to disperse a liquid above an open-surface 
tank, control must be provided for the airborne spray. Such operations 
shall be enclosed as completely as possible. The inward air velocity 
into the enclosure shall be sufficient to prevent the discharge of spray 
into the workroom. Mechanical baffles may be used to help prevent the 
discharge of spray. Spray painting operations are covered by paragraph 
(c) of this section.
    (6) Control means other than ventilation. Tank covers, foams, beads, 
chips, or other materials floating on the tank surface so as to confine 
gases, mists, or vapors to the area under the cover or to the foam, 
bead, or chip layer; or surface tension depressive agents added to the 
liquid in the tank to minimize mist formation, or any combination 
thereof, may all be used as gas, mist, or vapor control means for open-
surface tank operations, provided that they effectively reduce the 
concentrations of hazardous materials in the vicinity of the worker 
below the limits set in accordance with subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph.
    (7) System design. (i) The equipment for exhausting air shall have 
sufficient capacity to produce the flow of air required in each of the 
hoods and openings of the system.
    (ii) The capacity required in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph 
shall be obtained when the airflow producing equipment is operating 
against the following pressure losses, the sum of which is the static 
pressure:
    (a) Entrance losses into the hood.
    (b) Resistance to airflow in branch pipe including bends and 
transformations.
    (c) Entrance loss into the main pipe.
    (d) Resistance to airflow in main pipe including bends and 
transformations.
    (e) Resistance of mechanical equipment; that is, filters, washers, 
condensers, absorbers, etc., plus their entrance and exit losses.
    (f) Resistance in outlet duct and discharge stack.
    (iii) Two or more operations shall not be connected to the same 
exhaust system where either one or the combination of the substances 
removed may constitute a fire, explosion, or chemical reaction hazard in 
the duct system. Traps or other devices shall be provided to insure that 
condensate in ducts does not drain back into any tank.
    (iv) The exhaust system, consisting of hoods, ducts, air mover, and 
discharge outlet, shall be designed in accordance with American National 
Standard Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of Local 
Exhaust Systems, Z9.2-1960, or the manual, Industrial Ventilation, 
published by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists 1970, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6. Airflow and pressure loss data provided by the manufacturer 
of any air cleaning device shall be included in the design calculations.
    (8) Operation. (i) The required airflow shall be maintained at all 
times during which gas, mist, or vapor is emitted from the tank, and at 
all times the tank, the draining, or the drying area is in operation or 
use. When the system is first installed, the airflow from each hood 
shall be measured by means of a pitot traverse in the exhaust duct and 
corrective action taken if the flow is less than that required. When the 
proper flow is obtained, the hood static pressure shall be measured and 
recorded. At intervals of not more than 3 months operation, or after a 
prolonged

[[Page 198]]

shutdown period, the hoods and duct system shall be inspected for 
evidence of corrosion or damage. In any case where the airflow is found 
to be less than required, it shall be increased to the required value. 
(Information on airflow and static pressure measurement and calculations 
may be found in American National Standard Fundamental Governing the 
Design and Operation of Local Exhaust Systems, Z9.2-1960, or in the 
manual, Industrial Ventilation, published by the American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists.)
    (ii) The exhaust system shall discharge to the outer air in such a 
manner that the possibility of its effluent entering any building is at 
a minimum. Recirculation shall only be through a device for contaminant 
removal which will prevent the creation of a health hazard in the room 
or area to which the air is recirculated.
    (iii) A volume of outside air in the range of 90 percent to 110 
percent of the exhaust volume shall be provided to each room having 
exhaust hoods. The outside air supply shall enter the workroom in such a 
manner as not to be detrimental to any exhaust hood. The airflow of the 
makeup air system shall be measured on installation. Corrective action 
shall be taken when the airflow is below that required. The makeup air 
shall be uncontaminated.
    (9) Personal protection. (i) All employees working in and around 
open-surface tank operations must be instructed as to the hazards of 
their respective jobs, and in the personal protection and first aid 
procedures applicable to these hazards.
    (ii) All persons required to work in such a manner that their feet 
may become wet shall be provided with rubber or other impervious boots 
or shoes, rubbers, or wooden-soled shoes sufficient to keep feet dry.
    (iii) All persons required to handle work wet with a liquid other 
than water shall be provided with gloves impervious to such a liquid and 
of a length sufficient to prevent entrance of liquid into the tops of 
the gloves. The interior of gloves shall be kept free from corrosive or 
irritating contaminants.
    (iv) All persons required to work in such a manner that their 
clothing may become wet shall be provided with such aprons, coats, 
jackets, sleeves, or other garments made of rubber, or of other 
materials impervious to liquids other than water, as are required to 
keep their clothing dry. Aprons shall extend well below the top of boots 
to prevent liquid splashing into the boots. Provision of dry, clean, 
cotton clothing along with rubber shoes or short boots and an apron 
impervious to liquids other than water shall be considered a 
satisfactory substitute where small parts are cleaned, plated, or acid 
dipped in open tanks and rapid work is required.
    (v) Whenever there is a danger of splashing, for example, when 
additions are made manually to the tanks, or when acids and chemicals 
are removed from the tanks, the employees so engaged shall be required 
to wear either tight-fitting chemical goggles or an effective face 
shield. See Sec. 1910.133.
    (vi) During the emergencies specified in paragraph (d)(11)(v) of 
this section, if employees must be in areas where the concentrations of 
air contaminants are greater than the limits set by paragraph 
(d)(2)(iii) of this section or the oxygen concentration is less than 
19.5 percent, they must use respirators that reduce their exposure to a 
level below these limits or that provide adequate oxygen. Such 
respirators must also be provided in marked, quickly-accessible storage 
compartments built for this purpose when the possibility exists that 
hazardous concentrations of air contaminants could be released 
accidentally. The respirators must be approved by the NIOSH under 42 CFR 
part 84, selected by a competent industrial hygienist or other 
technically-qualified source, and used in accordance with 29 CFR 
1910.134.
    (vii) Near each tank containing a liquid which may burn, irritate, 
or otherwise be harmful to the skin if splashed upon the worker's body, 
there shall be a supply of clean cold water. The water pipe (carrying a 
pressure not exceeding 25 pounds) shall be provided with a quick opening 
valve and at least 48 inches of hose not smaller than three-fourths 
inch, so that no time may be lost in washing off liquids from the

[[Page 199]]

skin or clothing. Alternatively, deluge showers and eye flushes shall be 
provided in cases where harmful chemicals may be splashed on parts of 
the body.
    (viii) Operators with sores, burns, or other skin lesions requiring 
medical treatment shall not be allowed to work at their regular 
operations until so authorized by a physician. Any small skin abrasions, 
cuts, rash, or open sores which are found or reported shall be treated 
by a properly designated person so that chances of exposures to the 
chemicals are removed. Workers exposed to chromic acids shall have a 
periodic examination made of the nostrils and other parts of the body, 
to detect incipient ulceration.
    (ix) Sufficient washing facilities, including soap, individual 
towels, and hot water, shall be provided for all persons required to use 
or handle any liquids which may burn, irritate, or otherwise be harmful 
to the skin, on the basis of at least one basin (or its equivalent) with 
a hot water faucet for every 10 employees. See Sec. 1910.141(d).
    (x) Locker space or equivalent clothing storage facilities shall be 
provided to prevent contamination of street clothing.
    (xi) First aid facilities specific to the hazards of the operations 
conducted shall be readily available.
    (10) Special precautions for cyanide. Dikes or other arrangements 
shall be provided to prevent the possibility of intermixing of cyanide 
and acid in the event of tank rupture.
    (11) Inspection, maintenance, and installation. (i) Floors and 
platforms around tanks shall be prevented from becoming slippery both by 
original type of construction and by frequent flushing. They shall be 
firm, sound, and of the design and construction to minimize the 
possibility of tripping.
    (ii) Before cleaning the interior of any tank, the contents shall be 
drained off, and the cleanout doors shall be opened where provided. All 
pockets in tanks or pits, where it is possible for hazardous vapors to 
collect, shall be ventilated and cleared of such vapors.
    (iii) Tanks which have been drained to permit employees to enter for 
the purposes of cleaning, inspection, or maintenance may contain 
atmospheres which are hazardous to life or health, through the presence 
of flammable or toxic air contaminants, or through the absence of 
sufficient oxygen. Before employees shall be permitted to enter any such 
tank, appropriate tests of the atmosphere shall be made to determine if 
the limits set by paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section are exceeded, or 
if the oxygen concentration is less than 19.5 percent.
    (iv) If the tests made in accordance with paragraph(d)(11)(iii) of 
this section indicate that the atmosphere in the tank is unsafe, before 
any employee is permitted to enter the tank, the tank shall be 
ventilated until the hazardous atmosphere is removed, and ventilation 
shall be continued so as to prevent the occurrence of a hazardous 
atmosphere as long as an employee is in the tank.
    (v) If, in emergencies, such as rescue work, it is necessary to 
enter a tank which may contain a hazardous atmosphere, suitable 
respirators, such as self-contained breathing apparatus; hose mask with 
blower, if there is a possibility of oxygen deficiency; or a gas mask, 
selected and operated in accordance with paragraph (d)(9)(vi) of this 
section, shall be used. If a contaminant in the tank can cause 
dermatitis, or be absorbed through the skin, the employee entering the 
tank shall also wear protective clothing. At least one trained standby 
employee, with suitable respirator, shall be present in the nearest 
uncontaminated area. The standby employee must be able to communicate 
with the employee in the tank and be able to haul him out of the tank 
with a lifeline if necessary.
    (vi) Maintenance work requiring welding or open flame, where toxic 
metal fumes such as cadmium, chromium, or lead may be evolved, shall be 
done only with sufficient local exhaust ventilation to prevent the 
creation of a health hazard, or be done with respirators selected and 
used in accordance with paragraph (d)(9)(vi) of this section. Welding, 
or the use of open flames near any solvent cleaning equipment shall be 
permitted only after such equipment has first been thoroughly cleared of 
solvents and vapors.

[[Page 200]]

    (12) Vapor degreasing tanks. (i) In any vapor degreasing tank 
equipped with a condenser or vapor level thermostat, the condenser or 
thermostat shall keep the level of vapors below the top edge of the tank 
by a distance at least equal to one-half the tank width, or at least 36 
inches, whichever is shorter.
    (ii) Where gas is used as a fuel for heating vapor degreasing tanks, 
the combustion chamber shall be of tight construction, except for such 
openings as the exhaust flue, and those that are necessary for supplying 
air for combustion. Flues shall be of corrosion-resistant construction 
and shall extend to the outer air. If mechanical exhaust is used on this 
flue, a draft diverter shall be used. Special precautions must be taken 
to prevent solvent fumes from entering the combustion air of this or any 
other heater when chlorinated or fluorinated hydrocarbon solvents (for 
example, trichloroethylene, Freon) are used.
    (iii) Heating elements shall be so designed and maintained that 
their surface temperature will not cause the solvent or mixture to 
decompose, break down, or be converted into an excessive quantity of 
vapor.
    (iv) Tanks or machines of more than 4 square feet of vapor area, 
used for solvent cleaning or vapor degreasing, shall be equipped with 
suitable cleanout or sludge doors located near the bottom of each tank 
or still. These doors shall be so designed and gasketed that there will 
be no leakage of solvent when they are closed.
    (13) Scope. (i) This paragraph (d) applies to all operations 
involving the immersion of materials in liquids, or in the vapors of 
such liquids, for the purpose of cleaning or altering their surfaces, or 
adding or imparting a finish thereto, or changing the character of the 
materials, and their subsequent removal from the liquids or vapors, 
draining, and drying. Such operations include washing, electroplating, 
anodizing, pickling, quenching, dyeing, dipping, tanning, dressing, 
bleaching, degreasing, alkaline cleaning, stripping, rinsing, digesting, 
and other similar operations, but do not include molten materials 
handling operations, or surface coating operations.
    (ii) Molten materials handling operations means all operations, 
other than welding, burning, and soldering operations, involving the 
use, melting, smelting, or pouring of metals, alloys, salts, or other 
similar substances in the molten state. Such operations also include 
heat treating baths, descaling baths, die casting stereotyping, 
galvanizing, tinning, and similar operations.
    (iii) Surface coating operations means all operations involving the 
application of protective, decorative, adhesive, or strengthening 
coating or impregnation to one or more surfaces, or into the interstices 
of any object or material, by means of spraying, spreading, flowing, 
brushing, roll coating, pouring, cementing, or similar means; and any 
subsequent draining or drying operations, excluding open-tank 
operations.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 23073, May 28, 1975; 40 
FR 24522, June 9, 1975; 43 FR 49746, Oct. 24, 1978; 49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 
1984; 55 FR 32015, Aug. 6, 1990; 58 FR 35308, June 30, 1993; 61 FR 9236, 
Mar. 7, 1996; 63 FR 1269, Jan. 8, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.95  Occupational noise exposure.

    (a) Protection against the effects of noise exposure shall be 
provided when the sound levels exceed those shown in Table G-16 when 
measured on the A scale of a standard sound level meter at slow 
response. When noise levels are determined by octave band analysis, the 
equivalent A-weighted sound level may be determined as follows:


[[Page 201]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.023


                               Figure G-9

Equivalent sound level contours. Octave band sound pressure levels may 
be converted to the equivalent A-weighted sound level by plotting them 
on this graph and noting the A-weighted sound level corresponding to the 
point of highest penetration into the sound level contours. This 
equivalent A-weighted sound level, which may differ from the actual A-
weighted sound level of the noise, is used to determine exposure limits 
from Table 1.G-16.

    (b)(1) When employees are subjected to sound exceeding those listed 
in Table G-16, feasible administrative or engineering controls shall be 
utilized. If such controls fail to reduce sound levels within the levels 
of Table G-16, personal protective equipment shall be provided and used 
to reduce sound levels within the levels of the table.
    (2) If the variations in noise level involve maxima at intervals of 
1 second or less, it is to be considered continuous.

               Table G-16--Permissible Noise Exposures \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Sound
                                                               level dBA
                   Duration per day, hours                       slow
                                                               response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8...........................................................          90
6...........................................................          92
4...........................................................          95
3...........................................................          97
2...........................................................         100
1\1/2\......................................................         102
1...........................................................         105
\1/2\.......................................................         110
\1/4\ or less...............................................         115
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ When the daily noise exposure is composed of two or more periods of
  noise exposure of different levels, their combined effect should be
  considered, rather than the individual effect of each. If the sum of
  the following fractions: C<INF>1/T<INF>1+C<INF>2/T<INF>2C<INF>n/T<INF>n exceeds unity, then, the
  mixed exposure should be considered to exceed the limit value. Cn
  indicates the total time of exposure at a specified noise level, and
  Tn indicates the total time of exposure permitted at that level.
Exposure to impulsive or impact noise should not exceed 140 dB peak
  sound pressure level.

    (c) Hearing conservation program. (1) The employer shall administer 
a continuing, effective hearing conservation program, as described in 
paragraphs (c) through (o) of this section, whenever employee noise 
exposures equal or exceed an 8-hour time-weighted average sound level 
(TWA) of 85 decibels measured on the A scale (slow response) or, 
equivalently, a dose of fifty percent. For purposes of the hearing 
conservation program, employee noise exposures shall be computed in 
accordance with appendix A and Table G-16a, and without regard to any 
attenuation provided by the use of personal protective equipment.
    (2) For purposes of paragraphs (c) through (n) of this section, an 
8-hour time-weighted average of 85 decibels or a dose of fifty percent 
shall also be referred to as the action level.
    (d) Monitoring. (1) When information indicates that any employee's 
exposure may equal or exceed an 8-hour time-weighted average of 85 
decibels, the employer shall develop and implement a monitoring program.
    (i) The sampling strategy shall be designed to identify employees 
for inclusion in the hearing conservation program and to enable the 
proper selection of hearing protectors.
    (ii) Where circumstances such as high worker mobility, significant 
variations in sound level, or a significant component of impulse noise 
make area monitoring generally inappropriate, the employer shall use 
representative personal sampling to comply with the monitoring 
requirements of this paragraph unless the employer can show that area 
sampling produces equivalent results.

[[Page 202]]

    (2)(i) All continuous, intermittent and impulsive sound levels from 
80 decibels to 130 decibels shall be integrated into the noise 
measurements.
    (ii) Instruments used to measure employee noise exposure shall be 
calibrated to ensure measurement accuracy.
    (3) Monitoring shall be repeated whenever a change in production, 
process, equipment or controls increases noise exposures to the extent 
that:
    (i) Additional employees may be exposed at or above the action 
level; or
    (ii) The attenuation provided by hearing protectors being used by 
employees may be rendered inadequate to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (e) Employee notification. The employer shall notify each employee 
exposed at or above an 8-hour time-weighted average of 85 decibels of 
the results of the monitoring.
    (f) Observation of monitoring. The employer shall provide affected 
employees or their representatives with an opportunity to observe any 
noise measurements conducted pursuant to this section.
    (g) Audiometric testing program. (1) The employer shall establish 
and maintain an audiometric testing program as provided in this 
paragraph by making audiometric testing available to all employees whose 
exposures equal or exceed an 8-hour time-weighted average of 85 
decibels.
    (2) The program shall be provided at no cost to employees.
    (3) Audiometric tests shall be performed by a licensed or certified 
audiologist, otolaryngologist, or other physician, or by a technician 
who is certified by the Council of Accreditation in Occupational Hearing 
Conservation, or who has satisfactorily demonstrated competence in 
administering audiometric examinations, obtaining valid audiograms, and 
properly using, maintaining and checking calibration and proper 
functioning of the audiometers being used. A technician who operates 
microprocessor audiometers does not need to be certified. A technician 
who performs audiometric tests must be responsible to an audiologist, 
otolaryngologist or physician.
    (4) All audiograms obtained pursuant to this section shall meet the 
requirements of appendix C: Audiometric Measuring Instruments.
    (5) Baseline audiogram. (i) Within 6 months of an employee's first 
exposure at or above the action level, the employer shall establish a 
valid baseline audiogram against which subsequent audiograms can be 
compared.
    (ii) Mobile test van exception. Where mobile test vans are used to 
meet the audiometric testing obligation, the employer shall obtain a 
valid baseline audiogram within 1 year of an employee's first exposure 
at or above the action level. Where baseline audiograms are obtained 
more than 6 months after the employee's first exposure at or above the 
action level, employees shall wearing hearing protectors for any period 
exceeding six months after first exposure until the baseline audiogram 
is obtained.
    (iii) Testing to establish a baseline audiogram shall be preceded by 
at least 14 hours without exposure to workplace noise. Hearing 
protectors may be used as a substitute for the requirement that baseline 
audiograms be preceded by 14 hours without exposure to workplace noise.
    (iv) The employer shall notify employees of the need to avoid high 
levels of non-occupational noise exposure during the 14-hour period 
immediately preceding the audiometric examination.
    (6) Annual audiogram. At least annually after obtaining the baseline 
audiogram, the employer shall obtain a new audiogram for each employee 
exposed at or above an 8-hour time-weighted average of 85 decibels.
    (7) Evaluation of audiogram. (i) Each employee's annual audiogram 
shall be compared to that employee's baseline audiogram to determine if 
the audiogram is valid and if a standard threshold shift as defined in 
paragraph (g)(10) of this section has occurred. This comparison may be 
done by a technician.
    (ii) If the annual audiogram shows that an employee has suffered a 
standard threshold shift, the employer may obtain a retest within 30 
days and consider the results of the retest as the annual audiogram.

[[Page 203]]

    (iii) The audiologist, otolaryngologist, or physician shall review 
problem audiograms and shall determine whether there is a need for 
further evaluation. The employer shall provide to the person performing 
this evaluation the following information:
    (A) A copy of the requirements for hearing conservation as set forth 
in paragraphs (c) through (n) of this section;
    (B) The baseline audiogram and most recent audiogram of the employee 
to be evaluated;
    (C) Measurements of background sound pressure levels in the 
audiometric test room as required in appendix D: Audiometric Test Rooms.
    (D) Records of audiometer calibrations required by paragraph (h)(5) 
of this section.
    (8) Follow-up procedures. (i) If a comparison of the annual 
audiogram to the baseline audiogram indicates a standard threshold shift 
as defined in paragraph (g)(10) of this section has occurred, the 
employee shall be informed of this fact in writing, within 21 days of 
the determination.
    (ii) Unless a physician determines that the standard threshold shift 
is not work related or aggravated by occupational noise exposure, the 
employer shall ensure that the following steps are taken when a standard 
threshold shift occurs:
    (A) Employees not using hearing protectors shall be fitted with 
hearing protectors, trained in their use and care, and required to use 
them.
    (B) Employees already using hearing protectors shall be refitted and 
retrained in the use of hearing protectors and provided with hearing 
protectors offering greater attenuation if necessary.
    (C) The employee shall be referred for a clinical audiological 
evaluation or an otological examination, as appropriate, if additional 
testing is necessary or if the employer suspects that a medical 
pathology of the ear is caused or aggravated by the wearing of hearing 
protectors.
    (D) The employee is informed of the need for an otological 
examination if a medical pathology of the ear that is unrelated to the 
use of hearing protectors is suspected.
    (iii) If subsequent audiometric testing of an employee whose 
exposure to noise is less than an 8-hour TWA of 90 decibels indicates 
that a standard threshold shift is not persistent, the employer:
    (A) Shall inform the employee of the new audiometric interpretation; 
and
    (B) May discontinue the required use of hearing protectors for that 
employee.
    (9) Revised baseline. An annual audiogram may be substituted for the 
baseline audiogram when, in the judgment of the audiologist, 
otolaryngologist or physician who is evaluating the audiogram:
    (i) The standard threshold shift revealed by the audiogram is 
persistent; or
    (ii) The hearing threshold shown in the annual audiogram indicates 
significant improvement over the baseline audiogram.
    (10) Standard threshold shift. (i) As used in this section, a 
standard threshold shift is a change in hearing threshold relative to 
the baseline audiogram of an average of 10 dB or more at 2000, 3000, and 
4000 Hz in either ear.
    (ii) In determining whether a standard threshold shift has occurred, 
allowance may be made for the contribution of aging (presbycusis) to the 
change in hearing level by correcting the annual audiogram according to 
the procedure described in appendix F: Calculation and Application of 
Age Correction to Audiograms.
    (h) Audiometric test requirements. (1) Audiometric tests shall be 
pure tone, air conduction, hearing threshold examinations, with test 
frequencies including as a minimum 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, and 6000 
Hz. Tests at each frequency shall be taken separately for each ear.
    (2) Audiometric tests shall be conducted with audiometers (including 
microprocessor audiometers) that meet the specifications of, and are 
maintained and used in accordance with, American National Standard 
Specification for Audiometers, S3.6-1969, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.

[[Page 204]]

    (3) Pulsed-tone and self-recording audiometers, if used, shall meet 
the requirements specified in appendix C: Audiometric Measuring 
Instruments.
    (4) Audiometric examinations shall be administered in a room meeting 
the requirements listed in appendix D: Audiometric Test Rooms.
    (5) Audiometer calibration. (i) The functional operation of the 
audiometer shall be checked before each day's use by testing a person 
with known, stable hearing thresholds, and by listening to the 
audiometer's output to make sure that the output is free from distorted 
or unwanted sounds. Deviations of 10 decibels or greater require an 
acoustic calibration.
    (ii) Audiometer calibration shall be checked acoustically at least 
annually in accordance with appendix E: Acoustic Calibration of 
Audiometers. Test frequencies below 500 Hz and above 6000 Hz may be 
omitted from this check. Deviations of 15 decibels or greater require an 
exhaustive calibration.
    (iii) An exhaustive calibration shall be performed at least every 
two years in accordance with sections 4.1.2; 4.1.3.; 4.1.4.3; 4.2; 
4.4.1; 4.4.2; 4.4.3; and 4.5 of the American National Standard 
Specification for Audiometers, S3.6-1969. Test frequencies below 500 Hz 
and above 6000 Hz may be omitted from this calibration.
    (i) Hearing protectors. (1) Employers shall make hearing protectors 
available to all employees exposed to an 8-hour time-weighted average of 
85 decibels or greater at no cost to the employees. Hearing protectors 
shall be replaced as necessary.
    (2) Employers shall ensure that hearing protectors are worn:
    (i) By an employee who is required by paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section to wear personal protective equipment; and
    (ii) By any employee who is exposed to an 8-hour time-weighted 
average of 85 decibels or greater, and who:
    (A) Has not yet had a baseline audiogram established pursuant to 
paragraph (g)(5)(ii); or
    (B) Has experienced a standard threshold shift.
    (3) Employees shall be given the opportunity to select their hearing 
protectors from a variety of suitable hearing protectors provided by the 
employer.
    (4) The employer shall provide training in the use and care of all 
hearing protectors provided to employees.
    (5) The employer shall ensure proper initial fitting and supervise 
the correct use of all hearing protectors.
    (j) Hearing protector attenuation. (1) The employer shall evaluate 
hearing protector attenuation for the specific noise environments in 
which the protector will be used. The employer shall use one of the 
evaluation methods described in appendix B: Methods for Estimating the 
Adequacy of Hearing Protection Attenuation.
    (2) Hearing protectors must attenuate employee exposure at least to 
an 8-hour time-weighted average of 90 decibels as required by paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (3) For employees who have experienced a standard threshold shift, 
hearing protectors must attenuate employee exposure to an 8-hour time-
weighted average of 85 decibels or below.
    (4) The adequacy of hearing protector attenuation shall be re-
evaluated whenever employee noise exposures increase to the extent that 
the hearing protectors provided may no longer provide adequate 
attenuation. The employer shall provide more effective hearing 
protectors where necessary.
    (k) Training program. (1) The employer shall institute a training 
program for all employees who are exposed to noise at or above an 8-hour 
time-weighted average of 85 decibels, and shall ensure employee 
participation in such program.
    (2) The training program shall be repeated annually for each 
employee included in the hearing conservation program. Information 
provided in the training program shall be updated to be consistent with 
changes in protective equipment and work processes.
    (3) The employer shall ensure that each employee is informed of the 
following:
    (i) The effects of noise on hearing;
    (ii) The purpose of hearing protectors, the advantages, 
disadvantages, and attenuation of various types, and instructions on 
selection, fitting, use, and care; and

[[Page 205]]

    (iii) The purpose of audiometric testing, and an explanation of the 
test procedures.
    (l) Access to information and training materials. (1) The employer 
shall make available to affected employees or their representatives 
copies of this standard and shall also post a copy in the workplace.
    (2) The employer shall provide to affected employees any 
informational materials pertaining to the standard that are supplied to 
the employer by the Assistant Secretary.
    (3) The employer shall provide, upon request, all materials related 
to the employer's training and education program pertaining to this 
standard to the Assistant Secretary and the Director.
    (m) Recordkeeping--(1) Exposure measurements. The employer shall 
maintain an accurate record of all employee exposure measurements 
required by paragraph (d) of this section.
    (2) Audiometric tests. (i) The employer shall retain all employee 
audiometric test records obtained pursuant to paragraph (g) of this 
section:
    (ii) This record shall include:
    (A) Name and job classification of the employee;
    (B) Date of the audiogram;
    (C) The examiner's name;
    (D) Date of the last acoustic or exhaustive calibration of the 
audiometer; and
    (E) Employee's most recent noise exposure assessment.
    (F) The employer shall maintain accurate records of the measurements 
of the background sound pressure levels in audiometric test rooms.
    (3) Record retention. The employer shall retain records required in 
this paragraph (m) for at least the following periods.
    (i) Noise exposure measurement records shall be retained for two 
years.
    (ii) Audiometric test records shall be retained for the duration of 
the affected employee's employment.
    (4) Access to records. All records required by this section shall be 
provided upon request to employees, former employees, representatives 
designated by the individual employee, and the Assistant Secretary. The 
provisions of 29 CFR 1910.20 (a)-(e) and (g)-(i) apply to access to 
records under this section.
    (5) Transfer of records. If the employer ceases to do business, the 
employer shall transfer to the successor employer all records required 
to be maintained by this section, and the successor employer shall 
retain them for the remainder of the period prescribed in paragraph 
(m)(3) of this section.
    (n) Appendices. (1) Appendices A, B, C, D, and E to this section are 
incorporated as part of this section and the contents of these 
appendices are mandatory.
    (2) Appendices F and G to this section are informational and are not 
intended to create any additional obligations not otherwise imposed or 
to detract from any existing obligations.
    (o) Exemptions. Paragraphs (c) through (n) of this section shall not 
apply to employers engaged in oil and gas well drilling and servicing 
operations.
    (p) Startup date. Baseline audiograms required by paragraph (g) of 
this section shall be completed by March 1, 1984.

         Appendix A to Sec. 1910.95--Noise Exposure Computation

                       This Appendix is Mandatory

    I. Computation of Employee Noise Exposure
    (1) Noise dose is computed using Table G-16a as follows:
    (i) When the sound level, L, is constant over the entire work shift, 
the noise dose, D, in percent, is given by: D=100 C/T where C is the 
total length of the work day, in hours, and T is the reference duration 
corresponding to the measured sound level, L, as given in Table G-16a or 
by the formula shown as a footnote to that table.
    (ii) When the workshift noise exposure is composed of two or more 
periods of noise at different levels, the total noise dose over the work 
day is given by:

D=100 (C<INF>1</INF>/T<INF>1</INF>+C<INF>2</INF>/T<INF>2</INF>+ . . . + 
C<INF>n</INF>/T<INF>n</INF>),

where C<INF>n</INF> indicates the total time of exposure at a specific 
noise level, and T<INF>n</INF> indicates the reference duration for that 
level as given by Table G-16a.
    (2) The eight-hour time-weighted average sound level (TWA), in 
decibels, may be computed from the dose, in percent, by means of the 
formula: TWA=16.61 log<INF>10</INF> (D/100)+90. For an eight-hour 
workshift with the noise level constant over the entire shift, the TWA 
is equal to the measured sound level.
    (3) A table relating dose and TWA is given in Section II.

[[Page 206]]



                              Table G-16 a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Reference
             A-weighted sound level, L (decibel)               duration,
                                                                T (hour)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
80...........................................................         32
81...........................................................       27.9
82...........................................................       24.3
83...........................................................       21.1
84...........................................................       18.4
85...........................................................         16
86...........................................................       13.9
87...........................................................       12.1
88...........................................................       10.6
89...........................................................        9.2
90...........................................................          8
91...........................................................        7.0
92...........................................................        6.1
93...........................................................        5.3
94...........................................................        4.6
95...........................................................          4
96...........................................................        3.5
97...........................................................        3.0
98...........................................................        2.6
99...........................................................        2.3
100..........................................................          2
101..........................................................        1.7
102..........................................................        1.5
103..........................................................        1.3
104..........................................................        1.1
105..........................................................          1
106..........................................................       0.87
107..........................................................       0.76
108..........................................................       0.66
109..........................................................       0.57
110..........................................................        0.5
111..........................................................       0.44
112..........................................................       0.38
113..........................................................       0.33
114..........................................................       0.29
115..........................................................       0.25
116..........................................................       0.22
117..........................................................       0.19
118..........................................................       0.16
119..........................................................       0.14
120..........................................................      0.125
121..........................................................       0.11
122..........................................................      0.095
123..........................................................      0.082
124..........................................................      0.072
125..........................................................      0.063
126..........................................................      0.054
127..........................................................      0.047
128..........................................................      0.041
129..........................................................      0.036
130..........................................................      0.031
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In the above table the reference duration, T, is computed by


where L is the measured A-weighted sound level.

  II. Conversion Between ``Dose'' and ``8-Hour Time-Weighted Average'' 
                               Sound Level

    Compliance with paragraphs (c)-(r) of this regulation is determined 
by the amount of exposure to noise in the workplace. The amount of such 
exposure is usually measured with an audiodosimeter which gives a 
readout in terms of ``dose.'' In order to better understand the 
requirements of the amendment, dosimeter readings can be converted to an 
``8-hour time-weighted average sound level.'' (TWA).
    In order to convert the reading of a dosimeter into TWA, see Table 
A-1, below. This table applies to dosimeters that are set by the 
manufacturer to calculate dose or percent exposure according to the 
relationships in Table G-16a. So, for example, a dose of 91 percent over 
an eight hour day results in a TWA of 89.3 dB, and, a dose of 50 percent 
corresponds to a TWA of 85 dB.
    If the dose as read on the dosimeter is less than or greater than 
the values found in Table A-1, the TWA may be calculated by using the 
formula: TWA=16.61 log<INF>10</INF> (D/100)+90 where TWA=8-hour time-
weighted average sound level and D=accumulated dose in percent exposure.

Table A-1--Conversion From ``Percent Noise Exposure'' or ``Dose'' to ``8-
             Hour Time-Weighted Average Sound Level'' (TWA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Dose or percent noise exposure                    TWA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10...........................................................       73.4
15...........................................................       76.3
20...........................................................       78.4
25...........................................................       80.0
30...........................................................       81.3
35...........................................................       82.4
40...........................................................       83.4
45...........................................................       84.2
50...........................................................       85.0
55...........................................................       85.7
60...........................................................       86.3
65...........................................................       86.9
70...........................................................       87.4
75...........................................................       87.9
80...........................................................       88.4
81...........................................................       88.5
82...........................................................       88.6
83...........................................................       88.7
84...........................................................       88.7
85...........................................................       88.8
86...........................................................       88.9
87...........................................................       89.0
88...........................................................       89.1
89...........................................................       89.2
90...........................................................       89.2
91...........................................................       89.3
92...........................................................       89.4
93...........................................................       89.5
94...........................................................       89.6
95...........................................................       89.6
96...........................................................       89.7
97...........................................................       89.8
98...........................................................       89.9
99...........................................................       89.9
100..........................................................       90.0
101..........................................................       90.1
102..........................................................       90.1
103..........................................................       90.2
104..........................................................       90.3
105..........................................................       90.4
106..........................................................       90.4
107..........................................................       90.5

[[Page 207]]

108..........................................................       90.6
109..........................................................       90.6
110..........................................................       90.7
111..........................................................       90.8
112..........................................................       90.8
113..........................................................       90.9
114..........................................................       90.9
115..........................................................       91.1
116..........................................................       91.1
117..........................................................       91.1
118..........................................................       91.2
119..........................................................       91.3
120..........................................................       91.3
125..........................................................       91.6
130..........................................................       91.9
135..........................................................       92.2
140..........................................................       92.4
145..........................................................       92.7
150..........................................................       92.9
155..........................................................       93.2
160..........................................................       93.4
165..........................................................       93.6
170..........................................................       93.8
175..........................................................       94.0
180..........................................................       94.2
185..........................................................       94.4
190..........................................................       94.6
195..........................................................       94.8
200..........................................................       95.0
210..........................................................       95.4
220..........................................................       95.7
230..........................................................       96.0
240..........................................................       96.3
250..........................................................       96.6
260..........................................................       96.9
270..........................................................       97.2
280..........................................................       97.4
290..........................................................       97.7
300..........................................................       97.9
310..........................................................       98.2
320..........................................................       98.4
330..........................................................       98.6
340..........................................................       98.8
350..........................................................       99.0
360..........................................................       99.2
370..........................................................       99.4
380..........................................................       99.6
390..........................................................       99.8
400..........................................................      100.0
410..........................................................      100.2
420..........................................................      100.4
430..........................................................      100.5
440..........................................................      100.7
450..........................................................      100.8
460..........................................................      101.0
470..........................................................      101.2
480..........................................................      101.3
490..........................................................      101.5
500..........................................................      101.6
510..........................................................      101.8
520..........................................................      101.9
530..........................................................      102.0
540..........................................................      102.2
550..........................................................      102.3
560..........................................................      102.4
570..........................................................      102.6
580..........................................................      102.7
590..........................................................      102.8
600..........................................................      102.9
610..........................................................      103.0
620..........................................................      103.2
630..........................................................      103.3
640..........................................................      103.4
650..........................................................      103.5
660..........................................................      103.6
670..........................................................      103.7
680..........................................................      103.8
690..........................................................      103.9
700..........................................................      104.0
710..........................................................      104.1
720..........................................................      104.2
730..........................................................      104.3
740..........................................................      104.4
750..........................................................      104.5
760..........................................................      104.6
770..........................................................      104.7
780..........................................................      104.8
790..........................................................      104.9
800..........................................................      105.0
810..........................................................      105.1
820..........................................................      105.2
830..........................................................      105.3
840..........................................................      105.4
850..........................................................      105.4
860..........................................................      105.5
870..........................................................      105.6
880..........................................................      105.7
890..........................................................      105.8
900..........................................................      105.8
910..........................................................      105.9
920..........................................................      106.0
930..........................................................      106.1
940..........................................................      106.2
950..........................................................      106.2
960..........................................................      106.3
970..........................................................      106.4
980..........................................................      106.5
990..........................................................      106.5
999..........................................................      106.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Appendix B to Sec. 1910.95--Methods for Estimating the Adequacy of 
                      Hearing Protector Attenuation

                       This Appendix is Mandatory

    For employees who have experienced a significant threshold shift, 
hearing protector attenuation must be sufficient to reduce employee 
exposure to a TWA of 85 dB. Employers must select one of the following 
methods by which to estimate the adequacy of hearing protector 
attenuation.
    The most convenient method is the Noise Reduction Rating (NRR) 
developed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). According to EPA 
regulation, the NRR must be shown on the hearing protector package. The 
NRR is then related to an individual worker's noise environment in order 
to assess the adequacy of the attenuation of a

[[Page 208]]

given hearing protector. This appendix describes four methods of using 
the NRR to determine whether a particular hearing protector provides 
adequate protection within a given exposure environment. Selection among 
the four procedures is dependent upon the employer's noise measuring 
instruments.
    Instead of using the NRR, employers may evaluate the adequacy of 
hearing protector attenuation by using one of the three methods 
developed by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), which are described in the ``List of Personal Hearing 
Protectors and Attenuation Data,'' HEW Publication No. 76-120, 1975, 
pages 21-37. These methods are known as NIOSH methods 1B1, 1B2 and 
1B3. The NRR described below is a simplification of NIOSH method 1B2. 
The most complex method is NIOSH method 1B1, which is probably the most 
accurate method since it uses the largest amount of spectral information 
from the individual employee's noise environment. As in the case of the 
NRR method described below, if one of the NIOSH methods is used, the 
selected method must be applied to an individual's noise environment to 
assess the adequacy of the attenuation. Employers should be careful to 
take a sufficient number of measurements in order to achieve a 
representative sample for each time segment.

    Note: The employer must remember that calculated attenuation values 
reflect realistic values only to the extent that the protectors are 
properly fitted and worn.

    When using the NRR to assess hearing protector adequacy, one of the 
following methods must be used:
    (i) When using a dosimeter that is capable of C-weighted 
measurements:
    (A) Obtain the employee's C-weighted dose for the entire workshift, 
and convert to TWA (see appendix A, II).
    (B) Subtract the NRR from the C-weighted TWA to obtain the estimated 
A-weighted TWA under the ear protector.
    (ii) When using a dosimeter that is not capable of C-weighted 
measurements, the following method may be used:
    (A) Convert the A-weighted dose to TWA (see appendix A).
    (B) Subtract 7 dB from the NRR.
    (C) Subtract the remainder from the A-weighted TWA to obtain the 
estimated A-weighted TWA under the ear protector.
    (iii) When using a sound level meter set to the A-weighting network:
    (A) Obtain the employee's A-weighted TWA.
    (B) Subtract 7 dB from the NRR, and subtract the remainder from the 
A-weighted TWA to obtain the estimated A-weighted TWA under the ear 
protector.
    (iv) When using a sound level meter set on the C-weighting network:
    (A) Obtain a representative sample of the C-weighted sound levels in 
the employee's environment.
    (B) Subtract the NRR from the C-weighted average sound level to 
obtain the estimated A-weighted TWA under the ear protector.
    (v) When using area monitoring procedures and a sound level meter 
set to the A-weighing network.
    (A) Obtain a representative sound level for the area in question.
    (B) Subtract 7 dB from the NRR and subtract the remainder from the 
A-weighted sound level for that area.
    (vi) When using area monitoring procedures and a sound level meter 
set to the C-weighting network:
    (A) Obtain a representative sound level for the area in question.
    (B) Subtract the NRR from the C-weighted sound level for that area.

      Appendix C to Sec. 1910.95--Audiometric Measuring Instruments

                       This Appendix is Mandatory

    1. In the event that pulsed-tone audiometers are used, they shall 
have a tone on-time of at least 200 milliseconds.
    2. Self-recording audiometers shall comply with the following 
requirements:
    (A) The chart upon which the audiogram is traced shall have lines at 
positions corresponding to all multiples of 10 dB hearing level within 
the intensity range spanned by the audiometer. The lines shall be 
equally spaced and shall be separated by at least \1/4\ inch. Additional 
increments are optional. The audiogram pen tracings shall not exceed 2 
dB in width.
    (B) It shall be possible to set the stylus manually at the 10-dB 
increment lines for calibration purposes.
    (C) The slewing rate for the audiometer attenuator shall not be more 
than 6 dB/sec except that an initial slewing rate greater than 6 dB/sec 
is permitted at the beginning of each new test frequency, but only until 
the second subject response.
    (D) The audiometer shall remain at each required test frequency for 
30 seconds (<SUP>plus-minus</SUP> 3 seconds). The audiogram shall be 
clearly marked at each change of frequency and the actual frequency 
change of the audiometer shall not deviate from the frequency boundaries 
marked on the audiogram by more than <SUP>plus-minus</SUP> 3 seconds.
    (E) It must be possible at each test frequency to place a horizontal 
line segment parallel to the time axis on the audiogram, such that the 
audiometric tracing crosses the line segment at least six times at that 
test frequency. At each test frequency the threshold shall be the 
average of the midpoints of the tracing excursions.

[[Page 209]]

           Appendix D to Sec. 1910.95--Audiometric Test Rooms

                       This Appendix is Mandatory

    Rooms used for audiometric testing shall not have background sound 
pressure levels exceeding those in Table D-1 when measured by equipment 
conforming at least to the Type 2 requirements of American National 
Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters, S1.4-1971 (R1976), and to 
the Class II requirements of American National Standard Specification 
for Octave, Half-Octave, and Third-Octave Band Filter Sets, S1.11-1971 
(R1976).

   Table D-1--Maximum Allowable Octave-Band Sound Pressure Levels for
                         Audiometric Test Rooms
Octave-band center frequency (Hz)....    500   1000   2000   4000   8000
Sound pressure level (dB)............     40     40     47     57     62
------------------------------------------------------------------------

     Appendix E to Sec. 1910.95--Acoustic Calibration of Audiometers

                       This Appendix is Mandatory

    Audiometer calibration shall be checked acoustically, at least 
annually, according to the procedures described in this appendix. The 
equipment necessary to perform these measurements is a sound level 
meter, octave-band filter set, and a National Bureau of Standards 9A 
coupler. In making these measurements, the accuracy of the calibrating 
equipment shall be sufficient to determine that the audiometer is within 
the tolerances permitted by American Standard Specification for 
Audiometers, S3.6-1969.

                     (1) Sound Pressure Output Check

    A. Place the earphone coupler over the microphone of the sound level 
meter and place the earphone on the coupler.
    B. Set the audiometer's hearing threshold level (HTL) dial to 70 dB.
    C. Measure the sound pressure level of the tones at each test 
frequency from 500 Hz through 6000 Hz for each earphone.
    D. At each frequency the readout on the sound level meter should 
correspond to the levels in Table E-1 or Table E-2, as appropriate, for 
the type of earphone, in the column entitled ``sound level meter 
reading.''

                           (2) Linearity Check

    A. With the earphone in place, set the frequency to 1000 Hz and the 
HTL dial on the audiometer to 70 dB.
    B. Measure the sound levels in the coupler at each 10-dB decrement 
from 70 dB to 10 dB, noting the sound level meter reading at each 
setting.
    C. For each 10-dB decrement on the audiometer the sound level meter 
should indicate a corresponding 10 dB decrease.
    D. This measurement may be made electrically with a voltmeter 
connected to the earphone terminals.

                             (3) Tolerances

    When any of the measured sound levels deviate from the levels in 
Table E-1 or Table E-2 by <SUP>plus-minus</SUP> 3 dB at any test 
frequency between 500 and 3000 Hz, 4 dB at 4000 Hz, or 5 dB at 6000 Hz, 
an exhaustive calibration is advised. An exhaustive calibration is 
required if the deviations are greater than 15 dB or greater at any test 
frequency.

Table E-1--Reference Threshold Levels for Telephonics-- TDH-39 Earphones
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Reference
                                                   threshold     Sound
                                                   level for     level
                  Frequency, Hz                     TDH-39       meter
                                                  earphones,   reading,
                                                      dB          dB
------------------------------------------------------------------------
500.............................................        11.5        81.5
1000............................................         7          77
2000............................................         9          79
3000............................................        10          80
4000............................................         9.5        79.5
6000............................................        15.5        85.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table E-2--Reference Threshold Levels for Telephonics-- TDH-49 Earphones
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Reference
                                                    threshold    Sound
                                                    level for    level
                  Frequency, Hz                      TDH-49      meter
                                                   earphones,   reading,
                                                       dB          dB
------------------------------------------------------------------------
500..............................................        13.5       83.5
1000.............................................         7.5       77.5
2000.............................................          11       81.0
3000.............................................         9.5       79.5
4000.............................................        10.5       80.5
6000.............................................        13.5       83.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Appendix F to Sec. 1910.95--Calculations and Application of Age 
                        Corrections to Audiograms

                     This Appendix Is Non-Mandatory

    In determining whether a standard threshold shift has occurred, 
allowance may be made for the contribution of aging to the change in 
hearing level by adjusting the most recent audiogram. If the employer 
chooses to adjust the audiogram, the employer shall follow the procedure 
described below. This procedure and the age correction tables were 
developed by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
in the criteria document entitled ``Criteria for

[[Page 210]]

a Recommended Standard . . . Occupational Exposure to Noise,'' ((HSM)-
11001).
    For each audiometric test frequency;
    (i) Determine from Tables F-1 or F-2 the age correction values for 
the employee by:
    (A) Finding the age at which the most recent audiogram was taken and 
recording the corresponding values of age corrections at 1000 Hz through 
6000 Hz;
    (B) Finding the age at which the baseline audiogram was taken and 
recording the corresponding values of age corrections at 1000 Hz through 
6000 Hz.
    (ii) Subtract the values found in step (i)(B) from the value found 
in step (i)(A).
    (iii) The differences calculated in step (ii) represented that 
portion of the change in hearing that may be due to aging.
    Example: Employee is a 32-year-old male. The audiometric history for 
his right ear is shown in decibels below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Audiometric test frequency (Hz)
         Employee's age          ---------------------------------------
                                   1000    2000    3000    4000    6000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
26..............................      10       5       5      10       5
*27.............................       0       0       0       5       5
28..............................       0       0       0      10       5
29..............................       5       0       5      15       5
30..............................       0       5      10      20      10
31..............................       5      10      20      15      15
*32.............................       5      10      10      25      20
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The audiogram at age 27 is considered the baseline since it shows 
the best hearing threshold levels. Asterisks have been used to identify 
the baseline and most recent audiogram. A threshold shift of 20 dB 
exists at 4000 Hz between the audiograms taken at ages 27 and 32.
    (The threshold shift is computed by subtracting the hearing 
threshold at age 27, which was 5, from the hearing threshold at age 32, 
which is 25). A retest audiogram has confirmed this shift. The 
contribution of aging to this change in hearing may be estimated in the 
following manner:
    Go to Table F-1 and find the age correction values (in dB) for 4000 
Hz at age 27 and age 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Frequency (Hz)
                                 ---------------------------------------
                                   1000    2000    3000    4000    6000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Age 32..........................       6       5       7      10      14
Age 27..........................       5       4       6       7      11
                                 ---------------------------------------
    Difference..................       1       1       1       3       3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The difference represents the amount of hearing loss that may be 
attributed to aging in the time period between the baseline audiogram 
and the most recent audiogram. In this example, the difference at 4000 
Hz is 3 dB. This value is subtracted from the hearing level at 4000 Hz, 
which in the most recent audiogram is 25, yielding 22 after adjustment. 
Then the hearing threshold in the baseline audiogram at 4000 Hz (5) is 
subtracted from the adjusted annual audiogram hearing threshold at 4000 
Hz (22). Thus the age-corrected threshold shift would be 17 dB (as 
opposed to a threshold shift of 20 dB without age correction).

         Table F-1--Age Correction Values in Decibels for Males
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Audiometric Test Frequencies (Hz)
              Years              ---------------------------------------
                                   1000    2000    3000    4000    6000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
20 or younger...................       5       3       4       5       8
21..............................       5       3       4       5       8
22..............................       5       3       4       5       8
23..............................       5       3       4       6       9
24..............................       5       3       5       6       9
25..............................       5       3       5       7      10
26..............................       5       4       5       7      10
27..............................       5       4       6       7      11
28..............................       6       4       6       8      11
29..............................       6       4       6       8      12
30..............................       6       4       6       9      12
31..............................       6       4       7       9      13
32..............................       6       5       7      10      14
33..............................       6       5       7      10      14
34..............................       6       5       8      11      15
35..............................       7       5       8      11      15
36..............................       7       5       9      12      16
37..............................       7       6       9      12      17
38..............................       7       6       9      13      17
39..............................       7       6      10      14      18
40..............................       7       6      10      14      19
41..............................       7       6      10      14      20
42..............................       8       7      11      16      20
43..............................       8       7      12      16      21
44..............................       8       7      12      17      22
45..............................       8       7      13      18      23
46..............................       8       8      13      19      24
47..............................       8       8      14      19      24
48..............................       9       8      14      20      25
49..............................       9       9      15      21      26
50..............................       9       9      16      22      27
51..............................       9       9      16      23      28
52..............................       9      10      17      24      29
53..............................       9      10      18      25      30
54..............................      10      10      18      26      31
55..............................      10      11      19      27      32
56..............................      10      11      20      28      34
57..............................      10      11      21      29      35
58..............................      10      12      22      31      36
59..............................      11      12      22      32      37
60 or older.....................      11      13      23      33      38
------------------------------------------------------------------------


        Table F-2--Age Correction Values in Decibels for Females
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Audiometric Test Frequencies (Hz)
              Years              ---------------------------------------
                                   1000    2000    3000    4000    6000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
20 or younger...................       7       4       3       3       6
21..............................       7       4       4       3       6
22..............................       7       4       4       4       6
23..............................       7       5       4       4       7
24..............................       7       5       4       4       7
25..............................       8       5       4       4       7
26..............................       8       5       5       4       8
27..............................       8       5       5       5       8
28..............................       8       5       5       5       8
29..............................       8       5       5       5       9
30..............................       8       6       5       5       9
31..............................       8       6       6       5       9
32..............................       9       6       6       6      10

[[Page 211]]

33..............................       9       6       6       6      10
34..............................       9       6       6       6      10
35..............................       9       6       7       7      11
36..............................       9       7       7       7      11
37..............................       9       7       7       7      12
38..............................      10       7       7       7      12
39..............................      10       7       8       8      12
40..............................      10       7       8       8      13
41..............................      10       8       8       8      13
42..............................      10       8       9       9      13
43..............................      11       8       9       9      14
44..............................      11       8       9       9      14
45..............................      11       8      10      10      15
46..............................      11       9      10      10      15
47..............................      11       9      10      11      16
48..............................      12       9      11      11      16
49..............................      12       9      11      11      16
50..............................      12      10      11      12      17
51..............................      12      10      12      12      17
52..............................      12      10      12      13      18
53..............................      13      10      13      13      18
54..............................      13      11      13      14      19
55..............................      13      11      14      14      19
56..............................      13      11      14      15      20
57..............................      13      11      15      15      20
58..............................      14      12      15      16      21
59..............................      14      12      16      16      21
60 or older.....................      14      12      16      17      22
------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Appendix G to Sec. 1910.95--Monitoring Noise Levels Non-Mandatory 
                         Informational Appendix

    This appendix provides information to help employers comply with the 
noise monitoring obligations that are part of the hearing conservation 
amendment.
    What is the purpose of noise monitoring?
    This revised amendment requires that employees be placed in a 
hearing conservation program if they are exposed to average noise levels 
of 85 dB or greater during an 8 hour workday. In order to determine if 
exposures are at or above this level, it may be necessary to measure or 
monitor the actual noise levels in the workplace and to estimate the 
noise exposure or ``dose'' received by employees during the workday.
    When is it necessary to implement a noise monitoring program?
    It is not necessary for every employer to measure workplace noise. 
Noise monitoring or measuring must be conducted only when exposures are 
at or above 85 dB. Factors which suggest that noise exposures in the 
workplace may be at this level include employee complaints about the 
loudness of noise, indications that employees are losing their hearing, 
or noisy conditions which make normal conversation difficult. The 
employer should also consider any information available regarding noise 
emitted from specific machines. In addition, actual workplace noise 
measurements can suggest whether or not a monitoring program should be 
initiated.
    How is noise measured?
    Basically, there are two different instruments to measure noise 
exposures: the sound level meter and the dosimeter. A sound level meter 
is a device that measures the intensity of sound at a given moment. 
Since sound level meters provide a measure of sound intensity at only 
one point in time, it is generally necessary to take a number of 
measurements at different times during the day to estimate noise 
exposure over a workday. If noise levels fluctuate, the amount of time 
noise remains at each of the various measured levels must be determined.
    To estimate employee noise exposures with a sound level meter it is 
also generally necessary to take several measurements at different 
locations within the workplace. After appropriate sound level meter 
readings are obtained, people sometimes draw ``maps'' of the sound 
levels within different areas of the workplace. By using a sound level 
``map'' and information on employee locations throughout the day, 
estimates of individual exposure levels can be developed. This 
measurement method is generally referred to as area noise monitoring.
    A dosimeter is like a sound level meter except that it stores sound 
level measurements and integrates these measurements over time, 
providing an average noise exposure reading for a given period of time, 
such as an 8-hour workday. With a dosimeter, a microphone is attached to 
the employee's clothing and the exposure measurement is simply read at 
the end of the desired time period. A reader may be used to read-out the 
dosimeter's measurements. Since the dosimeter is worn by the employee, 
it measures noise levels in those locations in which the employee 
travels. A sound level meter can also be positioned within the immediate 
vicinity of the exposed worker to obtain an individual exposure 
estimate. Such procedures are generally referred to as personal noise 
monitoring.
    Area monitoring can be used to estimate noise exposure when the 
noise levels are relatively constant and employees are not mobile. In 
workplaces where employees move about in different areas or where the 
noise intensity tends to fluctuate over time, noise exposure is 
generally more accurately estimated by the personal monitoring approach.
    In situations where personal monitoring is appropriate, proper 
positioning of the microphone is necessary to obtain accurate 
measurements. With a dosimeter, the microphone is generally located on 
the shoulder and remains in that position for the entire workday. With a 
sound level meter, the microphone is stationed near the employee's head,

[[Page 212]]

and the instrument is usually held by an individual who follows the 
employee as he or she moves about.
    Manufacturer's instructions, contained in dosimeter and sound level 
meter operating manuals, should be followed for calibration and 
maintenance. To ensure accurate results, it is considered good 
professional practice to calibrate instruments before and after each 
use.
    How often is it necessary to monitor noise levels?
    The amendment requires that when there are significant changes in 
machinery or production processes that may result in increased noise 
levels, remonitoring must be conducted to determine whether additional 
employees need to be included in the hearing conservation program. Many 
companies choose to remonitor periodically (once every year or two) to 
ensure that all exposed employees are included in their hearing 
conservation programs.
    Where can equipment and technical advice be obtained?
    Noise monitoring equipment may be either purchased or rented. Sound 
level meters cost about $500 to $1,000, while dosimeters range in price 
from about $750 to $1,500. Smaller companies may find it more economical 
to rent equipment rather than to purchase it. Names of equipment 
suppliers may be found in the telephone book (Yellow Pages) under 
headings such as: ``Safety Equipment,'' ``Industrial Hygiene,'' or 
``Engineers-Acoustical.'' In addition to providing information on 
obtaining noise monitoring equipment, many companies and individuals 
included under such listings can provide professional advice on how to 
conduct a valid noise monitoring program. Some audiological testing 
firms and industrial hygiene firms also provide noise monitoring 
services. Universities with audiology, industrial hygiene, or acoustical 
engineering departments may also provide information or may be able to 
help employers meet their obligations under this amendment.
    Free, on-site assistance may be obtained from OSHA-supported state 
and private consultation organizations. These safety and health 
consultative entities generally give priority to the needs of small 
businesses.

    Appendix H to Sec. 1910.95--Availability of Referenced Documents

    Paragraphs (c) through (o) of 29 CFR 1910.95 and the accompanying 
appendices contain provisions which incorporate publications by 
reference. Generally, the publications provide criteria for instruments 
to be used in monitoring and audiometric testing. These criteria are 
intended to be mandatory when so indicated in the applicable paragraphs 
of Sec. 1910.95 and appendices.
    It should be noted that OSHA does not require that employers 
purchase a copy of the referenced publications. Employers, however, may 
desire to obtain a copy of the referenced publications for their own 
information.
    The designation of the paragraph of the standard in which the 
referenced publications appear, the titles of the publications, and the 
availability of the publications are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Referenced
     Paragraph designation         publication        Available from--
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Appendix B....................  ``List of          National Technical
                                 Personal Hearing   Information Service,
                                 Protectors and     Port Royal Road,
                                 Attenuation        Springfield, VA
                                 Data,'' HEW Pub.   22161.
                                 No. 76-120,
                                 1975. NTIS-
                                 PB267461.
Appendix D....................  ``Specification    American National
                                 for Sound Level    Standards Institute,
                                 Meters,'' S1.4-    Inc., 1430 Broadway,
                                 1971 (R1976).      New York, NY 10018.
Sec.  1910.95(k)(2), appendix   ``Specifications   American National
 E.                              for                Standards Institute,
                                 Audiometers,''     Inc., 1430 Broadway,
                                 S3.6-1969.         New York, NY 10018.
Appendix D....................  ``Specification    Back Numbers
                                 for Octave, Half-  Department, Dept.
                                 Octave and Third-  STD, American
                                 Octave Band        Institute of
                                 Filter Sets,''     Physics, 333 E. 45th
                                 S1.11-1971         St., New York, NY
                                 (R1976).           10017; American
                                                    National Standards
                                                    Institute, Inc.,
                                                    1430 Broadway, New
                                                    York, NY 10018.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The referenced publications (or a microfiche of the publications) 
are available for review at many universities and public libraries 
throughout the country. These publications may also be examined at the 
OSHA Technical Data Center, Room N2439, United States Department of 
Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210, (202) 219-
7500 or at any OSHA Regional Office (see telephone directories under 
United States Government--Labor Department).

                 Appendix I to Sec. 1910.95--Definitions

    These definitions apply to the following terms as used in paragraphs 
(c) through (n) of 29 CFR 1910.95.
Action level--An 8-hour time-weighted average of 85 decibels measured on 
the A-scale, slow response, or equivalently, a dose of fifty percent.
Audiogram--A chart, graph, or table resulting from an audiometric test 
showing an

[[Page 213]]

individual's hearing threshold levels as a function of frequency.
Audiologist--A professional, specializing in the study and 
rehabilitation of hearing, who is certified by the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association or licensed by a state board of examiners.
Baseline audiogram--The audiogram against which future audiograms are 
compared.
Criterion sound level--A sound level of 90 decibels.
Decibel (dB)--Unit of measurement of sound level.
Hertz (Hz)--Unit of measurement of frequency, numerically equal to 
cycles per second.
Medical pathology--A disorder or disease. For purposes of this 
regulation, a condition or disease affecting the ear, which should be 
treated by a physician specialist.
Noise dose--The ratio, expressed as a percentage, of (1) the time 
integral, over a stated time or event, of the 0.6 power of the measured 
SLOW exponential time-averaged, squared A-weighted sound pressure and 
(2) the product of the criterion duration (8 hours) and the 0.6 power of 
the squared sound pressure corresponding to the criterion sound level 
(90 dB).
Noise dosimeter--An instrument that integrates a function of sound 
pressure over a period of time in such a manner that it directly 
indicates a noise dose.
Otolaryngologist--A physician specializing in diagnosis and treatment of 
disorders of the ear, nose and throat.
Representative exposure--Measurements of an employee's noise dose or 8-
hour time-weighted average sound level that the employers deem to be 
representative of the exposures of other employees in the workplace.
Sound level--Ten times the common logarithm of the ratio of the square 
of the measured A-weighted sound pressure to the square of the standard 
reference pressure of 20 micropascals. Unit: decibels (dB). For use with 
this regulation, SLOW time response, in accordance with ANSI S1.4-1971 
(R1976), is required.
Sound level meter--An instrument for the measurement of sound level.
Time-weighted average sound level--That sound level, which if constant 
over an 8-hour exposure, would result in the same noise dose as is 
measured.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 46 FR 4161, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 
FR 62845, Dec. 29, 1981; 48 FR 9776, Mar. 8, 1983; 48 FR 29687, June 28, 
1983; 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989; 61 FR 9236, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.97  Nonionizing radiation.

    (a) Electromagnetic radiation--(1) Definitions applicable to this 
paragraph. (i) The term electromagnetic radiation is restricted to that 
portion of the spectrum commonly defined as the radio frequency region, 
which for the purpose of this specification shall include the microwave 
frequency region.
    (ii) Partial body irradiation. Pertains to the case in which part of 
the body is exposed to the incident electromagnetic energy.
    (iii) Radiation protection guide. Radiation level which should not 
be exceeded without careful consideration of the reasons for doing so.
    (iv) The word ``symbol'' as used in this specification refers to the 
overall design, shape, and coloring of the rf radiation sign shown in 
figure G-11.
    (v) Whole body irradiation. Pertains to the case in which the entire 
body is exposed to the incident electromagnetic energy or in which the 
cross section of the body is smaller than the cross section of the 
incident radiation beam.
    (2) Radiation protection guide. (i) For normal environmental 
conditions and for incident electromagnetic energy of frequencies from 
10 MHz to 100 GHz, the radiation protection guide is 10 mW/cm. <SUP>2</SUP> 
(milliwatt per square centimeter) as averaged over any possible 0.1-hour 
period. This means the following:

Power density: 10 mW./cm. <SUP>2</SUP> for periods of 0.1-hour or more.
Energy density: 1 mW.-hr./cm. <SUP>2</SUP> (milliwatt hour per square 
centimeter) during any 0.1-hour period.


This guide applies whether the radiation is continuous or intermittent.
    (ii) These formulated recommendations pertain to both whole body 
irradiation and partial body irradiation. Partial body irradiation must 
be included since it has been shown that some parts of the human body 
(e.g., eyes, testicles) may be harmed if exposed to incident radiation 
levels significantly in excess of the recommended levels.
    (3) Warning symbol. (i) The warning symbol for radio frequency 
radiation hazards shall consist of a red isosceles triangle above an 
inverted black isosceles triangle, separated and outlined by an aluminum 
color border. The words ``Warning--Radio-Frequency Radiation Hazard'' 
shall appear in the upper triangle. See figure G-11.

[[Page 214]]

    (ii) American National Standard Safety Color Code for Marking 
Physical Hazards and the Identification of Certain Equipment, Z53.1-
1953, which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, 
shall be used for color specification. All lettering and the border 
shall be of aluminum color.
    (iii) The inclusion and choice of warning information or 
precautionary instructions is at the discretion of the user. If such 
information is included it shall appear in the lower triangle of the 
warning symbol.

[[Page 215]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.024

       Figure G-11 Radio-Frequency Radiation Hazard Warning Symbol
    (4) Scope. This section applies to all radiations originating from 
radio stations, radar equipment, and other possible sources of 
electromagnetic radiation such as used for communication, radio 
navigation, and industrial and scientific purposes. This section does 
not apply to the deliberate exposure of patients by, or under the 
direction of, practitioners of the healing arts.
    (b) [Reserved]
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 61 FR 9236, Mar. 7, 1996]

[[Page 216]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.98  Effective dates.

    (a) The provisions of this Subpart G shall become effective on 
August 27, 1971, except as provided in the remaining paragraphs of this 
section.
    (b) The following provisions shall become effective on February 15, 
1972:

Sec. 1910.94 (a)(2)(iii), (a)(3), (a)(4), (b), (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4), 
(c)(5), (c)(6)(i), (c)(6)(ii), (d)(1)(ii), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5), and 
(d)(7).

    (c) Notwithstanding anything in paragraph (a), (b), or (d) of this 
section, any provision in any other section of this subpart which 
contains in itself a specific effective date or time limitation shall 
become effective on such date or shall apply in accordance with such 
limitation.
    (d) Notwithstanding anything in paragraph (a) of this section, if 
any standard in 41 CFR part 50-204, other than a national consensus 
standard incorporated by reference in Sec. 50-204.2(a)(1), is or becomes 
applicable at any time to any employment and place of employment, by 
virtue of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, or the Service Contract 
Act of 1965, or the National Foundation on Arts and Humanities Act of 
1965, any corresponding established Federal standard in this Subpart G 
which is derived from 41 CFR part 50-204 shall also become effective, 
and shall be applicable to such employment and place of employment, on 
the same date.


<R04>
                     Subpart H--Hazardous Materials

    Authority:  Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 6-96 
(62 FR 111), as applicable, and 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.101  Compressed gases (general requirements).

    (a) Inspection of compressed gas cylinders. Each employer shall 
determine that compressed gas cylinders under his control are in a safe 
condition to the extent that this can be determined by visual 
inspection. Visual and other inspections shall be conducted as 
prescribed in the Hazardous Materials Regulations of the Department of 
Transportation (49 CFR parts 171-179 and 14 CFR part 103). Where those 
regulations are not applicable, visual and other inspections shall be 
conducted in accordance with Compressed Gas Association Pamphlets C-6-
1968 and C-8-1962, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (b) Compressed gases. The in-plant handling, storage, and 
utilization of all compressed gases in cylinders, portable tanks, rail 
tankcars, or motor vehicle cargo tanks shall be in accordance with 
Compressed Gas Association Pamphlet P-1-1965, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (c) Safety relief devices for compressed gas containers. Compressed 
gas cylinders, portable tanks, and cargo tanks shall have pressure 
relief devices installed and maintained in accordance with Compressed 
Gas Association Pamphlets S-1.1-1963 and 1965 addenda and S-1.2-1963, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 61 FR 9236, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.102  Acetylene.

    (a) Cylinders. The in-plant transfer, handling, storage, and 
utilization of acetylene in cylinders shall be in accordance with 
Compressed Gas Association Pamphlet G-1-1966, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (b) Piped systems. The piped systems for the inplant transfer and 
distribution of acetylene shall be designed, installed, maintained, and 
operated in accordance with Compressed Gas Association Pamphlet G-1.3-
1959, which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (c) Generators and filling cylinders. Plants for the generation of 
acetylene and the charging (filling) of acetylene cylinders shall be 
designed, constructed, and tested in accordance with the standards 
prescribed in Compressed Gas Association Pamphlet G-1.4-1966, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 61 FR 9236, Mar. 7, 1996]

[[Page 217]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.103  Hydrogen.

    (a) General--(1) Definitions. As used in this section (i) Gaseous 
hydrogen system is one in which the hydrogen is delivered, stored and 
discharged in the gaseous form to consumer's piping. The system includes 
stationary or movable containers, pressure regulators, safety relief 
devices, manifolds, interconnecting piping and controls. The system 
terminates at the point where hydrogen at service pressure first enters 
the consumer's distribution piping.
    (ii) Approved--Means, unless otherwise indicated, listed or approved 
by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for 
definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (iii) Listed--See ``approved''.
    (iv) ASME--American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
    (v) DOT Specifications--Regulations of the Department of 
Transportation published in 49 CFR Chapter I.
    (vi) DOT regulations--See Sec. 1910.103 (a)(1)(v).
    (2) Scope--(i) Gaseous hydrogen systems. (a) Paragraph (b) of this 
section applies to the installation of gaseous hydrogen systems on 
consumer premises where the hydrogen supply to the consumer premises 
originates outside the consumer premises and is delivered by mobile 
equipment.
    (b) Paragraph (b) of this section does not apply to gaseous hydrogen 
systems having a total hydrogen content of less than 400 cubic feet, nor 
to hydrogen manufacturing plants or other establishments operated by the 
hydrogen supplier or his agent for the purpose of storing hydrogen and 
refilling portable containers, trailers, mobile supply trucks, or tank 
cars.
    (ii) Liquefied hydrogen systems. (a) Paragraph (c) of this section 
applies to the installation of liquefied hydrogen systems on consumer 
premises.
    (b) Paragraph (c) of this section does not apply to liquefied 
hydrogen portable containers of less than 150 liters (39.63 gallons) 
capacity; nor to liquefied hydrogen manufacturing plants or other 
establishments operated by the hydrogen supplier or his agent for the 
sole purpose of storing liquefied hydrogen and refilling portable 
containers, trailers, mobile supply trucks, or tank cars.
    (b) Gaseous hydrogen systems--(1) Design--(i) Containers. (a) 
Hydrogen containers shall comply with one of the following:
    (1) Designed, constructed, and tested in accordance with appropriate 
requirements of ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII--
Unfired Pressure Vessels--1968, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Designed, constructed, tested and maintained in accordance with 
U.S. Department of Transportation Specifications and Regulations.
    (b) Permanently installed containers shall be provided with 
substantial noncombustible supports on firm noncombustible foundations.
    (c) Each portable container shall be legibly marked with the name 
``Hydrogen'' in accordance with ``Marking Portable Compressed Gas 
Containers to Identify the Material Contained'' ANSI Z48.1--1954, which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. Each 
manifolded hydrogen supply unit shall be legibly marked with the name 
Hydrogen or a legend such as ``This unit contains hydrogen.''
    (ii) Safety relief devices. (a) Hydrogen containers shall be 
equipped with safety relief devices as required by the ASME Boiler and 
Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII Unfired Pressure Vessels, 1968 or the 
DOT Specifications and Regulations under which the container is 
fabricated.
    (b) Safety relief devices shall be arranged to discharge upward and 
unobstructed to the open air in such a manner as to prevent any 
impingement of escaping gas upon the container, adjacent structure or 
personnel. This requirement does not apply to DOT Specification 
containers having an internal volume of 2 cubic feet or less.
    (c) Safety relief devices or vent piping shall be designed or 
located so that moisture cannot collect and freeze in a manner which 
would interfere with proper operation of the device.
    (iii) Piping, tubing, and fittings. (a) Piping, tubing, and fittings 
shall be suitable for hydrogen service and for

[[Page 218]]

the pressures and temperatures involved. Cast iron pipe and fittings 
shall not be used.
    (b) Piping and tubing shall conform to Section 2--``Industrial Gas 
and Air Piping''--Code for Pressure Piping, ANSI B31.1-1967 with addenda 
B31.1-1969, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (c) Joints in piping and tubing may be made by welding or brazing or 
by use of flanged, threaded, socket, or compression fittings. Gaskets 
and thread sealants shall be suitable for hydrogen service.
    (iv) Equipment assembly. (a) Valves, gauges, regulators, and other 
accessories shall be suitable for hydrogen service.
    (b) Installation of hydrogen systems shall be supervised by 
personnel familiar with proper practices with reference to their 
construction and use.
    (c) Storage containers, piping, valves, regulating equipment, and 
other accessories shall be readily accessible, and shall be protected 
against physical damage and against tampering.
    (d) Cabinets or housings containing hydrogen control or operating 
equipment shall be adequately ventilated.
    (e) Each mobile hydrogen supply unit used as part of a hydrogen 
system shall be adequately secured to prevent movement.
    (f) Mobile hydrogen supply units shall be electrically bonded to the 
system before discharging hydrogen.
    (v) Marking. The hydrogen storage location shall be permanently 
placarded as follows: ``HYDROGEN--FLAMMABLE GAS--NO SMOKING--NO OPEN 
FLAMES,'' or equivalent.
    (vi) Testing. After installations, all piping, tubing, and fittings 
shall be tested and proved hydrogen gas tight at maximum operating 
pressure.
    (2) Location--(i) General. (a) The system shall be located so that 
it is readily accessible to delivery equipment and to authorized 
personnel.
    (b) Systems shall be located above ground.
    (c) Systems shall not be located beneath electric power lines.
    (d) Systems shall not be located close to flammable liquid piping or 
piping of other flammable gases.
    (e) Systems near aboveground flammable liquid storage shall be 
located on ground higher than the flammable liquid storage except when 
dikes, diversion curbs, grading, or separating solid walls are used to 
prevent accumulation of flammable liquids under the system.
    (ii) Specific requirements. (a) The location of a system, as 
determined by the maximum total contained volume of hydrogen, shall be 
in the order of preference as indicated by Roman numerals in Table H-1.

                                                    Table H-1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Size of hydrogen system
          Nature of location          --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Less than 3,000 CF     3,000 CF to 15,000 CF    In excess of 15,000 CF
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Outdoors.............................  I......................  IDI....................
In a separate building...............  II.....................  II.....................  II.
In a special room....................  III....................  III....................  Not permitted.
Inside buildings not in a special      IV.....................  Not permitted..........  Not permitted.
 room and exposed to other
 occupancies.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) The minimum distance in feet from a hydrogen system of indicated 
capacity located outdoors, in separate buildings or in special rooms to 
any specified outdoor exposure shall be in accordance with Table H-2.
    (c) The distances in Table H-2 Items 1, 14, and 3 to 10 inclusive do 
not apply where protective structures such as adequate fire walls are 
located between the system and the exposure.

                                                    Table H-2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Type of outdoor exposure                                  Size of hydrogen system
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                           3,000 CF    In excess
                                                                               Less than   to 15,000   of 15,000
                                                                               3,000 CF       CF          CF
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Building or structure.................  Wood frame construction \1\......          10          25          50
                                           Heavy timber, noncombustible or             0          10      \2\ 25
                                            ordinary construction \1\.
                                           Fire-resistive construction \1\..           0           0           0
2. Wall openings.........................  Not above any part of a system...          10          10          10

[[Page 219]]

                                           Above any part of a system.......          25          25          25
3. Flammable liquids above ground........  0 to 1,000 gallons...............          10          25          25
                                           In excess of 1,000 gallons.......          25          50          50
4. Flammable liquids below ground--0 to    Tank.............................          10          10          10
 1,000 gallons.                            Vent or fill opening of tank.....          25          25          25
5. Flammable liquids below ground--in      Tank.............................          20          20          20
 excess of 1,000 gallons..                 Vent or fill opening of tank.....          25          25          25
6. Flammable gas storage, either high      0 to 15,000 CF capacity..........          10          25          25
 pressure or low pressure..                In excess of 15,000 CF capacity..          25          50          50
7. Oxygen storage........................  12,000 CF or less \4\............  ..........  ..........  ..........
                                           More than 12,000 CF \5\..........  ..........  ..........  ..........
8. Fast burning solids such as ordinary lumber, excelsior or paper..........          50          50          50
9. Slow burning solids such as heavy       25...............................          25          25
 timber or coal.
10. Open flames and other sources of       25...............................          25          25
 ignition.
11. Air compressor intakes or inlets to    50...............................          50          50
 ventilating or air-conditioning
 equipment.
12. Concentration of people \3\..........  25...............................          50          50
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Refer to NFPA No. 220 Standard Types of Building Construction for definitions of various types of
  construction. (1969 Ed.)
\2\ But not less than one-half the height of adjacent side wall of the structure.
\3\ In congested areas such as offices, lunchrooms, locker rooms, time-clock areas.
\4\ Refer to NFPA No. 51, gas systems for welding and cutting (1969).
\5\ Refer to NFPA No. 566, bulk oxygen systems at consumer sites (1969).

    (d) Hydrogen systems of less than 3,000 CF when located inside 
buildings and exposed to other occupancies shall be situated in the 
building so that the system will be as follows:
    (1) In an adequately ventilated area as in paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(b) 
of this section.
    (2) Twenty feet from stored flammable materials or oxidizing gases.
    (3) Twenty-five feet from open flames, ordinary electrical equipment 
or other sources of ignition.
    (4) Twenty-five feet from concentrations of people.
    (5) Fifty feet from intakes of ventilation or air-conditioning 
equipment and air compressors.
    (6) Fifty feet from other flammable gas storage.
    (7) Protected against damage or injury due to falling objects or 
working activity in the area.
    (8) More than one system of 3,000 CF or less may be installed in the 
same room, provided the systems are separated by at least 50 feet. Each 
such system shall meet all of the requirements of this paragraph.
    (3) Design consideration at specific locations--(i) Outdoor 
locations. (a) Where protective walls or roofs are provided, they shall 
be constructed of noncombustible materials.
    (b) Where the enclosing sides adjoin each other, the area shall be 
properly ventilated.
    (c) Electrical equipment within 15 feet shall be in accordance with 
subpart S of this part.
    (ii) Separate buildings. (a) Separate buildings shall be built of at 
least noncombustible construction. Windows and doors shall be located so 
as to be readily accessible in case of emergency. Windows shall be of 
glass or plastic in metal frames.
    (b) Adequate ventilation to the outdoors shall be provided. Inlet 
openings shall be located near the floor in exterior walls only. Outlet 
openings shall be located at the high point of the room in exterior 
walls or roof. Inlet and outlet openings shall each have minimum total 
area of one (1) square foot per 1,000 cubic feet of room volume. 
Discharge from outlet openings shall be directed or conducted to a safe 
location.
    (c) Explosion venting shall be provided in exterior walls or roof 
only. The venting area shall be equal to not less than 1 square foot per 
30 cubic feet of room volume and may consist of any one or any 
combination of the following: Walls of light, noncombustible material, 
preferably single thickness, single strength glass; lightly fastened 
hatch covers; lightly fastened swinging

[[Page 220]]

doors in exterior walls opening outward; lightly fastened walls or roof 
designed to relieve at a maximum pressure of 25 pounds per square foot.
    (d) There shall be no sources of ignition from open flames, 
electrical equipment, or heating equipment.
    (e) Electrical equipment shall be in accordance with subpart S of 
this part for Class I, Division 2 locations.
    (f) Heating, if provided, shall be by steam, hot water, or other 
indirect means.
    (iii) Special rooms. (a) Floor, walls, and ceiling shall have a 
fire-resistance rating of at least 2 hours. Walls or partitions shall be 
continuous from floor to ceiling and shall be securely anchored. At 
least one wall shall be an exterior wall. Openings to other parts of the 
building shall not be permitted. Windows and doors shall be in exterior 
walls and shall be located so as to be readily accessible in case of 
emergency. Windows shall be of glass or plastic in metal frames.
    (b) Ventilation shall be as provided in paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(b) of 
this section.
    (c) Explosion venting shall be as provided in paragraph 
(b)(3)(ii)(c) of this section.
    (d) There shall be no sources of ignition from open flames, 
electrical equipment, or heating equipment.
    (e) Electric equipment shall be in accordance with the requirements 
of subpart S of this part for Class I, Division 2 locations.
    (f) Heating, if provided, shall be by steam, hot water, or indirect 
means.
    (4) Operating instructions. For installations which require any 
operation of equipment by the user, legible instructions shall be 
maintained at operating locations.
    (5) Maintenance. The equipment and functioning of each charged 
gaseous hydrogen system shall be maintained in a safe operating 
condition in accordance with the requirements of this section. The area 
within 15 feet of any hydrogen container shall be kept free of dry 
vegetation and combustible material.
    (c) Liquefied hydrogen systems--(1) Design--(i) Containers. (a) 
Hydrogen containers shall comply with the following: Storage containers 
shall be designed, constructed, and tested in accordance with 
appropriate requirements of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 
Section VIII--Unfired Pressure Vessels (1968) or applicable provisions 
of API Standard 620, Recommended Rules for Design and Construction of 
Large, Welded, Low-Pressure Storage Tanks, Second Edition (June 1963) 
and appendix R (April 1965), which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (b) Portable containers shall be designed, constructed and tested in 
accordance with DOT Specifications and Regulations.
    (ii) Supports. Permanently installed containers shall be provided 
with substantial noncombustible supports securely anchored on firm 
noncombustible foundations. Steel supports in excess of 18 inches in 
height shall be protected with a protective coating having a 2-hour 
fire-resistance rating.
    (iii) Marking. Each container shall be legibly marked to indicate 
``LIQUEFIED HYDROGEN--FLAMMABLE GAS.''
    (iv) Safety relief devices. (a)(1) Stationary liquefied hydrogen 
containers shall be equipped with safety relief devices sized in 
accordance with CGA Pamphlet S-1, Part 3, Safety Relief Device Standards 
for Compressed Gas Storage Containers, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Portable liquefied hydrogen containers complying with the U.S. 
Department of Transportation Regulations shall be equipped with safety 
relief devices as required in the U.S. Department of Transportation 
Specifications and Regulations. Safety relief devices shall be sized in 
accordance with the requirements of CGA Pamphlet S-1, Safety Relief 
Device Standards, Part 1, Compressed Gas Cylinders and Part 2, Cargo and 
Portable Tank Containers.
    (b) Safety relief devices shall be arranged to discharge 
unobstructed to the outdoors and in such a manner as to prevent 
impingement of escaping liquid or gas upon the container, adjacent 
structures or personnel. See paragraph (c)(2)(i)(f) of this section for 
venting of safety relief devices in special locations.
    (c) Safety relief devices or vent piping shall be designed or 
located so that

[[Page 221]]

moisture cannot collect and freeze in a manner which would interfere 
with proper operation of the device.
    (d) Safety relief devices shall be provided in piping wherever 
liquefied hydrogen could be trapped between closures.
    (v) Piping, tubing, and fittings. (a) Piping, tubing, and fittings 
and gasket and thread sealants shall be suitable for hydrogen service at 
the pressures and temperatures involved. Consideration shall be given to 
the thermal expansion and contraction of piping systems when exposed to 
temperature fluctuations of ambient to liquefied hydrogen temperatures.
    (b) Gaseous hydrogen piping and tubing (above -20 deg. F.) shall 
conform to the applicable sections of Pressure Piping Section 2--
Industrial Gas and Air Piping, ANSI B31.1-1967 with addenda B31.1-1969. 
Design of liquefied hydrogen or cold (-20 deg. F. or below) gas piping 
shall use Petroleum Refinery Piping ANSI B31.3-1966 or Refrigeration 
Piping ANSI B31.5-1966 with addenda B31.5a-1968 as a guide, which are 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (c) Joints in piping and tubing shall preferably be made by welding 
or brazing; flanged, threaded, socket, or suitable compression fittings 
may be used.
    (d) Means shall be provided to minimize exposure of personnel to 
piping operating at low temperatures and to prevent air condensate from 
contacting piping, structural members, and surfaces not suitable for 
cryogenic temperatures. Only those insulating materials which are rated 
nonburning in accordance with ASTM Procedures D1692-68, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, may be used. 
Other protective means may be used to protect personnel. The insulation 
shall be designed to have a vapor-tight seal in the outer covering to 
prevent the condensation of air and subsequent oxygen enrichment within 
the insulation. The insulation material and outside shield shall also be 
of adequate design to prevent attrition of the insulation due to normal 
operating conditions.
    (e) Uninsulated piping and equipment which operate at liquefied-
hydrogen temperature shall not be installed above asphalt surfaces or 
other combustible materials in order to prevent contact of liquid air 
with such materials. Drip pans may be installed under uninsulated piping 
and equipment to retain and vaporize condensed liquid air.
    (vi) Equipment assembly. (a) Valves, gauges, regulators, and other 
accessories shall be suitable for liquefied hydrogen service and for the 
pressures and temperatures involved.
    (b) Installation of liquefied hydrogen systems shall be supervised 
by personnel familiar with proper practices and with reference to their 
construction and use.
    (c) Storage containers, piping, valves, regulating equipment, and 
other accessories shall be readily accessible and shall be protected 
against physical damage and against tampering. A shutoff valve shall be 
located in liquid product withdrawal lines as close to the container as 
practical. On containers of over 2,000 gallons capacity, this shutoff 
valve shall be of the remote control type with no connections, flanges, 
or other appurtenances (other than a welded manual shutoff valve) 
allowed in the piping between the shutoff valve and its connection to 
the inner container.
    (d) Cabinets or housings containing hydrogen control equipment shall 
be ventilated to prevent any accumulation of hydrogen gas.
    (vii) Testing. (a) After installation, all field-erected piping 
shall be tested and proved hydrogen gas-tight at operating pressure and 
temperature.
    (b) Containers if out of service in excess of 1 year shall be 
inspected and tested as outlined in (a) of this subdivision. The safety 
relief devices shall be checked to determine if they are operable and 
properly set.
    (viii) Liquefied hydrogen vaporizers. (a) The vaporizer shall be 
anchored and its connecting piping shall be sufficiently flexible to 
provide for the effect of expansion and contraction due to temperature 
changes.
    (b) The vaporizer and its piping shall be adequately protected on 
the hydrogen and heating media sections with safety relief devices.
    (c) Heat used in a liquefied hydrogen vaporizer shall be indirectly 
supplied

[[Page 222]]

utilizing media such as air, steam, water, or water solutions.
    (d) A low temperature shutoff switch shall be provided in the 
vaporizer discharge piping to prevent flow of liquefied hydrogen in the 
event of the loss of the heat source.
    (ix) Electrical systems. (a) Electrical wiring and equipment located 
within 3 feet of a point where connections are regularly made and 
disconnected, shall be in accordance with subpart S of this part, for 
Class I, Group B, Division 1 locations.
    (b) Except as provided in (a) of this subdivision, electrical 
wiring, and equipment located within 25 feet of a point where 
connections are regularly made and disconnected or within 25 feet of a 
liquid hydrogen storage container, shall be in accordance with subpart S 
of this part, for Class I, Group B, Division 2 locations. When equipment 
approved for class I, group B atmospheres is not commercially available, 
the equipment may be--
    (1) Purged or ventilated in accordance with NFPA No. 496-1967, 
Standard for Purged Enclosures for Electrical Equipment in Hazardous 
Locations,
    (2) Intrinsically safe, or
    (3) Approved for Class I, Group C atmospheres. This requirement does 
not apply to electrical equipment which is installed on mobile supply 
trucks or tank cars from which the storage container is filled.
    (x) Bonding and grounding. The liquefied hydrogen container and 
associated piping shall be electrically bonded and grounded.
    (2) Location of liquefied hydrogen storage--(i) General 
requirements. (a) The storage containers shall be located so that they 
are readily accessible to mobile supply equipment at ground level and to 
authorized personnel.
    (b) The containers shall not be exposed by electric power lines, 
flammable liquid lines, flammable gas lines, or lines carrying oxidizing 
materials.
    (c) When locating liquified hydrogen storage containers near above-
ground flammable liquid storage or liquid oxygen storage, it is 
advisable to locate the liquefied hydrogen container on ground higher 
than flammable liquid storage or liquid oxygen storage.
    (d) Where it is necessary to locate the liquefied hydrogen container 
on ground that is level with or lower than adjacent flammable liquid 
storage or liquid oxygen storage, suitable protective means shall be 
taken (such as by diking, diversion curbs, grading), with respect to the 
adjacent flammable liquid storage or liquid oxygen storage, to prevent 
accumulation of liquids within 50 feet of the liquefied hydrogen 
container.
    (e) Storage sites shall be fenced and posted to prevent entrance by 
unauthorized personnel. Sites shall also be placarded as follows: 
``Liquefied Hydrogen--Flammable Gas--No Smoking--No Open Flames.''
    (f) If liquified hydrogen is located in (as specified in Table H-3) 
a separate building, in a special room, or inside buildings when not in 
a special room and exposed to other occupancies, containers shall have 
the safety relief devices vented unobstructed to the outdoors at a 
minimum elevation of 25 feet above grade to a safe location as required 
in paragraph (c)(1)(iv)(b) of this section.
    (ii) Specific requirements. (a) The location of liquefied hydrogen 
storage, as determined by the maximum total quantity of liquified 
hydrogen, shall be in the order of preference as indicated by Roman 
numerals in the following Table H-3.

                    Table H-3--Maximum Total Quantity of Liquefied Hydrogen Storage Permitted
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Size of hydrogen storage (capacity in gallons)
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Nature of location         39.63 (150 liters)
                                         to 50             51 to 300          301 to 600       In excess of 600
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Outdoors........................  I.................  I.................  I.................  I.
In a separate building..........  II................  II................  II................  Not permitted.
In a special room...............  III...............  III...............  Not permitted.....      Do.
Inside buildings not in a         IV................  Not permitted.....  ......do..........      Do.
 special room and exposed to
 other occupancies.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: This table does not apply to the storage in dewars of the type generally used in laboratories for
  experimental purposes.

[[Page 223]]


    (b) The minimum distance in feet from liquefied hydrogen systems of 
indicated storage capacity located outdoors, in a separate building, or 
in a special room to any specified exposure shall be in accordance with 
Table H-4.

  Table H-4--Minimum Distance (Feet) From Liquefied Hydrogen Systems to
                            Exposure \1\ \2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Liquefied hydrogen storage
                                                (capacity in gallons)
                                           -----------------------------
             Type of exposure                 39.63
                                              (150    3,501 to   15,001
                                             liters)   15,000      to
                                            to 3,500             30,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Fire-resistive building and fire walls
 \3\......................................         5         5         5
2. Noncombustible building \3\............        25        50        75
3. Other buildings \3\....................        50        75       100
4. Wall openings, air-compressor intakes,
 inlets for air-conditioning or
 ventilating equipment....................        75        75        75
5. Flammable liquids (above ground and
 vent or fill openings if below ground)
 (see 513 and 514)........................        50        75       100
6. Between stationary liquefied hydrogen
 containers...............................         5         5         5
7. Flammable gas storage..................        50        75       100
8. Liquid oxygen storage and other
 oxidizers (see 513 and 514)..............       100       100       100
9. Combustible solids.....................        50        75       100
10. Open flames, smoking and welding......        50        50        50
11. Concentrations of people..............        75        75        75
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The distance in Nos. 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 12 in Table H-4 may be
  reduced where protective structures, such as firewalls equal to height
  of top of the container, to safeguard the liquefied hydrogen storage
  system, are located between the liquefied hydrogen storage
  installation and the exposure.
\2\ Where protective structures are provided, ventilation and
  confinement of product should be considered. The 5-foot distance in
  Nos. 1 and 6 facilitates maintenance and enhances ventilation.
\3\ Refer to Standard Types of Building Construction, NFPA No. 220-1969
  for definitions of various types of construction.
In congested areas such as offices, lunchrooms, locker rooms, time-clock
  areas.

    (iii) Handling of liquefied hydrogen inside buildings other than 
separate buildings and special rooms. Portable liquefied hydrogen 
containers of 50 gallons or less capacity as permitted in Table H-3 and 
in compliance with subdivision (i)(f) of this subparagraph when housed 
inside buildings not located in a special room and exposed to other 
occupancies shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
    (a) Be located 20 feet from flammable liquids and readily 
combustible materials such as excelsior or paper.
    (b) Be located 25 feet from ordinary electrical equipment and other 
sources of ignition including process or analytical equipment.
    (c) Be located 25 feet from concentrations of people.
    (d) Be located 50 feet from intakes of ventilation and air-
conditioning equipment or intakes of compressors.
    (e) Be located 50 feet from storage of other flammable-gases or 
storage of oxidizing gases.
    (f) Containers shall be protected against damage or injury due to 
falling objects or work activity in the area.
    (g) Containers shall be firmly secured and stored in an upright 
position.
    (h) Welding or cutting operations, and smoking shall be prohibited 
while hydrogen is in the room.
    (i) The area shall be adequately ventilated. Safety relief devices 
on the containers shall be vented directly outdoors or to a suitable 
hood. See paragraphs (c)(1)(iv)(b) and (c)(2)(i)(f) of this section.
    (3) Design considerations at specific locations--(i) Outdoor 
locations. (a) Outdoor location shall mean outside of any building or 
structure, and includes locations under a weather shelter or canopy 
provided such locations are not enclosed by more than two walls set at 
right angles and are provided with vent-space between the walls and 
vented roof or canopy.
    (b) Roadways and yard surfaces located below liquefied hydrogen 
piping, from which liquid air may drip, shall be constructed of 
noncombustible materials.
    (c) If protective walls are provided, they shall be constructed of 
noncombustible materials and in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph (c)(3)(i)(a) of this section.
    (d) Electrical wiring and equipment shall comply with paragraph 
(c)(1)(ix) (a) and (b) of this section.
    (e) Adequate lighting shall be provided for nighttime transfer 
operation.
    (ii) Separate buildings. (a) Separate buildings shall be of light 
noncombustible construction on a substantial frame. Walls and roofs 
shall be lightly fastened and designed to relieve at a maximum internal 
pressure of 25 pounds per square foot. Windows shall be of shatterproof 
glass or plastic in metal frames. Doors shall be located in such a 
manner that they will be readily

[[Page 224]]

accessible to personnel in an emergency.
    (b) Adequate ventilation to the outdoors shall be provided. Inlet 
openings shall be located near the floor level in exterior walls only. 
Outlet openings shall be located at the high point of the room in 
exterior walls or roof. Both the inlet and outlet vent openings shall 
have a minimum total area of 1 square foot per 1,000 cubic feet of room 
volume. Discharge from outlet openings shall be directed or conducted to 
a safe location.
    (c) There shall be no sources of ignition.
    (d) Electrical wiring and equipment shall comply with paragraphs 
(c)(1)(ix) (a) and (b) of this section except that the provisions of 
paragraph (c)(1)(ix)(b) of this section shall apply to all electrical 
wiring and equipment in the separate building.
    (e) Heating, if provided, shall be by steam, hot water, or other 
indirect means.
    (iii) Special rooms. (a) Floors, walls, and ceilings shall have a 
fire resistance rating of at least 2 hours. Walls or partitions shall be 
continuous from floor to ceiling and shall be securely anchored. At 
least one wall shall be an exterior wall. Openings to other parts of the 
building shall not be permitted. Windows and doors shall be in exterior 
walls and doors shall be located in such a manner that they will be 
accessible in an emergency. Windows shall be of shatterproof glass or 
plastic in metal frames.
    (b) Ventilation shall be as provided in paragraph (c)(3)(ii)(b) of 
this section.
    (c) Explosion venting shall be provided in exterior walls or roof 
only. The venting area shall be equal to not less than 1 square foot per 
30 cubic feet of room volume and may consist of any one or any 
combination of the following: Walls of light noncombustible material; 
lightly fastened hatch covers; lightly fastened swinging doors opening 
outward in exterior walls; lightly fastened walls or roofs designed to 
relieve at a maximum pressure of 25 pounds per square foot.
    (d) There shall be no sources of ignition.
    (e) Electrical wiring and equipment shall comply with paragraph 
(c)(1)(ix) (a) and (b) of this section except that the provision of 
paragraph (c)(1)(ix)(b) of this section shall apply to all electrical 
wiring and equipment in the special room.
    (f) Heating, if provided, shall be steam, hot water, or by other 
indirect means.
    (4) Operating instructions--(i) Written instructions. For 
installation which require any operation of equipment by the user, 
legible instructions shall be maintained at operating locations.
    (ii) Attendant. A qualified person shall be in attendance at all 
times while the mobile hydrogen supply unit is being unloaded.
    (iii) Security. Each mobile liquefied hydrogen supply unit used as 
part of a hydrogen system shall be adequately secured to prevent 
movement.
    (iv) Grounding. The mobile liquefied hydrogen supply unit shall be 
grounded for static electricity.
    (5) Maintenance. The equipment and functioning of each charged 
liquefied hydrogen system shall be maintained in a safe operating 
condition in accordance with the requirements of this section. Weeds or 
similar combustibles shall not be permitted within 25 feet of any 
liquefied hydrogen equipment.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49746, Oct. 24, 1978; 
53 FR 12121, Apr. 12, 1988; 55 FR 32015, Aug. 6, 1990; 58 FR 35309, June 
30, 1993; 61 FR 9236, 9237, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.104  Oxygen.

    (a) Scope. This section applies to the installation of bulk oxygen 
systems on industrial and institutional consumer premises. This section 
does not apply to oxygen manufacturing plants or other establishments 
operated by the oxygen supplier or his agent for the purpose of storing 
oxygen and refilling portable containers, trailers, mobile supply 
trucks, or tank cars, nor to systems having capacities less than those 
stated in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (b) Bulk oxygen systems--(1) Definition. As used in this section: A 
bulk oxygen system is an assembly of equipment, such as oxygen storage 
containers, pressure regulators, safety devices, vaporizers, manifolds, 
and interconnecting piping, which has storage capacity

[[Page 225]]

of more than 13,000 cubic feet of oxygen, Normal Temperature and 
Pressure (NTP), connected in service or ready for service, or more than 
25,000 cubic feet of oxygen (NTP) including unconnected reserves on hand 
at the site. The bulk oxygen system terminates at the point where oxygen 
at service pressure first enters the supply line. The oxygen containers 
may be stationary or movable, and the oxygen may be stored as gas or 
liquid.
    (2) Location--(i) General. Bulk oxygen storage systems shall be 
located above ground out of doors, or shall be installed in a building 
of noncombustible construction, adequately vented, and used for that 
purpose exclusively. The location selected shall be such that containers 
and associated equipment shall not be exposed by electric power lines, 
flammable or combustible liquid lines, or flammable gas lines.
    (ii) Accessibility. The system shall be located so that it is 
readily accessible to mobile supply equipment at ground level and to 
authorized personnel.
    (iii) Leakage. Where oxygen is stored as a liquid, noncombustible 
surfacing shall be provided in an area in which any leakage of liquid 
oxygen might fall during operation of the system and filling of a 
storage container. For purposes of this paragraph, asphaltic or 
bituminous paving is considered to be combustible.
    (iv) Elevation. When locating bulk oxygen systems near above-ground 
flammable or combustible liquid storage which may be either indoors or 
outdoors, it is advisable to locate the system on ground higher than the 
flammable or combustible liquid storage.
    (v) Dikes. Where it is necessary to locate a bulk oxygen system on 
ground lower than adjacent flammable or combustible liquid storage 
suitable means shall be taken (such as by diking, diversion curbs, or 
grading) with respect to the adjacent flammable or combustible liquid 
storage to prevent accumulation of liquids under the bulk oxygen system.
    (3) Distance between systems and exposures--(i) General. The minimum 
distance from any bulk oxygen storage container to exposures, measured 
in the most direct line except as indicated in paragraphs (b)(3) (vi) 
and (viii) of this section, shall be as indicated in paragraphs (b)(3) 
(ii) to (xviii) of this section inclusive.
    (ii) Combustible structures. Fifty feet from any combustible 
structures.
    (iii) Fire resistive structures. Twenty-five feet from any 
structures with fire-resistive exterior walls or sprinklered buildings 
of other construction, but not less than one-half the height of adjacent 
side wall of the structure.
    (iv) Openings. At least 10 feet from any opening in adjacent walls 
of fire resistive structures. Spacing from such structures shall be 
adequate to permit maintenance, but shall not be less than 1 foot.
    (v) Flammable liquid storage above-ground

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Distance (feet)                    Capacity (gallons)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
50........................................  0 to 1000.
90........................................  1001 or more.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (vi) Flammable liquid storage below-ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Distance from
                                    oxygen storage
                                     container to
 Distance measured horizontally    filling and vent
from oxygen storage container to    connections or     Capacity gallons
  flammable liquid tank (feet)        openings to
                                   flammable liquid
                                      tank (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................  50................  0 to 1000.
30..............................  50................  1001 or more.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (vii) Combustible liquid storage above-ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Distance (feet)                    Capacity (gallons)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
25........................................  0 to 1000.
50........................................  1001 or more.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (viii) Combustible liquid storage belowground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Distance from oxygen storage
Distance measured horizontally from oxygen    container to filling and
  storage container to combustible liquid   vent connections or openings
                tank (feet)                  to combustible liquid tank
                                                       (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
15........................................  40.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ix) Flammable gas storage. (Such as compressed flammable gases, 
liquefied flammable gases and flammable gases in low pressure gas 
holders):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Distance (feet)                  Capacity (cu. ft. NTP)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
50........................................  Less than 5000.
90........................................  5000 or more.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 226]]

    (x) Highly combustible materials. Fifty feet from solid materials 
which burn rapidly, such as excelsior or paper.
    (xi) Slow-burning materials. Twenty-five feet from solid materials 
which burn slowly, such as coal and heavy timber.
    (xii) Ventilation. Seventy-five feet in one direction and 35 feet in 
approximately 90 deg. direction from confining walls (not including 
firewalls less than 20 feet high) to provide adequate ventilation in 
courtyards and similar confining areas.
    (xiii) Congested areas. Twenty-five feet from congested areas such 
as offices, lunchrooms, locker rooms, time clock areas, and similar 
locations where people may congregate.
    (xiv)-(xvii) [Reserved]
    (xviii) Exceptions. The distances in paragraphs (b)(3) (ii), (iii), 
(v) to (xi) inclusive, of this section do not apply where protective 
structures such as firewalls of adequate height to safeguard the oxygen 
storage systems are located between the bulk oxygen storage installation 
and the exposure. In such cases, the bulk oxygen storage installation 
may be a minimum distance of 1 foot from the firewall.
    (4) Storage containers--(i) Foundations and supports. Permanently 
installed containers shall be provided with substantial noncombustible 
supports on firm noncombustible foundations.
    (ii) Construction--liquid. Liquid oxygen storage containers shall be 
fabricated from materials meeting the impact test requirements of 
paragraph UG-84 of ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII--
Unfired Pressure Vessels--1968, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6. Containers operating at pressures above 15 
pounds per square inch gage (p.s.i.g.) shall be designed, constructed, 
and tested in accordance with appropriate requirements of ASME Boiler 
and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VII--Unfired Pressure Vessels--1968. 
Insulation surrounding the liquid oxygen container shall be 
noncombustible.
    (iii) Construction--gaseous. High- pressure gaseous oxygen 
containers shall comply with one of the following:
    (a) Designed, constructed, and tested in accordance with appropriate 
requirements of ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII--
Unfired Pressure Vessels--1968.
    (b) Designed, constructed, tested, and maintained in accordance with 
DOT Specifications and Regulations.
    (5) Piping, tubing, and fittings--(i) Selection. Piping, tubing, and 
fittings shall be suitable for oxygen service and for the pressures and 
temperatures involved.
    (ii) Specification. Piping and tubing shall conform to Section 2--
Gas and Air Piping Systems of Code for Pressure Piping, ANSI, B31.1-1967 
with addenda B31.10a-1969, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iii) Fabrication. Piping or tubing for operating temperatures below 
-20 deg. F. shall be fabricated from materials meeting the impact test 
requirements of paragraph UG-84 of ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 
Section VIII--Unfired Pressure Vessels--1968, when tested at the minimum 
operating temperature to which the piping may be subjected in service.
    (6) Safety relief devices--(i) General. Bulk oxygen storage 
containers, regardless of design pressure shall be equipped with safety 
relief devices as required by the ASME code or the DOT specifications 
and regulations.
    (ii) DOT containers. Bulk oxygen storage containers designed and 
constructed in accordance with DOT specification shall be equipped with 
safety relief devices as required thereby.
    (iii) ASME containers. Bulk oxygen storage containers designed and 
constructed in accordance with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 
Section VIII--Unfired Pressure Vessel--1968 shall be equipped with 
safety relief devices meeting the provisions of the Compressed Gas 
Association Pamphlet ``Safety Relief Device Standards for Compressed Gas 
Storage Containers,'' S-1, Part 3, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iv) Insulation. Insulation casings on liquid oxygen containers 
shall be equipped with suitable safety relief devices.
    (v) Reliability. All safety relief devices shall be so designed or 
located that moisture cannot collect and freeze

[[Page 227]]

in a manner which would interfere with proper operation of the device.
    (7) Liquid oxygen vaporizers--(i) Mounts and couplings. The 
vaporizer shall be anchored and its connecting piping be sufficiently 
flexible to provide for the effect of expansion and contraction due to 
temperature changes.
    (ii) Relief devices. The vaporizer and its piping shall be 
adequately protected on the oxygen and heating medium sections with 
safety relief devices.
    (iii) Heating. Heat used in an oxygen vaporizer shall be indirectly 
supplied only through media such as steam, air, water, or water 
solutions which do not react with oxygen.
    (iv) Grounding. If electric heaters are used to provide the primary 
source of heat, the vaporizing system shall be electrically grounded.
    (8) Equipment assembly and installation--(i) Cleaning. Equipment 
making up a bulk oxygen system shall be cleaned in order to remove oil, 
grease or other readily oxidizable materials before placing the system 
in service.
    (ii) Joints. Joints in piping and tubing may be made by welding or 
by use of flanged, threaded, slip, or compression fittings. Gaskets or 
thread sealants shall be suitable for oxygen service.
    (iii) Accessories. Valves, gages, regulators, and other accessories 
shall be suitable for oxygen service.
    (iv) Installation. Installation of bulk oxygen systems shall be 
supervised by personnel familiar with proper practices with reference to 
their construction and use.
    (v) Testing. After installation all field erected piping shall be 
tested and proved gas tight at maximum operating pressure. Any medium 
used for testing shall be oil free and nonflammable.
    (vi) Security. Storage containers, piping, valves, regulating 
equipment, and other accessories shall be protected against physical 
damage and against tampering.
    (vii) Venting. Any enclosure containing oxygen control or operating 
equipment shall be adequately vented.
    (viii) Placarding. The bulk oxygen storage location shall be 
permanently placarded to indicate: ``OXYGEN--NO SMOKING--NO OPEN 
FLAMES'', or an equivalent warning.
    (ix) Electrical wiring. Bulk oxygen installations are not hazardous 
locations as defined and covered in subpart S of this part. Therefore, 
general purpose or weatherproof types of electrical wiring and equipment 
are acceptable depending upon whether the installation is indoors or 
outdoors. Such equipment shall be installed in accordance with the 
applicable provisions of subpart S of this part.
    (9) Operating instructions. For installations which require any 
operation of equipment by the user, legible instructions shall be 
maintained at operating locations.
    (10) Maintenance. The equipment and functioning of each charged bulk 
oxygen system shall be maintained in a safe operating condition in 
accordance with the requirements of this section. Wood and long dry 
grass shall be cut back within 15 feet of any bulk oxygen storage 
container.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49746, Oct. 24, 1978; 
61 FR 9237, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.105  Nitrous oxide.

    The piped systems for the in-plant transfer and distribution of 
nitrous oxide shall be designed, installed, maintained, and operated in 
accordance with Compressed Gas Association Pamphlet G-8.1-1964, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 61 FR 9237, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.106  Flammable and combustible liquids.

    (a) Definitions. As used in this section:
    (1) Aerosol shall mean a material which is dispensed from its 
container as a mist, spray, or foam by a propellant under pressure.
    (2) Atmospheric tank shall mean a storage tank which has been 
designed to operate at pressures from atmospheric through 0.5 p.s.i.g.
    (3) Automotive service station shall mean that portion of property 
where flammable or combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored 
and dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel

[[Page 228]]

tanks of motor vehicles and shall include any facilities available for 
the sale and service of tires, batteries, and accessories, and for minor 
automotive maintenance work. Major automotive repairs, painting, body 
and fender work are excluded.
    (4) Basement shall mean a story of a building or structure having 
one-half or more of its height below ground level and to which access 
for fire fighting purposes is unduly restricted.
    (5) Boiling point shall mean the boiling point of a liquid at a 
pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute (p.s.i.a.) (760 mm.). 
Where an accurate boiling point is unavailable for the material in 
question, or for mixtures which do not have a constant boiling point, 
for purposes of this section the 10 percent point of a distillation 
performed in accordance with the Standard Method of Test for 
Distillation of Petroleum Products, ASTM D-86-62, which is incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, may be used as the boiling 
point of the liquid.
    (6) Boilover shall mean the expulsion of crude oil (or certain other 
liquids) from a burning tank. The light fractions of the crude oil 
burnoff producing a heat wave in the residue, which on reaching a water 
strata may result in the expulsion of a portion of the contents of the 
tank in the form of froth.
    (7) Bulk plant shall mean that portion of a property where flammable 
or combustible liquids are received by tank vessel, pipelines, tank car, 
or tank vehicle, and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of 
distributing such liquids by tank vessel, pipeline, tank car, tank 
vehicle, or container.
    (8) Chemical plant shall mean a large integrated plant or that 
portion of such a plant other than a refinery or distillery where 
flammable or combustible liquids are produced by chemical reactions or 
used in chemical reactions.
    (9) Closed container shall mean a container as herein defined, so 
sealed by means of a lid or other device that neither liquid nor vapor 
will escape from it at ordinary temperatures.
    (10) Crude petroleum shall mean hydrocarbon mixtures that have a 
flash point below 150 deg.F. and which have not been processed in a 
refinery.
    (11) Distillery shall mean a plant or that portion of a plant where 
flammable or combustible liquids produced by fermentation are 
concentrated, and where the concentrated products may also be mixed, 
stored, or packaged.
    (12) Fire area shall mean an area of a building separated from the 
remainder of the building by construction having a fire resistance of at 
least 1 hour and having all communicating openings properly protected by 
an assembly having a fire resistance rating of at least 1 hour.
    (13) Flammable aerosol shall mean an aerosol which is required to be 
labeled ``Flammable'' under the Federal Hazardous Substances Labeling 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1261). For the purposes of paragraph (d) of this section, 
such aerosols are considered Class IA liquids.
    (14) Flashpoint means the minimum temperature at which a liquid 
gives off vapor within a test vessel in sufficient concentration to form 
an ignitable mixture with air near the surface of the liquid, and shall 
be determined as follows:
    (i) For a liquid which has a viscosity of less than 45 SUS at 
100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.), does not contain suspended solids, and does 
not have a tendency to form a surface film while under test, the 
procedure specified in the Standard Method of Test for Flashpoint by Tag 
Closed Tester (ASTM D-56-70), which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6, shall be used.
    (ii) For a liquid which has a viscosity of 45 SUS or more at 
100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.), or contains suspended solids, or has a 
tendency to form a surface film while under test, the Standard Method of 
Test for Flashpoint by Pensky-Martens Closed Tester (ASTM D-93-71) shall 
be used, except that the methods specified in Note 1 to section 1.1 of 
ASTM D-93-71 may be used for the respective materials specified in the 
Note. The preceding ASTM standards are incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iii) For a liquid that is a mixture of compounds that have 
different volatilities and flashpoints, its flashpoint shall be 
determined by using the procedure specified in paragraph (a)(14) (i) or 
(ii) of this section on the liquid in the form it is shipped. If the 
flashpoint, as determined by this test,

[[Page 229]]

is 100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.) or higher, an additional flashpoint 
determination shall be run on a sample of the liquid evaporated to 90 
percent of its original volume, and the lower value of the two tests 
shall be considered the flashpoint of the material.
    (iv) Organic peroxides, which undergo autoaccelerating thermal 
decomposition, are excluded from any of the flashpoint determination 
methods specified in this subparagraph.
    (15) Hotel shall mean buildings or groups of buildings under the 
same management in which there are sleeping accommodations for hire, 
primarily used by transients who are lodged with or without meals 
including but not limited to inns, clubs, motels, and apartment hotels.
    (16) Institutional occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a 
building or structure or any portion thereof by persons harbored or 
detained to receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment, or 
by persons involuntarily detained.
    (17) Liquid shall mean, for the purpose of this section, any 
material which has a fluidity greater than that of 300 penetration 
asphalt when tested in accordance with ASTM Test for Penetration for 
Bituminous Materials, D-5-65, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6. When not otherwise identified, the term liquid 
shall include both flammable and combustible liquids.
    (18) Combustible liquid means any liquid having a flashpoint at or 
above 100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.) Combustible liquids shall be divided into 
two classes as follows:
    (i) Class II liquids shall include those with flashpoints at or 
above 100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.) and below 140 deg.F. (60 deg.C.), except 
any mixture having components with flashpoints of 200 deg.F. 
(93.3 deg.C.) or higher, the volume of which make up 99 percent or more 
of the total volume of the mixture.
    (ii) Class III liquids shall include those with flashpoints at or 
above 140 deg.F. (60 deg.C.) Class III liquids are subdivided into two 
subclasses:
    (a) Class IIIA liquids shall include those with flashpoints at or 
above 140 deg.F. (60 deg.C.) and below 200 deg.F. (93.3 deg.C.), except 
any mixture having components with flashpoints of 200 deg.F. 
(93.3 deg.C.), or higher, the total volume of which make up 99 percent 
or more of the total volume of the mixture.
    (b) Class IIIB liquids shall include those with flashpoints at or 
above 200 deg.F. (93.3 deg.C.). This section does not cover Class IIIB 
liquids. Where the term ``Class III liquids is used in this section, it 
shall mean only Class IIIA liquids.
    (iii) When a combustible liquid is heated for use to within 
30 deg.F. (16.7 deg.C.) of its flashpoint, it shall be handled in 
accordance with the requirements for the next lower class of liquids.
    (19) Flammable liquid means any liquid having a flashpoint below 
100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.), except any mixture having components with 
flashpoints of 100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.) or higher, the total of which 
make up 99 percent or more of the total volume of the mixture. Flammable 
liquids shall be known as Class I liquids. Class I liquids are divided 
into three classes as follows:
    (i) Class IA shall include liquids having flashpoints below 
73 deg.F. (22.8 deg.C.) and having a boiling point below 100 deg.F. 
(37.8 deg.C.).
    (ii) Class IB shall include liquids having flashpoints below 
73 deg.F. (22.8 deg.C.) and having a boiling point at or above 
100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.).
    (iii) Class IC shall include liquids having flashpoints at or above 
73 deg.F. (22.8 deg.C.) and below 100 deg.F. (37.8 deg.C.).
    (20) Unstable (reactive) liquid shall mean a liquid which in the 
pure state or as commercially produced or transported will vigorously 
polymerize, decompose, condense, or will become self-reactive under 
conditions of shocks, pressure, or temperature.
    (21) Low-pressure tank shall mean a storage tank which has been 
designed to operate at pressures above 0.5 p.s.i.g. but not more than 15 
p.s.i.g.
    (22) Marine service station shall mean that portion of a property 
where flammable or combustible liquids used as fuels are stored and 
dispensed from fixed equipment on shore, piers, wharves, or floating 
docks into the fuel tanks of self-propelled craft, and shall include all 
facilities used in connection therewith.
    (23) Mercantile occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a 
building or

[[Page 230]]

structure or any portion thereof for the displaying, selling, or buying 
of goods, wares, or merchandise.
    (24) Office occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building 
or structure or any portion thereof for the transaction of business, or 
the rendering or receiving of professional services.
    (25) Portable tank shall mean a closed container having a liquid 
capacity over 60 U.S. gallons and not intended for fixed installation.
    (26) Pressure vessel shall mean a storage tank or vessel which has 
been designed to operate at pressures above 15 p.s.i.g.
    (27) Protection for exposure shall mean adequate fire protection for 
structures on property adjacent to tanks, where there are employees of 
the establishment.
    (28) Refinery shall mean a plant in which flammable or combustible 
liquids are produced on a commercial scale from crude petroleum, natural 
gasoline, or other hydrocarbon sources.
    (29) Safety can shall mean an approved container, of not more than 5 
gallons capacity, having a spring-closing lid and spout cover and so 
designed that it will safely relieve internal pressure when subjected to 
fire exposure.
    (30) Vapor pressure shall mean the pressure, measured in pounds per 
square inch (absolute) exerted by a volatile liquid as determined by the 
``Standard Method of Test for Vapor Pressure of Petroleum Products (Reid 
Method),'' American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM D323-68, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (31) Ventilation as specified in this section is for the prevention 
of fire and explosion. It is considered adequate if it is sufficient to 
prevent accumulation of significant quantities of vapor-air mixtures in 
concentration over one-fourth of the lower flammable limit.
    (32) Storage: Flammable or combustible liquids shall be stored in a 
tank or in a container that complies with paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section.
    (33) Barrel shall mean a volume of 42 U.S. gallons.
    (34) Container shall mean any can, barrel, or drum.
    (35) Approved unless otherwise indicated, approved, or listed by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for 
definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (36) Listed see ``approved'' in Sec. 1910.106(a)(35).
    (37) SUS means Saybolt Universal Seconds as determined by the 
Standard Method of Test for Saybolt Viscosity (ASTM D-88-56), and may be 
determined by use of the SUS conversion tables specified in ASTM Method 
D2161-66 following determination of viscosity in accordance with the 
procedures specified in the Standard Method of Test for Viscosity of 
Transparent and Opaque Liquids (ASTM D445-65).
    (38) Viscous means a viscosity of 45 SUS or more.
    (b) Tank storage--(1) Design and construction of tanks--(i) 
Materials. (a) Tanks shall be built of steel except as provided in 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i) (b) through (e) of this section.
    (b) Tanks may be built of materials other than steel for 
installation underground or if required by the properties of the liquid 
stored. Tanks located above ground or inside buildings shall be of 
noncombustible construction.
    (c) Tanks built of materials other than steel shall be designed to 
specifications embodying principles recognized as good engineering 
design for the material used.
    (d) Unlined concrete tanks may be used for storing flammable or 
combustible liquids having a gravity of 40 deg. API or heavier. Concrete 
tanks with special lining may be used for other services provided the 
design is in accordance with sound engineering practice.
    (e) [Reserved]
    (f) Special engineering consideration shall be required if the 
specific gravity of the liquid to be stored exceeds that of water or if 
the tanks are designed to contain flammable or combustible liquids at a 
liquid temperature below 0 deg.F.
    (ii) Fabrication. (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Metal tanks shall be welded, riveted, and caulked, brazed, or 
bolted, or constructed by use of a combination of these methods. Filler 
metal used in brazing shall be nonferrous metal or an alloy having a 
melting point above 1000 deg. F. and below that of the metal joined.

[[Page 231]]

    (iii) Atmospheric tanks. (a) Atmospheric tanks shall be built in 
accordance with acceptable good standards of design. Atmospheric tanks 
may be built in accordance with the following consensus standards that 
are incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6:
    (1) Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., Subjects No. 142, Standard for 
Steel Aboveground Tanks for Flammable and Combustible Liquids, 1968; No. 
58, Standard for Steel Underground Tanks for Flammable and Combustible 
Liquids, Fifth Edition, December 1961; or No. 80, Standard for Steel 
Inside Tanks for Oil-Burner Fuel, September 1963.
    (2) American Petroleum Institute Standards No. 12A, Specification 
for Oil Storage Tanks with Riveted Shells, Seventh Edition, September 
1951, or No. 650, Welded Steel Tanks for Oil Storage, Third Edition, 
1966.
    (3) American Petroleum Institute Standards No. 12B, Specification 
for Bolted Production Tanks, Eleventh Edition, May 1958, and Supplement 
1, March 1962; No. 12D, Specification for Large Welded Production Tanks, 
Seventh Edition, August 1957; or No. 12F, Specification for Small Welded 
Production Tanks, Fifth Edition, March 1961. Tanks built in accordance 
with these standards shall be used only as production tanks for storage 
of crude petroleum in oil-producing areas.
    (b) Tanks designed for underground service not exceeding 2,500 
gallons capacity may be used aboveground.
    (c) Low-pressure tanks and pressure vessels may be used as 
atmospheric tanks.
    (d) Atmospheric tanks shall not be used for the storage of a 
flammable or combustible liquid at a temperature at or above its boiling 
point.
    (iv) Low pressure tanks. (a) The normal operating pressure of the 
tank shall not exceed the design pressure of the tank.
    (b) Low-pressure tanks shall be built in accordance with acceptable 
standards of design. Low-pressure tanks may be built in accordance with 
the following consensus standards that are incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6:
    (1) American Petroleum Institute Standard No. 620. Recommended Rules 
for the Design and Construction of Large, Welded, Low-Pressure Storage 
Tanks, Third Edition, 1966.
    (2) The principles of the Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels, Section 
VIII of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessels Code, 1968.
    (c) Atmospheric tanks built according to Underwriters' Laboratories, 
Inc., requirements in subdivision (iii)(a) of and shall be limited to 
2.5 p.s.i.g. under emergency venting conditions.

This paragraph may be used for operating pressures not exceeding 1 
p.s.i.g.
    (d) Pressure vessels may be used as low-pressure tanks.
    (v) Pressure vessels. (a) The normal operating pressure of the 
vessel shall not exceed the design pressure of the vessel.
    (b) Pressure vessels shall be built in accordance with the Code for 
Unfired Pressure Vessels, Section VIII of the ASME Boiler and Pressure 
Vessel Code 1968.
    (vi) Provisions for internal corrosion. When tanks are not designed 
in accordance with the American Petroleum Institute, American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, or the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.'s, 
standards, or if corrosion is anticipated beyond that provided for in 
the design formulas used, additional metal thickness or suitable 
protective coatings or linings shall be provided to compensate for the 
corrosion loss expected during the design life of the tank.
    (2) Installation of outside aboveground tanks.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Spacing (shell-to-shell) between aboveground tanks. (a) The 
distance between any two flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks 
shall not be less than 3 feet.
    (b) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(c) of this section, 
the distance between any two adjacent tanks shall not be less than one-
sixth the sum of their diameters. When the diameter of one tank is less 
than one-half the diameter of the adjacent tank, the distance between 
the two tanks shall not be less than one-half the diameter of the 
smaller tank.
    (c) Where crude petroleum in conjunction with production facilities 
are located in noncongested areas and have

[[Page 232]]

capacities not exceeding 126,000 gallons (3,000 barrels), the distance 
between such tanks shall not be less than 3 feet.
    (d) Where unstable flammable or combustible liquids are stored, the 
distance between such tanks shall not be less than one-half the sum of 
their diameters.
    (e) When tanks are compacted in three or more rows or in an 
irregular pattern, greater spacing or other means shall be provided so 
that inside tanks are accessible for firefighting purposes.
    (f) The minimum separation between a liquefied petroleum gas 
container and a flammable or combustible liquid storage tank shall be 20 
feet, except in the case of flammable or combustible liquid tanks 
operating at pressures exceeding 2.5 p.s.i.g. or equipped with emergency 
venting which will permit pressures to exceed 2.5 p.s.i.g. in which case 
the provisions of subdivisions (a) and (b) of this subdivision shall 
apply. Suitable means shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of 
flammable or combustible liquids under adjacent liquefied petroleum gas 
containers such as by diversion curbs or grading. When flammable or 
combustible liquid storage tanks are within a diked area, the liquefied 
petroleum gas containers shall be outside the diked area and at least 10 
feet away from the centerline of the wall of the diked area. The 
foregoing provisions shall not apply when liquefied petroleum gas 
containers of 125 gallons or less capacity are installed adjacent to 
fuel oil supply tanks of 550 gallons or less capacity.
    (iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) Normal venting for aboveground tanks. (a) Atmospheric storage 
tanks shall be adequately vented to prevent the development of vacuum or 
pressure sufficient to distort the roof of a cone roof tank or exceeding 
the design pressure in the case of other atmospheric tanks, as a result 
of filling or emptying, and atmospheric temperature changes.
    (b) Normal vents shall be sized either in accordance with: (1) The 
American Petroleum Institute Standard 2000 (1968), Venting Atmospheric 
and Low-Pressure Storage Tanks, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6; or (2) other accepted standard; or (3) shall 
be at least as large as the filling or withdrawal connection, whichever 
is larger but in no case less than 1\1/4\ inch nominal inside diameter.
    (c) Low-pressure tanks and pressure vessels shall be adequately 
vented to prevent development of pressure or vacuum, as a result of 
filling or emptying and atmospheric temperature changes, from exceeding 
the design pressure of the tank or vessel. Protection shall also be 
provided to prevent overpressure from any pump discharging into the tank 
or vessel when the pump discharge pressure can exceed the design 
pressure of the tank or vessel.
    (d) If any tank or pressure vessel has more than one fill or 
withdrawal connection and simultaneous filling or withdrawal can be 
made, the vent size shall be based on the maximum anticipated 
simultaneous flow.
    (e) Unless the vent is designed to limit the internal pressure 2.5 
p.s.i. or less, the outlet of vents and vent drains shall be arranged to 
discharge in such a manner as to prevent localized overheating of any 
part of the tank in the event vapors from such vents are ignited.
    (f) Tanks and pressure vessels storing Class IA liquids shall be 
equipped with venting devices which shall be normally closed except when 
venting to pressure or vacuum conditions. Tanks and pressure vessels 
storing Class IB and IC liquids shall be equipped with venting devices 
which shall be normally closed except when venting under pressure or 
vacuum conditions, or with approved flame arresters.

Exemption: Tanks of 3,000 bbls. capacity or less containing crude 
petroleum in crude-producing areas; and, outside aboveground atmospheric 
tanks under 1,000 gallons capacity containing other than Class IA 
flammable liquids may have open vents. (See subdivision (vi)(b) of this 
subparagraph.)
    (g) Flame arresters or venting devices required in subdivision (f) 
of this subdivision may be omitted for Class IB and IC liquids where 
conditions are such that their use may, in case of obstruction, result 
in tank damage.
    (v) Emergency relief venting for fire exposure for aboveground 
tanks. (a) Every aboveground storage tank shall have

[[Page 233]]

some form of construction or device that will relieve excessive internal 
pressure caused by exposure fires.
    (b) In a vertical tank the construction referred to in subdivision 
(a) of this subdivision may take the form of a floating roof, lifter 
roof, a weak roof-to-shell seam, or other approved pressure relieving 
construction. The weak roof-to-shell seam shall be constructed to fail 
preferential to any other seam.
    (c) Where entire dependence for emergency relief is placed upon 
pressure relieving devices, the total venting capacity of both normal 
and emergency vents shall be enough to prevent rupture of the shell or 
bottom of the tank if vertical, or of the shell or heads if horizontal. 
If unstable liquids are stored, the effects of heat or gas resulting 
from polymerization, decomposition, condensation, or self-reactivity 
shall be taken into account. The total capacity of both normal and 
emergency venting devices shall be not less than that derived from Table 
H-10 except as provided in subdivision (e) or (f) of this subdivision. 
Such device may be a self-closing manhole cover, or one using long bolts 
that permit the cover to lift under internal pressure, or an additional 
or larger relief valve or valves. The wetted area of the tank shall be 
calculated on the basis of 55 percent of the total exposed area of a 
sphere or spheroid, 75 percent of the total exposed area of a horizontal 
tank and the first 30 feet above grade of the exposed shell area of a 
vertical tank.

       Table H-10--Wetted Area Versus Cubic Feet Free Air Per Hour
                       [14.7 psia and 60 deg. F.]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Square                  Square
Square feet      CFH         feet         CFH        feet         CFH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
20.........      21,100         200     211,000       1,000     524,000
30.........      31,600         250     239,000       1,200     557,000
40.........      42,100         300     265,000       1,400     587,000
50.........      52,700         350     288,000       1,600     614,000
60.........      63,200         400     312,000       1,800     639,000
70.........      73,700         500     354,000       2,000     662,000
80.........      84,200         600     392,000       2,400     704,000
90.........      94,800         700     428,000       2,800     742,000
100........     105,000         800     462,000         and
120........     126,000         900     493,000       5over
140........     147,000       1,000     524,000
160........     168,000
180........     190,000
200........     211,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) For tanks and storage vessels designed for pressure over 1 
p.s.i.g., the total rate of venting shall be determined in accordance 
with Table H-10, except that when the exposed wetted area of the surface 
is greater than 2,800 square feet, the total rate of venting shall be 
calculated by the following formula:

                          CFH=1,107A <SUP>0.82

</SUP>Where;
    CFH=Venting requirement, in cubic feet of free air per hour.
    A=Exposed wetted surface, in square feet.

    Note: The foregoing formula is based on Q=21,000A <SUP>0.82</SUP>.

    (e) The total emergency relief venting capacity for any specific 
stable liquid may be determined by the following formula:

                        V=1337<divide>L<radical>M

V=Cubic feet of free air per hour from Table H-10.
L=Latent heat of vaporization of specific liquid in B.t.u. per pound.
M=Molecular weight of specific liquids.

    (f) The required airflow rate of subdivision (c) or (e) of this 
subdivision may be multiplied by the appropriate factor listed in the 
following schedule when protection is provided as indicated. Only one 
factor may be used for any one tank.

    0.5 for drainage in accordance with subdivision (vii)(b) of this 
subparagraph for tanks over 200 square feet of wetted area.
    0.3 for approved water spray.

[[Page 234]]

    0.3 for approved insulation.
    0.15 for approved water spray with approved insulation.

    (g) The outlet of all vents and vent drains on tanks equipped with 
emergency venting to permit pressures exceeding 2.5 p.s.i.g. shall be 
arranged to discharge in such a way as to prevent localized overheating 
of any part of the tank, in the event vapors from such vents are 
ignited.
    (h) Each commercial tank venting device shall have stamped on it the 
opening pressure, the pressure at which the valve reaches the full open 
position, and the flow capacity at the latter pressure, expressed in 
cubic feet per hour of air at 60 deg. F. and at a pressure of 14.7 
p.s.i.a.
    (i) The flow capacity of tank venting devices 12 inches and smaller 
in nominal pipe size shall be determined by actual test of each type and 
size of vent. These flow tests may be conducted by the manufacturer if 
certified by a qualified impartial observer, or may be conducted by an 
outside agency. The flow capacity of tank venting devices larger than 12 
inches nominal pipe size, including manhole covers with long bolts or 
equivalent, may be calculated provided that the opening pressure is 
actually measured, the rating pressure and corresponding free orifice 
area are stated, the word ``calculated'' appears on the nameplate, and 
the computation is based on a flow coefficient of 0.5 applied to the 
rated orifice area.
    (vi) Vent piping for aboveground tanks. (a) Vent piping shall be 
constructed in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Where vent pipe outlets for tanks storing Class I liquids are 
adjacent to buildings or public ways, they shall be located so that the 
vapors are released at a safe point outside of buildings and not less 
than 12 feet above the adjacent ground level. In order to aid their 
dispersion, vapors shall be discharged upward or horizontally away from 
closely adjacent walls. Vent outlets shall be located so that flammable 
vapors will not be trapped by eaves or other obstructions and shall be 
at least five feet from building openings.
    (c) When tank vent piping is manifolded, pipe sizes shall be such as 
to discharge, within the pressure limitations of the system, the vapors 
they may be required to handle when manifolded tanks are subject to the 
same fire exposure.
    (vii) Drainage, dikes, and walls for aboveground tanks--(a) Drainage 
and diked areas. The area surrounding a tank or a group of tanks shall 
be provided with drainage as in subdivision (b) of this subdivision, or 
shall be diked as provided in subdivision (c) of this subdivision, to 
prevent accidental discharge of liquid from endangering adjoining 
property or reaching waterways.
    (b) Drainage. Where protection of adjoining property or waterways is 
by means of a natural or manmade drainage system, such systems shall 
comply with the following:
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) The drainage system shall terminate in vacant land or other area 
or in an impounding basin having a capacity not smaller than that of the 
largest tank served. This termination area and the route of the drainage 
system shall be so located that, if the flammable or combustible liquids 
in the drainage system are ignited, the fire will not seriously expose 
tanks or adjoining property.
    (c) Diked areas. Where protection of adjoining property or waterways 
is accomplished by retaining the liquid around the tank by means of a 
dike, the volume of the diked area shall comply with the following 
requirements:
    (1) Except as provided in subdivision (2) of this subdivision, the 
volumetric capacity of the diked area shall not be less than the 
greatest amount of liquid that can be released from the largest tank 
within the diked area, assuming a full tank. The capacity of the diked 
area enclosing more than one tank shall be calculated by deducting the 
volume of the tanks other than the largest tank below the height of the 
dike.
    (2) For a tank or group of tanks with fixed roofs containing crude 
petroleum with boilover characteristics, the volumetric capacity of the 
diked area shall be not less than the capacity of the largest tank 
served by the enclosure, assuming a full tank. The capacity of the diked 
enclosure shall be calculated

[[Page 235]]

by deducting the volume below the height of the dike of all tanks within 
the enclosure.
    (3) Walls of the diked area shall be of earth, steel, concrete or 
solid masonry designed to be liquidtight and to withstand a full 
hydrostatic head. Earthen walls 3 feet or more in height shall have a 
flat section at the top not less than 2 feet wide. The slope of an 
earthen wall shall be consistent with the angle of repose of the 
material of which the wall is constructed.
    (4) The walls of the diked area shall be restricted to an average 
height of 6 feet above interior grade.
    (5) [Reserved]
    (6) No loose combustible material, empty or full drum or barrel, 
shall be permitted within the diked area.
    (viii) Tank openings other than vents for aboveground tanks.
    (a)-(c) [Reserved]
    (d) Openings for gaging shall be provided with a vaportight cap or 
cover.
    (e) For Class IB and Class IC liquids other than crude oils, 
gasolines, and asphalts, the fill pipe shall be so designed and 
installed as to minimize the possibility of generating static 
electricity. A fill pipe entering the top of a tank shall terminate 
within 6 inches of the bottom of the tank and shall be installed to 
avoid excessive vibration.
    (f) Filling and emptying connections which are made and broken shall 
be located outside of buildings at a location free from any source of 
ignition and not less than 5 feet away from any building opening. Such 
connection shall be closed and liquidtight when not in use. The 
connection shall be properly identified.
    (3) Installation of underground tanks--(i) Location. Excavation for 
underground storage tanks shall be made with due care to avoid 
undermining of foundations of existing structures. Underground tanks or 
tanks under buildings shall be so located with respect to existing 
building foundations and supports that the loads carried by the latter 
cannot be transmitted to the tank. The distance from any part of a tank 
storing Class I liquids to the nearest wall of any basement or pit shall 
be not less than 1 foot, and to any property line that may be built 
upon, not less than 3 feet. The distance from any part of a tank storing 
Class II or Class III liquids to the nearest wall of any basement, pit 
or property line shall be not less than 1 foot.
    (ii) Depth and cover. Underground tanks shall be set on firm 
foundations and surrounded with at least 6 inches of noncorrosive, inert 
materials such as clean sand, earth, or gravel well tamped in place. The 
tank shall be placed in the hole with care since dropping or rolling the 
tank into the hole can break a weld, puncture or damage the tank, or 
scrape off the protective coating of coated tanks. Tanks shall be 
covered with a minimum of 2 feet of earth, or shall be covered with not 
less than 1 foot of earth, on top of which shall be placed a slab of 
reinforced concrete not less than 4 inches thick. When underground tanks 
are, or are likely to be, subject to traffic, they shall be protected 
against damage from vehicles passing over them by at least 3 feet of 
earth cover, or 18 inches of well-tamped earth, plus 6 inches of 
reinforced concrete or 8 inches of asphaltic concrete. When asphaltic or 
reinforced concrete paving is used as part of the protection, it shall 
extend at least 1 foot horizontally beyond the outline of the tank in 
all directions.
    (iii) Corrosion protection. Corrosion protection for the tank and 
its piping shall be provided by one or more of the following methods:
    (a) Use of protective coatings or wrappings;
    (b) Cathodic protection; or,
    (c) Corrosion resistant materials of construction.
    (iv) Vents. (a) Location and arrangement of vents for Class I 
liquids. Vent pipes from tanks storing Class I liquids shall be so 
located that the discharge point is outside of buildings, higher than 
the fill pipe opening, and not less than 12 feet above the adjacent 
ground level. Vent pipes shall discharge only upward in order to 
disperse vapors. Vent pipes 2 inches or less in nominal inside diameter 
shall not be obstructed by devices that will cause excessive back 
pressure. Vent pipe outlets shall be so located that flammable vapors 
will not enter building openings, or be trapped under eaves or other 
obstructions. If the vent pipe is less than 10 feet in length, or 
greater than 2 inches

[[Page 236]]

in nominal inside diameter, the outlet shall be provided with a vacuum 
and pressure relief device or there shall be an approved flame arrester 
located in the vent line at the outlet or within the approved distance 
from the outlet.
    (b) Size of vents. Each tank shall be vented through piping adequate 
in size to prevent blow-back of vapor or liquid at the fill opening 
while the tank is being filled. Vent pipes shall be not less than 1\1/4\ 
inch nominal inside diameter.

                     Table H-11--Vent Line Diameters
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Pipe length \1\
             Maximum flow GPM              -----------------------------
                                             50 feet  100 feet  200 feet
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Inches    Inches    Inches
100.......................................    1\1/4\    1\1/4\    1\1/4\
200.......................................    1\1/4\    1\1/4\    1\1/4\
300.......................................    1\1/4\    1\1/4\    1\1/2\
400.......................................    1\1/4\    1\1/2\       2
500.......................................    1\1/2\    1\1/2\       2
600.......................................    1\1/2\       2         2
700.......................................       2         2         2
800.......................................       2         2         3
900.......................................       2         2         3
1,000.....................................       2         2         3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Vent lines of 50 ft., 100 ft., and 200 ft. of pipe plus 7 ells.

    (c) Location and arrangement of vents for Class II or Class III 
liquids. Vent pipes from tanks storing Class II or Class III flammable 
liquids shall terminate outside of the building and higher than the fill 
pipe opening. Vent outlets shall be above normal snow level. They may be 
fitted with return bends, coarse screens or other devices to minimize 
ingress of foreign material.
    (d) Vent piping shall be constructed in accordance with paragraph 
(c) of this section. Vent pipes shall be so laid as to drain toward the 
tank without sags or traps in which liquid can collect. They shall be 
located so that they will not be subjected to physical damage. The tank 
end of the vent pipe shall enter the tank through the top.
    (e) When tank vent piping is manifolded, pipe sizes shall be such as 
to discharge, within the pressure limitations of the system, the vapors 
they may be required to handle when manifolded tanks are filled 
simultaneously.
    (v) Tank openings other than vents. (a) Connections for all tank 
openings shall be vapor or liquid tight.
    (b) Openings for manual gaging, if independent of the fill pipe, 
shall be provided with a liquid-tight cap or cover. If inside a 
building, each such opening shall be protected against liquid overflow 
and possible vapor release by means of a spring loaded check valve or 
other approved device.
    (c) Fill and discharge lines shall enter tanks only through the top. 
Fill lines shall be sloped toward the tank.
    (d) For Class IB and Class IC liquids other than crude oils, 
gasolines, and asphalts, the fill pipe shall be so designed and 
installed as to minimize the possibility of generating static 
electricity by terminating within 6 inches of the bottom of the tank.
    (e) Filling and emptying connections which are made and broken shall 
be located outside of buildings at a location free from any source of 
ignition and not less than 5 feet away from any building opening. Such 
connection shall be closed and liquidtight when not in use. The 
connection shall be properly identified.
    (4) Installation of tanks inside of buildings--(i) Location. Tanks 
shall not be permitted inside of buildings except as provided in 
paragraphs (e), (g), (h), or (i) of this section.
    (ii) Vents. Vents for tanks inside of buildings shall be as provided 
in subparagraphs (2) (iv), (v), (vi)(b), and (3)(iv) of this paragraph, 
except that emergency venting by the use of weak roof seams on tanks 
shall not be permitted. Vents shall discharge vapors outside the 
buildings.
    (iii) Vent piping. Vent piping shall be constructed in accordance 
with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (iv) Tank openings other than vents. (a) Connections for all tank 
openings shall be vapor or liquidtight. Vents are covered in subdivision 
(ii) of this subparagraph.
    (b) Each connection to a tank inside of buildings through which 
liquid can normally flow shall be provided with an internal or an 
external valve located as close as practical to the shell of the tank. 
Such valves, when external, and their connections to the tank shall be 
of steel except when the chemical characteristics of the liquid stored 
are incompatible with steel. When materials other than steel are 
necessary,

[[Page 237]]

they shall be suitable for the pressures, structural stresses, and 
temperatures involved, including fire exposures.
    (c) Flammable or combustible liquid tanks located inside of 
buildings, except in one-story buildings designed and protected for 
flammable or combustible liquid storage, shall be provided with an 
automatic-closing heat-actuated valve on each withdrawal connection 
below the liquid level, except for connections used for emergency 
disposal, to prevent continued flow in the event of fire in the vicinity 
of the tank. This function may be incorporated in the valve required in 
(b) of this subdivision, and if a separate valve, shall be located 
adjacent to the valve required in (b) of this subdivision.
    (d) Openings for manual gaging, if independent of the fill pipe (see 
(f) of this subdivision), shall be provided with a vaportight cap or 
cover. Each such opening shall be protected against liquid overflow and 
possible vapor release by means of a spring loaded check valve or other 
approved device.
    (e) For Class IB and Class IC liquids other than crude oils, 
gasolines, and asphalts, the fill pipe shall be so designed and 
installed as to minimize the possibility of generating static 
electricity by terminating within 6 inches of the bottom of the tank.
    (f) The fill pipe inside of the tank shall be installed to avoid 
excessive vibration of the pipe.
    (g) The inlet of the fill pipe shall be located outside of buildings 
at a location free from any source of ignition and not less than 5 feet 
away from any building opening. The inlet of the fill pipe shall be 
closed and liquidtight when not in use. The fill connection shall be 
properly identified.
    (h) Tanks inside buildings shall be equipped with a device, or other 
means shall be provided, to prevent overflow into the building.
    (5) Supports, foundations, and anchorage for all tank locations--(i) 
General. Tank supports shall be installed on firm foundations. Tank 
supports shall be of concrete, masonry, or protected steel. Single wood 
timber supports (not cribbing) laid horizontally may be used for outside 
aboveground tanks if not more than 12 inches high at their lowest point.
    (ii) Fire resistance. Steel supports or exposed piling shall be 
protected by materials having a fire resistance rating of not less than 
2 hours, except that steel saddles need not be protected if less than 12 
inches high at their lowest point. Water spray protection or its 
equivalent may be used in lieu of fire-resistive materials to protect 
supports.
    (iii) Spheres. The design of the supporting structure for tanks such 
as spheres shall receive special engineering consideration.
    (iv) Load distribution. Every tank shall be so supported as to 
prevent the excessive concentration of loads on the supporting portion 
of the shell.
    (v) Foundations. Tanks shall rest on the ground or on foundations 
made of concrete, masonry, piling, or steel. Tank foundations shall be 
designed to minimize the possibility of uneven settling of the tank and 
to minimize corrosion in any part of the tank resting on the foundation.
    (vi) Flood areas. Where a tank is located in an area that may be 
subjected to flooding, the applicable precautions outlined in this 
subdivision shall be observed.
    (a) No aboveground vertical storage tank containing a flammable or 
combustible liquid shall be located so that the allowable liquid level 
within the tank is below the established maximum flood stage, unless the 
tank is provided with a guiding structure such as described in (m), (n), 
and (o) of this subdivision.
    (b) Independent water supply facilities shall be provided at 
locations where there is no ample and dependable public water supply 
available for loading partially empty tanks with water.
    (c) In addition to the preceding requirements, each tank so located 
that more than 70 percent, but less than 100 percent, of its allowable 
liquid storage capacity will be submerged at the established maximum 
flood stage, shall be safeguarded by one of the following methods: Tank 
shall be raised, or its height shall be increased, until its top extends 
above the maximum flood stage a distance equivalent to 30 percent or 
more of its allowable liquid storage capacity: Provided, however, That 
the submerged part of the tank shall not exceed two and one-half times

[[Page 238]]

the diameter. Or, as an alternative to the foregoing, adequate 
noncombustible structural guides, designed to permit the tank to float 
vertically without loss of product, shall be provided.
    (d) Each horizontal tank so located that more than 70 percent of its 
storage capacity will be submerged at the established flood stage, shall 
be anchored, attached to a foundation of concrete or of steel and 
concrete, of sufficient weight to provide adequate load for the tank 
when filled with flammable or combustible liquid and submerged by flood 
waters to the established flood stage, or adequately secured by other 
means.
    (e) [Reserved]
    (f) At locations where there is no ample and dependable water 
supply, or where filling of underground tanks with liquids is 
impracticable because of the character of their contents, their use, or 
for other reasons, each tank shall be safeguarded against movement when 
empty and submerged by high ground water or flood waters by anchoring, 
weighting with concrete or other approved solid loading material, or 
securing by other means. Each such tank shall be so constructed and 
installed that it will safely resist external pressures due to high 
ground water or flood waters.
    (g) At locations where there is an ample and dependable water supply 
available, underground tanks containing flammable or combustible 
liquids, so installed that more than 70 percent of their storage 
capacity will be submerged at the maximum flood stage, shall be so 
anchored, weighted, or secured by other means, as to prevent movement of 
such tanks when filled with flammable or combustible liquids, and 
submerged by flood waters to the established flood stage.
    (h) Pipe connections below the allowable liquid level in a tank 
shall be provided with valves or cocks located as closely as practicable 
to the tank shell. Such valves and their connections to tanks shall be 
of steel or other material suitable for use with the liquid being 
stored. Cast iron shall not be permitted.
    (i) At locations where an independent water supply is required, it 
shall be entirely independent of public power and water supply. 
Independent source of water shall be available when flood waters reach a 
level not less than 10 feet below the bottom of the lowest tank on a 
property.
    (j) The self-contained power and pumping unit shall be so located or 
so designed that pumping into tanks may be carried on continuously 
throughout the rise in flood waters from a level 10 feet below the 
lowest tank to the level of the potential flood stage.
    (k) Capacity of the pumping unit shall be such that the rate of rise 
of water in all tanks shall be equivalent to the established potential 
average rate of rise of flood waters at any stage.
    (l) Each independent pumping unit shall be tested periodically to 
insure that it is in satisfactory operating condition.
    (m) Structural guides for holding floating tanks above their 
foundations shall be so designed that there will be no resistance to the 
free rise of a tank, and shall be constructed of noncombustible 
material.
    (n) The strength of the structure shall be adequate to resist 
lateral movement of a tank subject to a horizontal force in any 
direction equivalent to not less than 25 pounds per square foot acting 
on the projected vertical cross-sectional area of the tank.
    (o) Where tanks are situated on exposed points or bends in a 
shoreline where swift currents in flood waters will be present, the 
structures shall be designed to withstand a unit force of not less than 
50 pounds per square foot.
    (p) The filling of a tank to be protected by water loading shall be 
started as soon as flood waters reach a dangerous flood stage. The rate 
of filling shall be at least equal to the rate of rise of the 
floodwaters (or the established average potential rate of rise).
    (q) Sufficient fuel to operate the water pumps shall be available at 
all times to insure adequate power to fill all tankage with water.
    (r) All valves on connecting pipelines shall be closed and locked in 
closed position when water loading has been completed.
    (s) Where structural guides are provided for the protection of 
floating tanks, all rigid connections between

[[Page 239]]

tanks and pipelines shall be disconnected and blanked off or blinded 
before the floodwaters reach the bottom of the tank, unless control 
valves and their connections to the tank are of a type designed to 
prevent breakage between the valve and the tank shell.
    (t) All valves attached to tanks other than those used in connection 
with water loading operations shall be closed and locked.
    (u) If a tank is equipped with a swing line, the swing pipe shall be 
raised to and secured at its highest position.
    (v) Inspections. The Assistant Secretary or his designated 
representative shall make periodic inspections of all plants where the 
storage of flammable or combustible liquids is such as to require 
compliance with the foregoing requirements, in order to assure the 
following:
    (1) That all flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks are in 
compliance with these requirements and so maintained.
    (2) That detailed printed instructions of what to do in flood 
emergencies are properly posted.
    (3) That station operators and other employees depended upon to 
carry out such instructions are thoroughly informed as to the location 
and operation of such valves and other equipment necessary to effect 
these requirements.
    (vii) Earthquake areas. In areas subject to earthquakes, the tank 
supports and connections shall be designed to resist damage as a result 
of such shocks.
    (6) Sources of ignition. In locations where flammable vapors may be 
present, precautions shall be taken to prevent ignition by eliminating 
or controlling sources of ignition. Sources of ignition may include open 
flames, lightning, smoking, cutting and welding, hot surfaces, 
frictional heat, sparks (static, electrical, and mechanical), 
spontaneous ignition, chemical and physical-chemical reactions, and 
radiant heat.
    (7) Testing--(i) General. All tanks, whether shop built or field 
erected, shall be strength tested before they are placed in service in 
accordance with the applicable paragraphs of the code under which they 
were built. The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) code 
stamp, American Petroleum Institute (API) monogram, or the label of the 
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., on a tank shall be evidence of 
compliance with this strength test. Tanks not marked in accordance with 
the above codes shall be strength tested before they are placed in 
service in accordance with good engineering principles and reference 
shall be made to the sections on testing in the codes listed in 
subparagraphs (1) (iii)(a), (iv)(b), or (v)(b) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Strength. When the vertical length of the fill and vent pipes 
is such that when filled with liquid the static head imposed upon the 
bottom of the tank exceeds 10 pounds per square inch, the tank and 
related piping shall be tested hydrostatically to a pressure equal to 
the static head thus imposed.
    (iii) Tightness. In addition to the strength test called for in 
subdivisions (i) and (ii) of this subparagraph, all tanks and 
connections shall be tested for tightness. Except for underground tanks, 
this tightness test shall be made at operating pressure with air, inert 
gas, or water prior to placing the tank in service. In the case of 
field-erected tanks the strength test may be considered to be the test 
for tank tightness. Underground tanks and piping, before being covered, 
enclosed, or placed in use, shall be tested for tightness 
hydrostatically, or with air pressure at not less than 3 pounds per 
square inch and not more than 5 pounds per square inch.
    (iv) Repairs. All leaks or deformations shall be corrected in an 
acceptable manner before the tank is placed in service. Mechanical 
caulking is not permitted for correcting leaks in welded tanks except 
pinhole leaks in the roof.
    (v) Derated operations. Tanks to be operated at pressures below 
their design pressure may be tested by the applicable provisions of 
subdivision (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph, based upon the pressure 
developed under full emergency venting of the tank.
    (c) Piping, valves, and fittings--(1) General--(i) Design. The 
design (including selection of materials) fabrication, assembly, test, 
and inspection of piping systems containing flammable or combustible 
liquids shall be suitable for

[[Page 240]]

the expected working pressures and structural stresses. Conformity with 
the applicable provisions of Pressure Piping, ANSI B31 series and the 
provisions of this paragraph, shall be considered prima facie evidence 
of compliance with the foregoing provisions.
    (ii) Exceptions. This paragraph does not apply to any of the 
following:
    (a) Tubing or casing on any oil or gas wells and any piping 
connected directly thereto.
    (b) Motor vehicle, aircraft, boat, or portable or stationary 
engines.
    (c) Piping within the scope of any applicable boiler and pressures 
vessel code.
    (iii) Definitions. As used in this paragraph, piping systems consist 
of pipe, tubing, flanges, bolting, gaskets, valves, fittings, the 
pressure containing parts of other components such as expansion joints 
and strainers, and devices which serve such purposes as mixing, 
separating, snubbing, distributing, metering, or controlling flow.
    (2) Materials for piping, valves, and fittings--(i) Required 
materials. Materials for piping, valves, or fittings shall be steel, 
nodular iron, or malleable iron, except as provided in paragraph (c)(2) 
(ii), (iii) and (iv) of this section.
    (ii) Exceptions. Materials other than steel, nodular iron, or 
malleable iron may be used underground, or if required by the properties 
of the flammable or combustible liquid handled. Material other than 
steel, nodular iron, or malleable iron shall be designed to 
specifications embodying principles recognized as good engineering 
practices for the material used.
    (iii) Linings. Piping, valves, and fittings may have combustible or 
noncombustible linings.
    (iv) Low-melting materials. When low-melting point materials such as 
aluminum and brass or materials that soften on fire exposure such as 
plastics, or non-ductile materials such as cast iron, are necessary, 
special consideration shall be given to their behavior on fire exposure. 
If such materials are used in above ground piping systems or inside 
buildings, they shall be suitably protected against fire exposure or so 
located that any spill resulting from the failure of these materials 
could not unduly expose persons, important buildings or structures or 
can be readily controlled by remote valves.
    (3) Pipe joints. Joints shall be made liquid tight. Welded or 
screwed joints or approved connectors shall be used. Threaded joints and 
connections shall be made up tight with a suitable lubricant or piping 
compound. Pipe joints dependent upon the friction characteristics of 
combustible materials for mechanical continuity of piping shall not be 
used inside buildings. They may be used outside of buildings above or 
below ground. If used above ground, the piping shall either be secured 
to prevent disengagement at the fitting or the piping system shall be so 
designed that any spill resulting from such disengagement could not 
unduly expose persons, important buildings or structures, and could be 
readily controlled by remote valves.
    (4) Supports. Piping systems shall be substantially supported and 
protected against physical damage and excessive stresses arising from 
settlement, vibration, expansion, or contraction.
    (5) Protection against corrosion. All piping for flammable or 
combustible liquids, both aboveground and underground, where subject to 
external corrosion, shall be painted or otherwise protected.
    (6) Valves. Piping systems shall contain a sufficient number of 
valves to operate the system properly and to protect the plant. Piping 
systems in connection with pumps shall contain a sufficient number of 
valves to control properly the flow of liquid in normal operation and in 
the event of physical damage. Each connection to pipelines, by which 
equipments such as tankcars or tank vehicles discharge liquids by means 
of pumps into storage tanks, shall be provided with a check valve for 
automatic protection against backflow if the piping arrangement is such 
that backflow from the system is possible.
    (7) Testing. All piping before being covered, enclosed, or placed in 
use shall be hydrostatically tested to 150 percent of the maximum 
anticipated pressure of the system, or pneumatically tested to 110 
percent of the maximum anticipated pressure of the system, but not less 
than 5 pounds per square inch gage at the highest point

[[Page 241]]

of the system. This test shall be maintained for a sufficient time to 
complete visual inspection of all joints and connections, but for at 
least 10 minutes.
    (d) Container and portable tank storage--(1) Scope--(i) General. 
This paragraph shall apply only to the storage of flammable or 
combustible liquids in drums or other containers (including flammable 
aerosols) not exceeding 60 gallons individual capacity and those 
portable tanks not exceeding 660 gallons individual capacity.
    (ii) Exceptions. This paragraph shall not apply to the following:
    (a) Storage of containers in bulk plants, service stations, 
refineries, chemical plants, and distilleries;
    (b) Class I or Class II liquids in the fuel tanks of a motor 
vehicle, aircraft, boat, or portable or stationary engine;
    (c) Flammable or combustible paints, oils, varnishes, and similar 
mixtures used for painting or maintenance when not kept for a period in 
excess of 30 days;
    (d) Beverages when packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1 
gallon in size.
    (2) Design, construction, and capacity of containers--(i) General. 
Only approved containers and portable tanks shall be used. Metal 
containers and portable tanks meeting the requirements of and containing 
products authorized by chapter I, title 49 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations (regulations issued by the Hazardous Materials Regulations 
Board, Department of Transportation), shall be deemed to be acceptable.
    (ii) Emergency venting. Each portable tank shall be provided with 
one or more devices installed in the top with sufficient emergency 
venting capacity to limit internal pressure under fire exposure 
conditions to 10 p.s.i.g., or 30 percent of the bursting pressure of the 
tank, whichever is greater. The total venting capacity shall be not less 
than that specified in paragraphs (b)(2)(v) (c) or (e) of this section. 
At least one pressure-activated vent having a minimum capacity of 6,000 
cubic feet of free air (14.7 p.s.i.a. and 60 deg. F.) shall be used. It 
shall be set to open at not less than 5 p.s.i.g. If fusible vents are 
used, they shall be actuated by elements that operate at a temperature 
not exceeding 300 deg. F.
    (iii) Size. Flammable and combustible liquid containers shall be in 
accordance with Table H-12, except that glass or plastic containers of 
no more than 1-gallon capacity may be used for a Class IA or IB 
flammable liquid if:
    (a)(1) Such liquid either would be rendered unfit for its intended 
use by contact with metal or would excessively corrode a metal container 
so as to create a leakage hazard; and
    (2) The user's process either would require more than 1 pint of a 
Class IA liquid or more than 1 quart of a Class IB liquid of a single 
assay lot to be used at one time, or would require the maintenance of an 
analytical standard liquid of a quality which is not met by the 
specified standards of liquids available, and the quantity of the 
analytical standard liquid required to be used in any one control 
process exceeds one-sixteenth the capacity of the container allowed 
under Table H-12 for the class of liquid; or
    (b) The containers are intended for direct export outside the United 
States.

                       Table H-12--Maximum Allowable Size of Containers and Portable Tanks
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Flammable liquids            Combustible liquids
                   Container type                    -----------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Class IA    Class IB    Class IC    Class II    Class III
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Glass or approved plastic...........................        1 pt        1 qt       1 gal       1 gal      1 gal.
Metal (other than DOT drums)........................       1 gal       5 gal       5 gal       5 gal      5 gal.
Safety cans.........................................       2 gal       5 gal       5 gal       5 gal      5 gal.
Metal drums (DOT specifications)....................      60 gal      60 gal      60 gal      60 gal     60 gal.
Approved portable tanks.............................     660 gal     660 gal     660 gal     660 gal    660 gal.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Container exemptions: (a) Medicines, beverages, foodstuffs, cosmetics, and other common consumer items,
  when packaged according to commonly accepted practices, shall be exempt from the requirements of Sec.
  1910.106(d)(2) (i) and (ii).

    (3) Design, construction, and capacity of storage cabinets--(i) 
Maximum capacity. Not more than 60 gallons of Class I or Class II 
liquids, nor more than 120

[[Page 242]]

gallons of Class III liquids may be stored in a storage cabinet.
    (ii) Fire resistance. Storage cabinets shall be designed and 
constructed to limit the internal temperature to not more than 325 deg. 
F. when subjected to a 10-minute fire test using the standard time-
temperature curve as set forth in Standard Methods of Fire Tests of 
Building Construction and Materials, NFPA 251-1969, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. All joints and 
seams shall remain tight and the door shall remain securely closed 
during the fire test. Cabinets shall be labeled in conspicuous 
lettering, ``Flammable--Keep Fire Away.''
    (a) Metal cabinets constructed in the following manner shall be 
deemed to be in compliance. The bottom, top, door, and sides of cabinet 
shall be at least No. 18 gage sheet iron and double walled with 1\1/2\-
inch air space. Joints shall be riveted, welded or made tight by some 
equally effective means. The door shall be provided with a three-point 
lock, and the door sill shall be raised at least 2 inches above the 
bottom of the cabinet.
    (b) Wooden cabinets constructed in the following manner shall be 
deemed in compliance. The bottom, sides, and top shall be constructed of 
an approved grade of plywood at least 1 inch in thickness, which shall 
not break down or delaminate under fire conditions. All joints shall be 
rabbetted and shall be fastened in two directions with flathead 
woodscrews. When more than one door is used, there shall be a rabbetted 
overlap of not less than 1 inch. Hinges shall be mounted in such a 
manner as not to lose their holding capacity due to loosening or burning 
out of the screws when subjected to the fire test.
    (4) Design and construction of inside storage rooms--(i) 
Construction. Inside storage rooms shall be constructed to meet the 
required fire-resistive rating for their use. Such construction shall 
comply with the test specifications set forth in Standard Methods of 
Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials, NFPA 251-1969. Where 
an automatic sprinkler system is provided, the system shall be designed 
and installed in an acceptable manner. Openings to other rooms or 
buildings shall be provided with noncombustible liquid-tight raised 
sills or ramps at least 4 inches in height, or the floor in the storage 
area shall be at least 4 inches below the surrounding floor. Openings 
shall be provided with approved self-closing fire doors. The room shall 
be liquid-tight where the walls join the floor. A permissible alternate 
to the sill or ramp is an open-grated trench inside of the room which 
drains to a safe location. Where other portions of the building or other 
properties are exposed, windows shall be protected as set forth in the 
Standard for Fire Doors and Windows, NFPA No. 80-1968, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, for Class E or F 
openings. Wood at least 1 inch nominal thickness may be used for 
shelving, racks, dunnage, scuffboards, floor overlay, and similar 
installations.
    (ii) Rating and capacity. Storage in inside storage rooms shall 
comply with Table H-13.

                                       Table H-13--Storage in Inside Rooms
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                         Total
                                                                                                       allowable
                                                                                                      quantities
       Fire protection \1\ provided               Fire resistance                Maximum size         (gals./sq.
                                                                                                       ft./floor
                                                                                                         area)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yes......................................  2 hours.....................  500 sq. ft.................         10
No.......................................  2 hours.....................  500 sq. ft.................          5
Yes......................................  1 hour......................  150 sq. ft.................          4
No.......................................  1 hour......................  150 sq. ft.................          2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Fire protection system shall be sprinkler, water spray, carbon dioxide, or other system.

    (iii) Wiring. Electrical wiring and equipment located in inside 
storage rooms used for Class I liquids shall be approved under Subpart S 
of this part for Class I, Division 2 Hazardous Locations; for Class II 
and Class III liquids, shall be approved for general use.
    (iv) Ventilation. Every inside storage room shall be provided with 
either a gravity or a mechanical exhaust ventilation system. Such system 
shall be designed to provide for a complete change of air within the 
room at least six times per hour. If a mechanical exhaust system is 
used, it shall be controlled by a switch located outside of the door. 
The ventilating equipment and any lighting fixtures shall be operated by 
the same switch. A pilot light shall be installed adjacent to the switch 
if Class I flammable liquids are

[[Page 243]]

dispensed within the room. Where gravity ventilation is provided, the 
fresh air intake, as well as the exhaust outlet from the room, shall be 
on the exterior of the building in which the room is located.
    (v) Storage in inside storage rooms. In every inside storage room 
there shall be maintained one clear aisle at least 3 feet wide. 
Containers over 30 gallons capacity shall not be stacked one upon the 
other. Dispensing shall be by approved pump or self-closing faucet only.
    (5) Storage inside building--(i) Egress. Flammable or combustible 
liquids, including stock for sale, shall not be stored so as to limit 
use of exits, stairways, or areas normally used for the safe egress of 
people.
    (ii) Containers. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in 
containers or portable tanks shall comply with subdivisions (iii) 
through (v) of this subparagraph.
    (iii) Office occupancies. Storage shall be prohibited except that 
which is required for maintenance and operation of building and 
operation of equipment. Such storage shall be kept in closed metal 
containers stored in a storage cabinet or in safety cans or in an inside 
storage room not having a door that opens into that portion of the 
building used by the public.
    (iv) Mercantile occupancies and other retail stores.
    (a)-(d) [Reserved]
    (e) Leaking containers shall be removed to a storage room or taken 
to a safe location outside the building and the contents transferred to 
an undamaged container.
    (v) General purpose public warehouses. Storage shall be in 
accordance with Table H-14 or H-15 and in buildings or in portions of 
such buildings cut off by standard firewalls. Material creating no fire 
exposure hazard to the flammable or combustible liquids may be stored in 
the same area.

                                      Table H-14--Indoor Container Storage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                Gallons
                                                                                     ---------------------------
                                                                                        Protected    Unprotected
                 Class liquid                               Storage level                storage       storage
                                                                                       maximum per   maximum per
                                                                                          pile          pile
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A.............................................  Ground and upper floors.............         2,750           660
                                                                                              (50)          (12)
                                                Basement............................           Not           Not
                                                                                         permitted     permitted
B.............................................  Ground and upper floors.............         5,500         1,375
                                                                                             (100)          (25)
                                                Basement............................           Not           Not
                                                                                         permitted     permitted
C.............................................  Ground and upper floors.............        16,500         4,125
                                                                                             (300)          (75)
                                                Basement............................           Not           Not
                                                                                         permitted     permitted
II............................................  Ground and upper floors.............        16,500         4,125
                                                                                             (300)          (75)
                                                Basement............................         5,500           Not
                                                                                                       permitted
                                                                                             (100)
III...........................................  Ground and upper floors.............        55,000        13,750
                                                                                           (1,000)         (250)
                                                Basement............................         8,250           Not
                                                                                                       permitted
                                                                                             (450)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: When 2 or more classes of materials are stored in a single pile, the maximum gallonage permitted in that
  pile shall be the smallest of the 2 or more separate maximum gallonages.
Note 2: Aisles shall be provided so that no container is more than 12 ft. from an aisle. Main aisles shall be at
  least 3 ft. wide and side aisles at least 4 ft. wide.
Note 3: Each pile shall be separated from each other by at least 4 ft.
(Numbers in parentheses indicate corresponding number of 55-gal. drums.)


                                    Table H-15--Indoor Portable Tank Storage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                Gallons
                                                                                     ---------------------------
                                                                                        Protected    Unprotected
                 Class liquid                               Storage level                storage       storage
                                                                                       maximum per   maximum per
                                                                                          pile          pile
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
IA............................................  Ground and upper floors.............           Not           Not
                                                                                         permitted     permitted
                                                Basement............................           Not           Not
                                                                                         permitted     permitted
IB............................................  Ground and upper floors.............        20,000         2,000

[[Page 244]]

                                                Basement............................           Not           Not
                                                                                         permitted     permitted
IC............................................  Ground and upper floors.............        40,000         5,500
                                                Basement............................           Not           Not
                                                                                         permitted     permitted
II............................................  Ground and upper floors.............        40,000         5,500
                                                Basement............................        20,000           Not
                                                                                                       permitted
III...........................................  Ground and upper floors.............        60,000        22,000
                                                Basement............................        20,000           Not
                                                                                                       permitted
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: When 1 or more classes of materials are stored in a single pile, the maximum gallonage permitted in that
  pile shall be the smallest of the 2 or more separate maximum gallonages.
Note 2: Aisles shall be provided so that no portable tank is more than 12 ft. from an aisle. Main aisles shall
  be at least 8 ft. wide and side aisles at least 4 ft. wide.
Note 3: Each pile shall be separated from each other by at least 4 ft.

    (vi) Flammable and combustible liquid warehouses or storage 
buildings. (a) If the storage building is located 50 feet or less from a 
building or line of adjoining property that may be built upon, the 
exposing wall shall be a blank wall having a fire-resistance rating of 
at least 2 hours.
    (b) The total quantity of liquids within a building shall not be 
restricted, but the arrangement of storage shall comply with Table H-14 
or H-15.
    (c) Containers in piles shall be separated by pallets or dunnage 
where necessary to provide stability and to prevent excessive stress on 
container walls.
    (d) Portable tanks stored over one tier high shall be designed to 
nest securely, without dunnage, and adequate materials handing equipment 
shall be available to handle tanks safely at the upper tier level.
    (e) No pile shall be closer than 3 feet to the nearest beam, chord, 
girder, or other obstruction, and shall be 3 feet below sprinkler 
deflectors or discharge orifices of water spray, or other overhead fire 
protection systems.
    (f) Aisles of at least 3 feet wide shall be provided where necessary 
for reasons of access to doors, windows or standpipe connections.
    (6) Storage outside buildings--(i) General. Storage outside 
buildings shall be in accordance with Table H-16 or H-17, and 
subdivisions (ii) and (iv) of this subparagraph.

                                      Table H-16--Outdoor Container Storage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                        4--Distance
                                                                           3--Distance  to property  5--Distance
                          1--Class                             2--Maximum    between     line that    to street,
                                                                per pile      piles        can be       alley,
                                                                                         built upon   public way
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                gallons         feet         feet         feet
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
IA..........................................................        1,100            5           20           10
IB..........................................................        2,200            5           20           10
IC..........................................................        4,400            5           20           10
II..........................................................        8,800            5           10            5
III.........................................................       22,000            5           10            5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: When 2 or more classes of materials are stored in a single pile, the maximum gallonage in that pile
  shall be the smallest of the 2 or more separate gallonages.
Note 2: Within 200 ft. of each container, there shall be a 12-ft. wide access way to permit approach of fire
  control apparatus.
Note 3: The distances listed apply to properties that have protection for exposures as defined. If there are
  exposures, and such protection for exposures does not exist, the distances in column 4 shall be doubled.
Note 4: When total quantity stored does not exceed 50 percent of maximum per pile, the distances in columns 4
  and 5 may be reduced 50 percent, but not less than 3 ft.

    (ii) Maximum storage. A maximum of 1,100 gallons of flammable or 
combustible liquids may be located adjacent to buildings located on the 
same premises and under the same management provided the provisions of 
subdivisions

[[Page 245]]

(a) and (b) of this subdivision are complied with.
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Where quantity stored exceeds 1,100 gallons, or provisions of 
subdivision (a) of this subdivision cannot be met, a minimum distance of 
10 feet between buildings and nearest container of flammable or 
combustible liquid shall be maintained.
    (iii) Spill containment. The storage area shall be graded in a 
manner to divert possible spills away from buildings or other exposures 
or shall be surrounded by a curb at least 6 inches high. When curbs are 
used, provisions shall be made for draining of accumulations of ground 
or rain water or spills of flammable or combustible liquids. Drains 
shall terminate at a safe location and shall be accessible to operation 
under fire conditions.
    (iv) Security. The storage area shall be protected against tampering 
or trespassers where necessary and shall be kept free of weeds, debris 
and other combustible material not necessary to the storage.
    (7) Fire control--(i) Extinguishers. Suitable fire control devices, 
such as small hose or portable fire extinguishers, shall be available at 
locations where flammable or combustible liquids are stored.

                                    Table H-17--Outdoor Portable Tank Storage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                        4--Distance
                                                                           3--Distance  to property  5--Distance
                          1--Class                             2--Maximum    between     line that    to street,
                                                                per pile      piles        can be       alley,
                                                                                         built upon   public way
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 gallon         feet         feet         feet
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
IA..........................................................        2,200            5           20           10
IB..........................................................        4,400            5           20           10
IC..........................................................        8,800            5           20           10
II..........................................................       17,600            5           10            5
III.........................................................       44,000            5           10            5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: When 2 or more classes of materials are stored in a single pile, the maximum gallonage in that pile
  shall be the the smallest of the 2 or more separate gallonages.
Note 2: Within 200 ft. of each portable tank, there shall be a 12-ft. wide access way to permit approach of fire
  control apparatus.
Note 3: The distances listed apply to properties that have protection for exposures as defined. If there are
  exposures, and such protection for exposures does not exist, the distances in column 4 shall be doubled.
Note 4: When total quantity stored does not exceed 50 percent of maximum per pile, the distances in columns 4
  and 5 may be reduced 50 percent, but not less than 3 ft.

    (a) At least one portable fire extinguisher having a rating of not 
less than 12-B units shall be located outside of, but not more than 10 
feet from, the door opening into any room used for storage.
    (b) At least one portable fire extinguisher having a rating of not 
less than 12-B units must be located not less than 10 feet, nor more 
than 25 feet, from any Class I or Class II liquid storage area located 
outside of a storage room but inside a building.
    (ii) Sprinklers. When sprinklers are provided, they shall be 
installed in accordance with Sec. 1910.159.
    (iii) Open flames and smoking. Open flames and smoking shall not be 
permitted in flammable or combustible liquid storage areas.
    (iv) Water reactive materials. Materials which will react with water 
shall not be stored in the same room with flammable or combustible 
liquids.
    (e) Industrial plants--(1) Scope--(i) Application. This paragraph 
shall apply to those industrial plants where:
    (a) The use of flammable or combustible liquids is incidental to the 
principal business, or
    (b) Where flammable or combustible liquids are handled or used only 
in unit physical operations such as mixing, drying, evaporating, 
filtering, distillation, and similar operations which do not involve 
chemical reaction. This paragraph shall not apply to chemical plants, 
refineries or distilleries.
    (ii) Exceptions. Where portions of such plants involve chemical 
reactions such as oxidation, reduction, halogenation, hydrogenation, 
alkylation, polymerization, and other chemical processes, those portions 
of the plant shall be in

[[Page 246]]

accordance with paragraph (h) of this section.
    (2) Incidental storage or use of flammable and combustible liquids--
(i) Application. This subparagraph shall be applicable to those portions 
of an industrial plant where the use and handling of flammable or 
combustible liquids is only incidental to the principal business, such 
as automobile assembly, construction of electronic equipment, furniture 
manufacturing, or other similar activities.
    (ii) Containers. Flammable or combustible liquids shall be stored in 
tanks or closed containers.
    (a) Except as provided in subdivisions (b) and (c) of this 
subdivision, all storage shall comply with paragraph (d) (3) or (4) of 
this section.
    (b) The quantity of liquid that may be located outside of an inside 
storage room or storage cabinet in a building or in any one fire area of 
a building shall not exceed:
    (1) 25 gallons of Class IA liquids in containers
    (2) 120 gallons of Class IB, IC, II, or III liquids in containers
    (3) 660 gallons of Class IB, IC, II, or III liquids in a single 
portable tank.
    (c) Where large quantities of flammable or combustible liquids are 
necessary, storage may be in tanks which shall comply with the 
applicable requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.
    (iii) Separation and protection. Areas in which flammable or 
combustible liquids are transferred from one tank or container to 
another container shall be separated from other operations in the 
building by adequate distance or by construction having adequate fire 
resistance. Drainage or other means shall be provided to control spills. 
Adequate natural or mechanical ventilation shall be provided.
    (iv) Handling liquids at point of final use. (a) Flammable liquids 
shall be kept in covered containers when not actually in use.
    (b) Where flammable or combustible liquids are used or handled, 
except in closed containers, means shall be provided to dispose promptly 
and safely of leakage or spills.
    (c) Class I liquids may be used only where there are no open flames 
or other sources of ignition within the possible path of vapor travel.
    (d) Flammable or combustible liquids shall be drawn from or 
transferred into vessels, containers, or portable tanks within a 
building only through a closed piping system, from safety cans, by means 
of a device drawing through the top, or from a container or portable 
tanks by gravity through an approved self-closing valve. Transferring by 
means of air pressure on the container or portable tanks shall be 
prohibited.
    (3) Unit physical operations--(i) Application. This subparagraph 
shall be applicable in those portions of industrial plants where 
flammable or combustible liquids are handled or used in unit physical 
operations such as mixing, drying, evaporating, filtering, distillation, 
and similar operations which do not involve chemical change. Examples 
are plants compounding cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, solvents, cleaning 
fluids, insecticides, and similar types of activities.
    (ii) Location. Industrial plants shall be located so that each 
building or unit of equipment is accessible from at least one side for 
firefighting and fire control purposes. Buildings shall be located with 
respect to lines of adjoining property which may be built upon as set 
forth in paragraph (h)(2) (i) and (ii) of this section except that the 
blank wall referred to in paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section shall 
have a fire resistance rating of at least 2 hours.
    (iii) Chemical processes. Areas where unstable liquids are handled 
or small scale unit chemical processes are carried on shall be separated 
from the remainder of the plant by a fire wall of 2-hour minimum fire 
resistance rating.
    (iv) Drainage. (a) Emergency drainage systems shall be provided to 
direct flammable or combustible liquid leakage and fire protection water 
to a safe location. This may require curbs, scuppers, or special 
drainage systems to control the spread of fire; see paragraph 
(b)(2)(vii)(b) of this section.
    (b) Emergency drainage systems, if connected to public sewers or 
discharged into public waterways, shall be equipped with traps or 
separator.
    (v) Ventilation. (a) Areas as defined in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph using Class I liquids shall be ventilated

[[Page 247]]

at a rate of not less than 1 cubic foot per minute per square foot of 
solid floor area. This shall be accomplished by natural or mechanical 
ventilation with discharge or exhaust to a safe location outside of the 
building. Provision shall be made for introduction of makeup air in such 
a manner as not to short circuit the ventilation. Ventilation shall be 
arranged to include all floor areas or pits where flammable vapors may 
collect.
    (b) Equipment used in a building and the ventilation of the building 
shall be designed so as to limit flammable vapor-air mixtures under 
normal operating conditions to the interior of equipment, and to not 
more than 5 feet from equipment which exposes Class I liquids to the 
air. Examples of such equipment are dispensing stations, open 
centrifuges, plate and frame filters, open vacuum filters, and surfaces 
of open equipment.
    (vi) Storage and handling. The storage, transfer, and handling of 
liquid shall comply with paragraph (h)(4) of this section.
    (4) Tank vehicle and tank car loading and unloading. (i) Tank 
vehicle and tank car loading or unloading facilities shall be separated 
from aboveground tanks, warehouses, other plant buildings or nearest 
line of adjoining property which may be built upon by a distance of 25 
feet for Class I liquids and 15 feet for Class II and Class III liquids 
measured from the nearest position of any fill stem. Buildings for pumps 
or shelters for personnel may be a part of the facility. Operations of 
the facility shall comply with the appropriate portions of paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (5) Fire control--(i) Portable and special equipment. Portable fire 
extinguishment and control equipment shall be provided in such 
quantities and types as are needed for the special hazards of operation 
and storage.
    (ii) Water supply. Water shall be available in volume and at 
adequate pressure to supply water hose streams, foam-producing 
equipment, automatic sprinklers, or water spray systems as the need is 
indicated by the special hazards of operation, dispensing and storage.
    (iii) Special extinguishers. Special extinguishing equipment such as 
that utilizing foam, inert gas, or dry chemical shall be provided as the 
need is indicated by the special hazards of operation dispensing and 
storage.
    (iv) Special hazards. Where the need is indicated by special hazards 
of operation, flammable or combustible liquid processing equipment, 
major piping, and supporting steel shall be protected by approved water 
spray systems, deluge systems, approved fire-resistant coatings, 
insulation, or any combination of these.
    (v) Maintenance. All plant fire protection facilities shall be 
adequately maintained and periodically inspected and tested to make sure 
they are always in satisfactory operating condition, and they will serve 
their purpose in time of emergency.
    (6) Sources of ignition--(i) General. Adequate precautions shall be 
taken to prevent the ignition of flammable vapors. Sources of ignition 
include but are not limited to open flames; lightning; smoking; cutting 
and welding; hot surfaces; frictional heat; static, electrical, and 
mechanical sparks; spontaneous ignition, including heat-producing 
chemical reactions; and radiant heat.
    (ii) Grounding. Class I liquids shall not be dispensed into 
containers unless the nozzle and container are electrically 
interconnected. Where the metallic floorplate on which the container 
stands while filling is electrically connected to the fill stem or where 
the fill stem is bonded to the container during filling operations by 
means of a bond wire, the provisions of this section shall be deemed to 
have been complied with.
    (7) Electrical--(i) Equipment. (a) All electrical wiring and 
equipment shall be installed according to the requirements of Subpart S 
of this part.
    (b) Locations where flammable vapor-air mixtures may exist under 
normal operations shall be classified Class I, Division 1 according to 
the requirements of Subpart S of this part. For those pieces of 
equipment installed in accordance with subparagraph (3)(v)(b) of this 
paragraph, the Division

[[Page 248]]

1 area shall extend 5 feet in all directions from all points of vapor 
liberation. All areas within pits shall be classified Division 1 if any 
part of the pit is within a Division 1 or 2 classified area, unless the 
pit is provided with mechanical ventilation.
    (c) Locations where flammable vapor-air mixtures may exist under 
abnormal conditions and for a distance beyond Division 1 locations shall 
be classified Division 2 according to the requirements of Subpart S of 
this part. These locations include an area within 20 feet horizontally, 
3 feet vertically beyond a Division 1 area, and up to 3 feet above floor 
or grade level within 25 feet, if indoors, or 10 feet if outdoors, from 
any pump, bleeder, withdrawal fitting, meter, or similar device handling 
Class I liquids. Pits provided with adequate mechanical ventilation 
within a Division 1 or 2 area shall be classified Division 2. If Class 
II or Class III liquids only are handled, then ordinary electrical 
equipment is satisfactory though care shall be used in locating 
electrical apparatus to prevent hot metal from falling into open 
equipment.
    (d) Where the provisions of subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), of this 
subdivision require the installation of electrical equipment suitable 
for Class I, Division 1 or Division 2 locations, ordinary electrical 
equipment including switchgear may be used if installed in a room or 
enclosure which is maintained under positive pressure with respect to 
the hazardous area. Ventilation makeup air shall be uncontaminated by 
flammable vapors.
    (8) Repairs to equipment. Hot work, such as welding or cutting 
operations, use of spark-producing power tools, and chipping operations 
shall be permitted only under supervision of an individual in 
responsible charge. The individual in responsible charge shall make an 
inspection of the area to be sure that it is safe for the work to be 
done and that safe procedures will be followed for the work specified.
    (9) Housekeeping--(i) General. Maintenance and operating practices 
shall be in accordance with established procedures which will tend to 
control leakage and prevent the accidental escape of flammable or 
combustible liquids. Spills shall be cleaned up promptly.
    (ii) Access. Adequate aisles shall be maintained for unobstructed 
movement of personnel and so that fire protection equipment can be 
brought to bear on any part of flammable or combustible liquid storage, 
use, or any unit physical operation.
    (iii) Waste and residue. Combustible waste material and residues in 
a building or unit operating area shall be kept to a minimum, stored in 
covered metal receptacles and disposed of daily.
    (iv) Clear zone. Ground area around buildings and unit operating 
areas shall be kept free of weeds, trash, or other unnecessary 
combustible materials.
    (f) Bulk plants--(1) Storage--(i) Class I liquids. Class I liquids 
shall be stored in closed containers, or in storage tanks above ground 
outside of buildings, or underground in accordance with paragraph (b) of 
this section.
    (ii) Class II and III liquids. Class II and Class III liquids shall 
be stored in containers, or in tanks within buildings or above ground 
outside of buildings, or underground in accordance with paragraph (b) of 
this section.
    (iii) Piling containers. Containers of flammable or combustible 
liquids when piled one upon the other shall be separated by dunnage 
sufficient to provide stability and to prevent excessive stress on 
container walls. The height of the pile shall be consistent with the 
stability and strength of containers.
    (2) Buildings--(i) Exits. Rooms in which flammable or combustible 
liquids are stored or handled by pumps shall have exit facilities 
arranged to prevent occupants from being trapped in the event of fire.
    (ii) Heating. Rooms in which Class I liquids are stored or handled 
shall be heated only by means not constituting a source of ignition, 
such as steam or hot water. Rooms containing heating appliances 
involving sources of ignition shall be located and arranged to prevent 
entry of flammable vapors.
    (iii) Ventilation. (a) Ventilation shall be provided for all rooms, 
buildings, or enclosures in which Class I liquids are pumped or 
dispensed. Design of ventilation systems shall take into account the 
relatively high specific gravity of the vapors. Ventilation may be 
provided by adequate openings in outside

[[Page 249]]

walls at floor level unobstructed except by louvers or coarse screens. 
Where natural ventilation is inadequate, mechanical ventilation shall be 
provided.
    (b) Class I liquids shall not be stored or handled within a building 
having a basement or pit into which flammable vapors may travel, unless 
such area is provided with ventilation designed to prevent the 
accumulation of flammable vapors therein.
    (c) Containers of Class I liquids shall not be drawn from or filled 
within buildings unless provision is made to prevent the accumulation of 
flammable vapors in hazardous concentrations. Where mechanical 
ventilation is required, it shall be kept in operation while flammable 
liquids are being handled.
    (3) Loading and unloading facilities--(i) Separation. Tank vehicle 
and tank car loading or unloading facilities shall be separated from 
aboveground tanks, warehouses, other plant buildings or nearest line of 
adjoining property that may be built upon by a distance of 25 feet for 
Class I liquids and 15 feet for Class II and Class III liquids measured 
from the nearest position of any fill spout. Buildings for pumps or 
shelters for personnel may be a part of the facility.
    (ii) Class restriction. Equipment such as piping, pumps, and meters 
used for the transfer of Class I liquids between storage tanks and the 
fill stem of the loading rack shall not be used for the transfer of 
Class II or Class III liquids.
    (iii) Valves. Valves used for the final control for filling tank 
vehicles shall be of the self-closing type and manually held open except 
where automatic means are provided for shutting off the flow when the 
vehicle is full or after filling of a preset amount.
    (iv) Static protection. (a) Bonding facilities for protection 
against static sparks during the loading of tank vehicles through open 
domes shall be provided:
    (1) Where Class I liquids are loaded, or
    (2) Where Class II or Class III liquids are loaded into vehicles 
which may contain vapors from previous cargoes of Class I liquids.
    (b) Protection as required in (a) of this subdivision (iv) shall 
consist of a metallic bond wire permanently electrically connected to 
the fill stem or to some part of the rack structure in electrical 
contact with the fill stem. The free end of such wire shall be provided 
with a clamp or equivalent device for convenient attachment to some 
metallic part in electrical contact with the cargo tank of the tank 
vehicle.
    (c) Such bonding connection shall be made fast to the vehicle or 
tank before dome covers are raised and shall remain in place until 
filling is completed and all dome covers have been closed and secured.
    (d) Bonding as specified in (a), (b), and (c) of this subdivision is 
not required:
    (1) Where vehicles are loaded exclusively with products not having a 
static accumulating tendency, such as asphalt, most crude oils, residual 
oils, and water soluble liquids;
    (2) Where no Class I liquids are handled at the loading facility and 
the tank vehicles loaded are used exclusively for Class II and Class III 
liquids; and
    (3) Where vehicles are loaded or unloaded through closed bottom or 
top connections.
    (e) Filling through open domes into the tanks of tank vehicles or 
tank cars, that contain vapor-air mixtures within the flammable range or 
where the liquid being filled can form such a mixture, shall be by means 
of a downspout which extends near the bottom of the tank. This 
precaution is not required when loading liquids which are 
nonaccumulators of static charges.
    (v) Stray currents. Tank car loading facilities where Class I 
liquids are loaded through open domes shall be protected against stray 
currents by bonding the pipe to at least one rail and to the rack 
structure if of metal. Multiple lines entering the rack area shall be 
electrically bonded together. In addition, in areas where excessive 
stray currents are known to exist, all pipe entering the rack area shall 
be provided with insulating sections to electrically isolate the rack 
piping from the pipelines. No bonding between the tank car and the rack 
or piping is required during either loading or unloading of Class II or 
III liquids.

[[Page 250]]

    (vi) Container filling facilities. Class I liquids shall not be 
dispensed into containers unless the nozzle and container are 
electrically interconnected. Where the metallic floorplate on which the 
container stands while filling is electrically connected to the fill 
stem or where the fill stem is bonded to the container during filling 
operations by means of a bond wire, the provisions of this section shall 
be deemed to have been complied with.
    (4) Wharves--(i) Definition, application. The term wharf shall mean 
any wharf, pier, bulkhead, or other structure over or contiguous to 
navigable water used in conjunction with a bulk plant, the primary 
function of which is the transfer of flammable or combustible liquid 
cargo in bulk between the bulk plant and any tank vessel, ship, barge, 
lighter boat, or other mobile floating craft; and this subparagraph 
shall apply to all such installations except Marine Service Stations as 
covered in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (ii)-(iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) Design and construction. Substructure and deck shall be 
substantially designed for the use intended. Deck may employ any 
material which will afford the desired combination of flexibility, 
resistance to shock, durability, strength, and fire resistance. Heavy 
timber construction is acceptable.
    (v) [Reserved]
    (vi) Pumps. Loading pumps capable of building up pressures in excess 
of the safe working pressure of cargo hose or loading arms shall be 
provided with bypasses, relief valves, or other arrangement to protect 
the loading facilities against excessive pressure. Relief devices shall 
be tested at not more than yearly intervals to determine that they 
function satisfactorily at the pressure at which they are set.
    (vii) Hoses and couplings. All pressure hoses and couplings shall be 
inspected at intervals appropriate to the service. The hose and 
couplings shall be tested with the hose extended and using the 
``inservice maximum operating pressures.'' Any hose showing material 
deteriorations, signs of leakage, or weakness in its carcass or at the 
couplings shall be withdrawn from service and repaired or discarded.
    (viii) Piping and fittings. Piping, valves, and fittings shall be in 
accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, with the following 
exceptions and additions:
    (a) Flexibility of piping shall be assured by appropriate layout and 
arrangement of piping supports so that motion of the wharf structure 
resulting from wave action, currents, tides, or the mooring of vessels 
will not subject the pipe to repeated strain beyond the elastic limit.
    (b) Pipe joints depending upon the friction characteristics of 
combustible materials or grooving of pipe ends for mechanical continuity 
of piping shall not be used.
    (c) Swivel joints may be used in piping to which hoses are 
connected, and for articulated swivel-joint transfer systems, provided 
that the design is such that the mechanical strength of the joint will 
not be impaired if the packing material should fail, as by exposure to 
fire.
    (d) Piping systems shall contain a sufficient number of valves to 
operate the system properly and to control the flow of liquid in normal 
operation and in the event of physical damage.
    (e) In addition to the requirements of subdivision (d) of this 
subdivision, each line conveying flammable liquids leading to a wharf 
shall be provided with a readily accessible block valve located on shore 
near the approach to the wharf and outside of any diked area. Where more 
than one line is involved, the valves shall be grouped in one location.
    (f) Means of easy access shall be provided for cargo line valves 
located below the wharf deck.
    (g) Pipelines on flammable or combustible liquids wharves shall be 
adequately bonded and grounded. If excessive stray currents are 
encountered, insulating joints shall be installed. Bonding and grounding 
connections on all pipelines shall be located on wharfside of hose-riser 
insulating flanges, if used, and shall be accessible for inspection.
    (h) Hose or articulated swivel-joint pipe connections used for cargo 
transfer shall be capable of accommodating the combined effects of 
change in draft and maximum tidal range, and mooring lines shall be kept 
adjusted to prevent

[[Page 251]]

the surge of the vessel from placing stress on the cargo transfer 
system.
    (i) Hose shall be supported so as to avoid kinking and damage from 
chafing.
    (ix) Fire protection. Suitable portable fire extinguishers with a 
rating of not less than 12-BC shall be located within 75 feet of those 
portions of the facility where fires are likely to occur, such as hose 
connections, pumps, and separator tanks.
    (a) Where piped water is available, ready-connected fire hose in 
size appropriate for the water supply shall be provided so that 
manifolds where connections are made and broken can be reached by at 
least one hose stream.
    (b) Material shall not be placed on wharves in such a manner as to 
obstruct access to firefighting equipment, or important pipeline control 
valves.
    (c) Where the wharf is accessible to vehicle traffic, an 
unobstructed roadway to the shore end of the wharf shall be maintained 
for access of firefighting apparatus.
    (x) Operations control. Loading or discharging shall not commence 
until the wharf superintendent and officer in charge of the tank vessel 
agree that the tank vessel is properly moored and all connections are 
properly made. Mechanical work shall not be performed on the wharf 
during cargo transfer, except under special authorization based on a 
review of the area involved, methods to be employed, and precautions 
necessary.
    (5) Electrical equipment--(i) Application. This subparagraph shall 
apply to areas where Class I liquids are stored or handled. For areas 
where Class II or Class III liquids only are stored or handled, the 
electrical equipment may be installed in accordance with the provisions 
of Subpart S of this part, for ordinary locations.
    (ii) Conformance. All electrical equipment and wiring shall be of a 
type specified by and shall be installed in accordance with Subpart S of 
this part.
    (iii) Classification. So far as it applies Table H-18 shall be used 
to delineate and classify hazardous areas for the purpose of 
installation of electrical equipment under normal circumstances. In 
Table H-18 a classified area shall not extend beyond an unpierced wall, 
roof, or other solid partition. The area classifications listed shall be 
based on the premise that the installation meets the applicable 
requirements of this section in all respects.
    (6) Sources of ignition. Class I liquids shall not be handled, 
drawn, or dispensed where flammable vapors may reach a source of 
ignition. Smoking shall be prohibited except in designated localities. 
``No Smoking'' signs shall be conspicuously posted where hazard from 
flammable liquid vapors is normally present.
    (7) Drainage and waste disposal. Provision shall be made to prevent 
flammable or combustible liquids which may be spilled at loading or 
unloading points from entering public sewers and drainage systems, or 
natural waterways. Connection to such sewers, drains, or waterways by 
which flammable or combustible liquids might enter shall be provided 
with separator boxes or other approved means whereby such entry is 
precluded. Crankcase drainings and flammable or combustible liquids 
shall not be dumped into sewers, but shall be stored in tanks or tight 
drums outside of any building until removed from the premises.
    (8) Fire control. Suitable fire-control devices, such as small hose 
or portable fire extinguishers, shall be available to locations where 
fires are likely to occur. Additional fire-control equipment may be 
required where a tank of more than 50,000 gallons individual capacity 
contains Class I liquids and where an unusual exposure hazard exists 
from surrounding property. Such additional fire-control equipment shall 
be sufficient to extinguish a fire in the largest tank. The design and 
amount of such equipment shall be in accordance with approved 
engineering standards.
    (g) Service stations--(1) Storage and handling--(i) General 
provisions. (a) Liquids shall be stored in approved closed containers 
not exceeding 60 gallons capacity, in tanks located underground, in 
tanks in special enclosures as described in paragraph (g)(i) of this 
section, or in aboveground tanks as provided for in paragraphs 
(g)(4)(ii), (b), (c) and (d) of this section.
    (b) Aboveground tanks, located in an adjoining bulk plant, may be 
connected

[[Page 252]]

by piping to service station underground tanks if, in addition to valves 
at aboveground tanks, a valve is also installed within control of 
service station personnel.
    (c) Apparatus dispensing Class I liquids into the fuel tanks of 
motor vehicles of the public shall not be located at a bulk plant unless 
separated by a fence or similar barrier from the area in which bulk 
operations are conducted.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) The provisions of paragraph (g)(1)(i)(a) of this section shall 
not prohibit the dispensing of flammable liquids in the open from a tank 
vehicle to a motor vehicle. Such dispensing shall be permitted provided:
    (1) The tank vehicle complies with the requirements covered in the 
Standard on Tank Vehicles for Flammable Liquids, NFPA 385-1966.
    (2) The dispensing is done on premises not open to the public.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) The dispensing hose does not exceed 50 feet in length.
    (5) The dispensing nozzle is a listed automatic-closing type without 
a latchopen device.
    (f) Class I liquids shall not be stored or handled within a building 
having a basement or pit into which flammable vapors may travel, unless 
such area is provided with ventilation designed to prevent the 
accumulation of flammable vapors therein.
    (g) [Reserved]

      Table H-18--Electrical Equipment Hazardous Areas--Bulk Plants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Class I
           Location              Group D     Extent of classified area
                                division
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tank vehicle and tank car:
 \1\
  Loading through open dome..           1  Within 3 feet of edge of
                                            dome, extending in all
                                            directions.
                                        2  Area between 3 feet and 5
                                            feet from edge of dome,
                                            extending in all directions.
  Loading through bottom                1  Within 3 feet of point of
   connections with                         venting to atmosphere
   atmospheric venting.                     extending in all directions.
                                        2  Area between 3 feet and 5
                                            feet from point of venting
                                            to atmosphere, extending in
                                            all directions. Also up to
                                            18 inches above grade within
                                            a horizontal radius of 10
                                            feet from point of loading
                                            connection.
  Loading through closed dome           1  Within 3 feet of open end of
   with atmospheric venting.            2   vent, extending in all
                                            directions.
                                           Area between 3 feet and 5
                                            feet from open end of vent,
                                            extending in all directions.
                                            Also within 3 feet of edge
                                            of dome, extending in all
                                            directions.
  Loading through closed dome           2  Within 3 feet of point of
   with vapor recovery.                     connection of both fill and
                                            vapor lines, extending in
                                            all directions.
  Bottom loading with vapor             2  Within 3 feet of point of
   recovery or any bottom                   connections extending in all
   unloading.                               directions. Also up to 18
                                            inches above grade with in a
                                            horizontal radius of 10 feet
                                            from point of connection.
Drum and container filling:
  Outdoors, or indoors with             1  Within 3 feet of vent and
   adequate ventilation.                    fill opening, extending in
                                            all directions.
                                        2  Area between 3 feet and 5
                                            feet from vent or fill
                                            opening, extending in all
                                            directions. Also up to 18
                                            inches above floor or grade
                                            level within a horizontal
                                            radius of 10 feet from vent
                                            or fill opening.
  Outdoors, or indoors with             1  Within 3 feet of vent and
   adequate ventilation.                    fill opening, extending in
                                            all directions.
                                        2  Area between 3 feet and 5
                                            feet from vent or fill
                                            opening, extending in all
                                            directions. Also up to 18
                                            inches above floor or grade
                                            level within a horizontal
                                            radius of 10 feet from vent
                                            or fill opening.
Tank--Aboveground:
  Shell, ends, or roof and              2  Within 10 feet from shell,
   dike area.                               ends, or roof of tank, Area
                                            inside dikes to level of top
                                            of dike.
  Vent.......................           1  Within 5 feet of open end of
                                            vent, extending in all
                                            directions.
                                        2  Area between 5 feet and 10
                                            feet from open end of vent,
                                            extending in all directions.
  Floating roof..............           1  Area above the roof and
                                            within the shell.
Pits:
  Without mechanical                    1  Entire area within pit if any
   ventilation.                             part is within a Division 1
                                            or 2 classified area.
  With mechanical ventilation           2  Entire area within pit if any
                                            part is within a Division 1
                                            or 2 classified area.

[[Page 253]]

  Containing valves, fittings           2  Entire pit.
   or piping, and not within
   a Division 1 or 2
   classified area.
Pumps, bleeders, withdrawal
 fittings, meters and similar
 devices:
  Indoors....................           2  Within 5 feet of any edge of
                                            such devices, extending in
                                            all directions. Also up to 3
                                            feet above floor or grade
                                            level within 25 feet
                                            horizontally from any edge
                                            of such devices.
  Outdoors...................           2  Within 3 feet of any edge of
                                            such devices, extending in
                                            all directions. Also up to
                                            18 inches above grade level
                                            within 10 feet horizontally
                                            from any edge of such
                                            devices.
  Storage and repair garage             1  All pits or spaces below
   for tank vehicles.                       floor level.
                                        2  Area up to 18 inches above
                                            floor or grade level for
                                            entire storage or repair
                                            garage.
  Drainage ditches,                     2  Area up to 18 inches above
   separators, impounding                   ditch, separator or basin.
   basins.                                  Also up to 18 inches above
                                            grade within 15 feet
                                            horizontally from any edge.
  Garages for other than tank     (\2\  )  If there is any opening to
   vehicles.                                these rooms within the
                                            extent of an outdoor
                                            classified area, the entire
                                            room shall be classified the
                                            same as the area
                                            classification at the point
                                            of the opening.
  Outdoor drum storage.......     (\2\  )
  Indoor warehousing where        (\2\  )  If there is any opening to
   there is no flammable                    these rooms within the
   liquid transfer.                         extent of an indoor
                                            classified are, the room
                                            shall be classified the same
                                            as if the wall, curb or
                                            partition did not exist.
  Office and rest rooms......     (\2\  )
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ When classifying the extent of the area, consideration shall be
  given to the fact that tank cars or tank vehicles may be spotted at
  varying points. Therefore, the extremities of the loading or unloading
  positions shall be used.
\2\ Ordinary.

    (ii) Special enclosures. (a) When installation of tanks in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section is impractical because 
of property or building limitations, tanks for flammable or combustible 
liquids may be installed in buildings if properly enclosed.
    (b) The enclosure shall be substantially liquid and vaportight 
without backfill. Sides, top, and bottom of the enclosure shall be of 
reinforced concrete at least 6 inches thick, with openings for 
inspection through the top only. Tank connections shall be so piped or 
closed that neither vapors nor liquid can escape into the enclosed 
space. Means shall be provided whereby portable equipment may be 
employed to discharge to the outside any liquid or vapors which might 
accumulate should leakage occur.
    (iii) Inside buildings. (a) Except where stored in tanks as provided 
in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, no Class I liquids shall be 
stored within any service station building except in closed containers 
of aggregate capacity not exceeding 60 gallons. One container not 
exceeding 60 gallons capacity equipped with an approved pump is 
permitted.
    (b) Class I liquids may be transferred from one container to another 
in lubrication or service rooms of a service station building provided 
the electrical installation complies with Table H-19 and provided that 
any heating equipment complies with subparagraph (6) of this paragraph.
    (c) Class II and Class III liquids may be stored and dispensed 
inside service station buildings from tanks of not more than 120 gallons 
capacity each.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Dispensing into portable containers. No delivery of any Class I 
liquids shall be made into portable containers unless the container is 
constructed of metal, has a tight closure with screwed or spring cover, 
and is fitted with a spout or so designed that the contents can be 
poured without spilling.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Dispensing systems--(i) Location. Dispensing devices at 
automotive service stations shall be so located that all parts of the 
vehicle being served will be on the premises of the service station.

[[Page 254]]

    (ii) Inside location. Approved dispensing units may be located 
inside of buildings. The dispensing area shall be separated from other 
areas in an approved manner. The dispensing unit and its piping shall be 
mounted either on a concrete island or protected against collision 
damage by suitable means and shall be located in a position where it 
cannot be struck by a vehicle descending a ramp or other slope out of 
control. The dispensing area shall be provided with an approved 
mechanical or gravity ventilation system. When dispensing units are 
located below grade, only approved mechanical ventilation shall be used 
and the entire dispensing area shall be protected by an approved 
automatic sprinkler system. Ventilating systems shall be electrically 
interlocked with gasoline dispensing units so that the dispensing units 
cannot be operated unless the ventilating fan motors are energized.
    (iii) Emergency power cutoff. A clearly identified and easily 
accessible switch(es) or a circuit breaker(s) shall be provided at a 
location remote from dispensing devices, including remote pumping 
systems, to shut off the power to all dispensing devices in the event of 
an emergency.
    (iv) Dispensing units. (a) Class I liquids shall be transferred from 
tanks by means of fixed pumps so designed and equipped as to allow 
control of the flow and to prevent leakage or accidental discharge.
    (b)(1) Only listed devices may be used for dispensing Class I 
liquids. No such device may be used if it shows evidence of having been 
dismantled.
    (2) Every dispensing device for Class I liquids installed after 
December 31, 1978, shall contain evidence of listing so placed that any 
attempt to dismantle the device will result in damage to such evidence, 
visible without disassembly or dismounting of the nozzle.
    (c) Class I liquids shall not be dispensed by pressure from drums, 
barrels, and similar containers. Approved pumps taking suction through 
the top of the container or approved self-closing faucets shall be used.
    (d) The dispensing units, except those attached to containers, shall 
be mounted either on a concrete island or protected against collision 
damage by suitable means.
    (v) Remote pumping systems.
    (a) This subdivision shall apply to systems for dispensing Class I 
liquids where such liquids are transferred from storage to individual or 
multiple dispensing units by pumps located elsewhere than at the 
dispensing units.
    (b) Pumps shall be designed or equipped so that no part of the 
system will be subjected to pressures above its allowable working 
pressure. Pumps installed above grade, outside of buildings, shall be 
located not less than 10 feet from lines of adjoining property which may 
be built upon, and not less than 5 feet from any building opening. When 
an outside pump location is impractical, pumps may be installed inside 
of buildings, as provided for dispensers in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph, or in pits as provided in subdivision (c) of this 
subdivision. Pumps shall be substantially anchored and protected against 
physical damage by vehicles.
    (c) Pits for subsurface pumps or piping manifolds of submersible 
pumps shall withstand the external forces to which they may be subjected 
without damage to the pump, tank, or piping. The pit shall be no larger 
than necessary for inspection and maintenance and shall be provided with 
a fitted cover.
    (d) A control shall be provided that will permit the pump to operate 
only when a dispensing nozzle is removed from its bracket on the 
dispensing unit and the switch on this dispensing unit is manually 
actuated. This control shall also stop the pump when all nozzles have 
been returned to their brackets.
    (e) An approved impact valve, incorporating a fusible link, designed 
to close automatically in the event of severe impact or fire exposure 
shall be properly installed in the dispensing supply line at the base of 
each individual dispensing device.
    (f) Testing. After the completion of the installation, including any 
paving, that section of the pressure piping system between the pump 
discharge and

[[Page 255]]

the connection for the dispensing facility shall be tested for at least 
30 minutes at the maximum operating pressure of the system. Such tests 
shall be repeated at 5-year intervals thereafter.
    (vi) Delivery nozzles. (a) A listed manual or automatic-closing type 
hose nozzle valve shall be provided on dispensers used for the 
dispensing of Class I liquids.
    (b) Manual-closing type valves shall be held open manually during 
dispensing. Automatic-closing type valves may be used in conjunction 
with an approved latch-open device.
    (4) Marine service stations--(i) Dispensing. (a) The dispensing area 
shall be located away from other structures so as to provide room for 
safe ingress and egress of craft to be fueled. Dispensing units shall in 
all cases be at least 20 feet from any activity involving fixed sources 
of ignition.
    (b) Dispensing shall be by approved dispensing units with or without 
integral pumps and may be located on open piers, wharves, or floating 
docks or on shore or on piers of the solid fill type.
    (c) Dispensing nozzles shall be automatic-closing without a hold-
open latch.
    (ii) Tanks and pumps. (a) Tanks, and pumps not integral with the 
dispensing unit, shall be on shore or on a pier of the solid fill type, 
except as provided in paragraphs (g)(4)(ii) (b) and (c) of this section.
    (b) Where shore location would require excessively long supply lines 
to dispensers, tanks may be installed on a pier provided that applicable 
portions of paragraph (b) of this section relative to spacing, diking, 
and piping are complied with and the quantity so stored does not exceed 
1,100 gallons aggregate capacity.
    (c) Shore tanks supplying marine service stations may be located 
above ground, where rock ledges or high water table make underground 
tanks impractical.
    (d) Where tanks are at an elevation which would produce gravity head 
on the dispensing unit, the tank outlet shall be equipped with a 
pressure control valve positioned adjacent to and outside the tank block 
valve specified in paragraph (b)(2)(ix)(b) of this section, so adjusted 
that liquid cannot flow by gravity from the tank in case of piping or 
hose failure.
    (iii) Piping. (a) Piping between shore tanks and dispensing units 
shall be as described in paragraph (c) of this section, except that, 
where dispensing is from a floating structure, suitable lengths of oil-
resistant flexible hose may be employed between the shore piping and the 
piping on the floating structure as made necessary by change in water 
level or shoreline.

   Table H-19--Electrical Equipment Hazardous Areas--Service Stations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Class I
           Location              Group D     Extent of classified area
                                division
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Underground tank:
  Fill opening...............           1  Any pit, box or space below
                                            grade level, any part of
                                            which is within the Division
                                            1 or 2 classified area.
                                        2  Up to 18 inches above grade
                                            level within a horizontal
                                            radius of 10 feet from a
                                            loose fill connection and
                                            within a horizontal radius
                                            of 5 feet from a tight fill
                                            connection.
  Vent--Discharging upward...           1  Within 3 feet of open end of
                                            vent, extending in all
                                            directions.
                                        2  Area between 3 feet and 5
                                            feet of open end of vent,
                                            extending in all directions.
Dispenser:
  Pits.......................           1  Any pit, box or space below
                                            grade level, any part of
                                            which is within the Division
                                            1 or 2 classified area.
  Dispenser enclosure........           1  The area 4 feet vertically
                                            above base within the
                                            enclosure and 18 inches
                                            horizontally in all
                                            directions.
  Outdoor....................           2  Up to 18 inches above grade
                                            level within 20 feet
                                            horizontally of any edge of
                                            enclosure.
Indoor:
  With mechanical ventilation           2  Up to 18 inches above grade
                                            or floor level within 20
                                            feet horizontally of any
                                            edge of enclosure.
  With gravity ventilation...           2  Up to 18 inches above grade
                                            or floor level within 25
                                            feet horizontally of any
                                            edge of enclosure.
  Remote pump--Outdoor.......           1  Any pit, box or space below
                                            grade level if any part is
                                            within a horizontal distance
                                            of 10 feet from any edge of
                                            pump.

[[Page 256]]

                                        2  Within 3 feet of any edge of
                                            pump, extending in all
                                            directions. Also up to 18
                                            inches above grade level
                                            within 10 feet horizontally
                                            from any edge of pump.
  Remote pump--Indoor........           1  Entire area within any pit.
                                        2  Within 5 feet of any edge of
                                            pump, extending in all
                                            directions. Also up to 3
                                            feet above floor or grade
                                            level within 25 feet
                                            horizontally from any edge
                                            of pump.
  Lubrication or service room           1  Entire area within any pit.
                                        2  Area up to 18 inches above
                                            floor or grade level within
                                            entire lubrication room.
  Dispenser for Class I                 2  Within 3 feet of any fill or
   liquids.                                 dispensing point, extending
                                            in all directions.
  Special enclosure inside              1  Entire enclosure.
   building per Sec.  1910.-
   106(f)(1)(ii).
  Sales, storage and rest         (\1\  )  If there is any opening to
   rooms.                                   these rooms within the
                                            extent of a Division 1 area,
                                            the entire room shall be
                                            classified as Division 1.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Ordinary.

    (b) A readily accessible valve to shut off the supply from shore 
shall be provided in each pipeline at or near the approach to the pier 
and at the shore end of each pipeline adjacent to the point where 
flexible hose is attached.
    (c) Piping shall be located so as to be protected from physical 
damage.
    (d) Piping handling Class I liquids shall be grounded to control 
stray currents.
    (5) Electrical equipment--(i) Application. This subparagraph shall 
apply to areas where Class I liquids are stored or handled. For areas 
where Class II or Class III liquids are stored or handled the electrical 
equipment may be installed in accordance with the provisions of subpart 
S of this part, for ordinary locations.
    (ii) All electrical equipment and wiring shall be of a type 
specified by and shall be installed in accordance with subpart S of this 
part.
    (iii) So far as it applies. Table H-19 shall be used to delineate 
and classify hazardous areas for the purpose of installation of 
electrical equipment under normal circumstances. A classified area shall 
not extend beyond an unpierced wall, roof, or other solid partition.
    (iv) The area classifications listed shall be based on the 
assumption that the installation meets the applicable requirements of 
this section in all respects.
    (6) Heating equipment--(i) Conformance. Heating equipment shall be 
installed as provided in paragraphs (g)(6) (ii) through (v) of this 
section.
    (ii) Application. Heating equipment may be installed in the 
conventional manner in an area except as provided in paragraph (g)(6) 
(iii), (iv), or (v) of this section.
    (iii) Special room. Heating equipment may be installed in a special 
room separated from an area classified by Table H-19 by walls having a 
fire resistance rating of at least 1 hour and without any openings in 
the walls within 8 feet of the floor into an area classified in Table H-
19. This room shall not be used for combustible storage and all air for 
combustion purposes shall come from outside the building.
    (iv) Work areas. Heating equipment using gas or oil fuel may be 
installed in the lubrication, sales, or service room where there is no 
dispensing or transferring of Class I liquids provided the bottom of the 
combustion chamber is at least 18 inches above the floor and the heating 
equipment is protected from physical damage by vehicles. Heating 
equipment using gas or oil fuel listed for use in garages may be 
installed in the lubrication or service room where Class I liquids are 
dispensed provided the equipment is installed at least 8 feet above the 
floor.
    (v) Electric heat. Electrical heating equipment shall conform to 
paragraph (g)(5) of this section.

[[Page 257]]

    (7) Drainage and waste disposal. Provision shall be made in the area 
where Class I liquids are dispensed to prevent spilled liquids from 
flowing into the interior of service station buildings. Such provision 
may be by grading driveways, raising door sills, or other equally 
effective means. Crankcase drainings and flammable or combustible 
liquids shall not be dumped into sewers but shall be stored in tanks or 
drums outside of any building until removed from the premises.
    (8) Sources of ignition. In addition to the previous restrictions of 
this paragraph, the following shall apply: There shall be no smoking or 
open flames in the areas used for fueling, servicing fuel systems for 
internal combustion engines, receiving or dispensing of flammable or 
combustible liquids. Conspicuous and legible signs prohibiting smoking 
shall be posted within sight of the customer being served. The motors of 
all equipment being fueled shall be shut off during the fueling 
operation.
    (9) Fire control. Each service station shall be provided with at 
least one fire extinguisher having a minimum approved classification of 
6 B, C, located so that an extinguisher, will be within 75 feet of each 
pump, dispenser, underground fill pipe opening, and lubrication or 
service room.
    (h) Processing plants--(1) Scope. This paragraph shall apply to 
those plants or buildings which contain chemical operations such as 
oxidation, reduction, halogenation, hydrogenation, alkylation, 
polymerization, and other chemical processes but shall not apply to 
chemical plants, refineries or distilleries.
    (2) Location--(i) Classification. The location of each processing 
vessel shall be based upon its flammable or combustible liquid capacity.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (3) Processing building--(i) Construction. (a) Processing buildings 
shall be of fire-resistance or noncombustible construction, except heavy 
timber construction with load-bearing walls may be permitted for plants 
utilizing only stable Class II or Class III liquids. Except as provided 
in paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section or in the case of explosion 
resistant walls used in conjunction with explosion relieving facilities, 
see paragraph (h)(3)(iv) of this section, load-bearing walls are 
prohibited. Buildings shall be without basements or covered pits.
    (b) Areas shall have adequate exit facilities arranged to prevent 
occupants from being trapped in the event of fire. Exits shall not be 
exposed by the drainage facilities described in paragraph (h)(ii) of 
this section.
    (ii) Drainage. (a) Emergency drainage systems shall be provided to 
direct flammable or combustible liquid leakage and fire protection water 
to a safe location. This may require curbs, scuppers, or special 
drainage systems to control the spread of fire, see paragraph 
(b)(2)(vii)(b) of this section.
    (b) Emergency drainage systems, if connected to public sewers or 
discharged into public waterways, shall be equipped with traps or 
separators.
    (iii) Ventilation. (a) Enclosed processing buildings shall be 
ventilated at a rate of not less than 1 cubic foot per minute per square 
foot of solid floor area. This shall be accomplished by natural or 
mechanical ventilation with discharge or exhaust to a safe location 
outside of the building. Provisions shall be made for introduction of 
makeup air in such a manner as not to short circuit the ventilation. 
Ventilation shall be arranged to include all floor areas or pits where 
flammable vapors may collect.
    (b) Equipment used in a building and the ventilation of the building 
shall be designed so as to limit flammable vapor-air mixtures under 
normal operating conditions to the interior of equipment, and to not 
more than 5 feet from equipment which exposes Class I liquids to the 
air. Examples of such equipment are dispensing stations, open 
centrifuges, plate and frame filters, open vacuum filters, and surfaces 
of open equipment.
    (iv) Explosion relief. Areas where Class IA or unstable liquids are 
processed shall have explosion venting through one or more of the 
following methods:
    (a) Open air construction.
    (b) Lightweight walls and roof.
    (c) Lightweight wall panels and roof hatches.
    (d) Windows of explosion venting type.

[[Page 258]]

    (4) Liquid handling--(i) Storage. (a) The storage of flammable or 
combustible liquids in tanks shall be in accordance with the applicable 
provisions of paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) If the storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside 
aboveground or underground tanks is not practical because of temperature 
or production considerations, tanks may be permitted inside of buildings 
or structures in accordance with the applicable provisions of paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (c) Storage tanks inside of buildings shall be permitted only in 
areas at or above grade which have adequate drainage and are separated 
from the processing area by construction having a fire resistance rating 
of at least 2 hours.
    (d) The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in containers 
shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (ii) Piping, valves, and fittings. (a) Piping, valves, and fittings 
shall be in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Approved flexible connectors may be used where vibration exists 
or where frequent movement is necessary. Approved hose may be used at 
transfer stations.
    (c) Piping containing flammable or combustible liquids shall be 
identified.
    (iii) Transfer. (a) The transfer of large quantities of flammable or 
combustible liquids shall be through piping by means of pumps or water 
displacement. Except as required in process equipment, gravity flow 
shall not be used. The use of compressed air as a transferring medium is 
prohibited.
    (b) Positive displacement pumps shall be provided with pressure 
relief discharging back to the tank or to pump suction.
    (iv) Equipment. (a) Equipment shall be designed and arranged to 
prevent the unintentional escape of liquids and vapors and to minimize 
the quantity escaping in the event of accidental release.
    (b) Where the vapor space of equipment is usually within the 
flammable range, the probability of explosion damage to the equipment 
can be limited by inerting, by providing an explosion suppression 
system, or by designing the equipment to contain the peak explosion 
pressure which may be modified by explosion relief. Where the special 
hazards of operation, sources of ignition, or exposures indicate a need, 
consideration shall be given to providing protection by one or more of 
the above means.
    (5) Tank vehicle and tank car loading and unloading. Tank vehicle 
and tank car loading or unloading facilities shall be separated from 
aboveground tanks, warehouses, other plant buildings, or nearest line of 
adjoining property which may be built upon by a distance of 25 feet for 
Class I liquids and 15 feet for Class II and Class III liquids measured 
from the nearest position of any fill stem. Buildings for pumps or 
shelters for personnel may be a part of the facility. Operations of the 
facility shall comply with the appropriate portions of paragraph (f)(3) 
of this section.
    (6) Fire control--(i) Portable extinguishers. Approved portable fire 
extinguishers of appropriate size, type, and number shall be provided.
    (ii) Other controls. Where the special hazards of operation or 
exposure indicate a need, the following fire control provision shall be 
provided.
    (a) A reliable water supply shall be available in pressure and 
quantity adequate to meet the probable fire demands.
    (b) Hydrants shall be provided in accordance with accepted good 
practice.
    (c) Hose connected to a source of water shall be installed so that 
all vessels, pumps, and other equipment containing flammable or 
combustible liquids can be reached with at least one hose stream. 
Nozzles that are capable of discharging a water spray shall be provided.
    (d) Processing plants shall be protected by an approved automatic 
sprinkler system or equivalent extinguishing system. If special 
extinguishing systems including but not limited to those employing foam, 
carbon dioxide, or dry chemical are provided, approved equipment shall 
be used and installed in an approved manner.
    (iii) Alarm systems. An approved means for prompt notification of 
fire to those within the plant and any public fire department available 
shall be

[[Page 259]]

provided. It may be advisable to connect the plant system with the 
public system where public fire alarm system is available.
    (iv) Maintenance. All plant fire protection facilities shall be 
adequately maintained and periodically inspected and tested to make sure 
they are always in satisfactory operating condition and that they will 
serve their purpose in time of emergency.
    (7) Sources of ignition--(i) General. (a) Precautions shall be taken 
to prevent the ignition of flammable vapors. Sources of ignition include 
but are not limited to open flames; lightning; smoking; cutting and 
welding; hot surfaces; frictional heat; static, electrical, and 
mechanical sparks; spontaneous ignition, including heat-producing 
chemical reactions; and radiant heat.
    (b) Class I liquids shall not be dispensed into containers unless 
the nozzle and container are electrically interconnected. Where the 
metallic floorplate on which the container stands while filling is 
electrically connected to the fill stem or where the fill stem is bonded 
to the container during filling operations by means of a bond wire, the 
provisions of this section shall be deemed to have been complied with.
    (ii) Maintenance and repair. (a) When necessary to do maintenance 
work in a flammable or combustible liquid processing area, the work 
shall be authorized by a responsible representative of the employer.
    (b) Hot work, such as welding or cutting operations, use of spark-
producing power tools, and chipping operations shall be permitted only 
under supervision of an individual in responsible charge who shall make 
an inspection of the area to be sure that it is safe for the work to be 
done and that safe procedures will be followed for the work specified.
    (iii) Electrical. (a) All electric wiring and equipment shall be 
installed in accordance with subpart S of this part.
    (b) Locations where flammable vapor-air mixtures may exist under 
normal operations shall be classified Class I, Division 1 according to 
the requirements of subpart S of this part. For those pieces of 
equipment installed in accordance with paragraph (h)(3)(iii)(b) of this 
section, the Division 1 area shall extend 5 feet in all directions from 
all points of vapor liberation. All areas within pits shall be 
classified Division 1 if any part of the pit is within a Division 1 or 2 
classified area, unless the pit is provided with mechanical ventilation.
    (c) Locations where flammable vapor-air mixtures may exist under 
abnormal conditions and for a distance beyond Division 1 locations shall 
be classified Division 2 according to the requirements of subpart S of 
this part. These locations include an area within 20 feet horizontally, 
3 feet vertically beyond a Division 1 area, and up to 3 feet above floor 
or grade level within 25 feet, if indoors, or 10 feet if outdoors, from 
any pump, bleeder, withdrawal fitting, meter, or similar device handling 
Class I liquids. Pits provided with adequate mechanical ventilation 
within a Division 1 or 2 area shall be classified Division 2. If Class 
II or Class III liquids only are handled, then ordinary electrical 
equipment is satisfactory though care shall be used in locating 
electrical apparatus to prevent hot metal from falling into open 
equipment.
    (d) Where the provisions of paragraphs (h)(7)(iii) (a), (b), and (c) 
of this section require the installation of explosion-proof equipment, 
ordinary electrical equipment including switchgear may be used if 
installed in a room or enclosure which is maintained under positive 
pressure with respect to the hazardous area. Ventilation makeup air 
shall be uncontaminated by flammable vapors.
    (8) Housekeeping--(i) General. Maintenance and operating practices 
shall be in accordance with established procedures which will tend to 
control leakage and prevent the accidental escape of flammable or 
combustible liquids. Spills shall be cleaned up promptly.
    (ii) Access. Adequate aisles shall be maintained for unobstructed 
movement of personnel and so that fire protection equipment can be 
brought to bear on any part of the processing equipment.
    (iii) Waste and residues. Combustible waste material and residues in 
a building or operating area shall be kept to a minimum, stored in 
closed metal waste cans, and disposed of daily.

[[Page 260]]

    (iv) Clear zone. Ground area around buildings and operating areas 
shall be kept free of tall grass, weeds, trash, or other combustible 
materials.
    (i) Refineries, chemical plants, and distilleries--(1) Storage 
tanks. Flammable or combustible liquids shall be stored in tanks, in 
containers, or in portable tanks. Tanks shall be installed in accordance 
with paragraph (b) of this section. Tanks for the storage of flammable 
or combustible liquids in tank farms and in locations other than process 
areas shall be located in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) (i) and (ii) 
of this section.
    (2) Wharves. Wharves handling flammable or combustible liquids shall 
be in accordance with paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
    (3) Fired and unfired pressure vessels--(i) Fired vessels. Fired 
pressure vessels shall be constructed in accordance with the Code for 
Fired Pressure Vessels, Section I of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Code--1968.
    (ii) Unfired vessels shall be constructed in accordance with the 
Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels, Section VIII of the ASME Boiler and 
Pressure Vessel Code--1968.
    (4) Location of process units. Process units shall be located so 
that they are accessible from at least one side for the purpose of fire 
control.
    (5) Fire control--(i) Portable equipment. Portable fire 
extinguishment and control equipment shall be provided in such 
quantities and types as are needed for the special hazards of operation 
and storage.
    (ii) Water supply. Water shall be available in volume and at 
adequate pressure to supply water hose streams, foam producing 
equipment, automatic sprinklers, or water spray systems as the need is 
indicated by the special hazards of operation and storage.
    (iii) Special equipment. Special extinguishing equipment such as 
that utilizing foam, inert gas, or dry chemical shall be provided as the 
need is indicated by the special hazards of operation and storage.
    (j) Scope. This section applies to the handling, storage, and use of 
flammable and combustible liquids with a flashpoint below 200 deg. F. 
This section does not apply to:
    (1) Bulk transportation of flammable and combustible liquids;
    (2) Storage, handling, and use of fuel oil tanks and containers 
connected with oil burning equipment;
    (3) Storage of flammable and combustible liquids on farms;
    (4) Liquids without flashpoints that may be flammable under some 
conditions, such as certain halogenated hydrocarbons and mixtures 
containing halogenated hydrocarbons;
    (5) Mists, sprays, or foams, except flammable aerosols covered in 
paragraph (d) of this section; or
    (6) Installations made in accordance with requirements of the 
following standards that are incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6:
    (i) National Fire Protection Association Standard for Drycleaning 
Plants, NFPA No. 32-1970;
    (ii) National Fire Protection Association Standard for the 
Manufacture of Organic Coatings, NFPA No. 35-1970;
    (iii) National Fire Protection Association Standard for Solvent 
Extraction Plants, NFPA No. 36-1967; or
    (iv) National Fire Protection Association Standard for the 
Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas Turbines, 
NFPA No. 37-1970.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 3982, Jan. 27, 1975; 40 
FR 23743, June 2, 1975; 43 FR 49746, Oct. 24, 1978; 43 FR 51759, Nov. 7, 
1978; 47 FR 39164, Sept. 7, 1982; 51 FR 34560, Sept. 29, 1986; 53 FR 
12121, Apr. 12, 1988; 55 FR 32015, Aug. 6, 1990; 61 FR 9237, Mar. 7, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.107  Spray finishing using flammable and combustible materials.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section--(1) Aerated solid 
powders. Aerated powders shall mean any powdered material used as a 
coating material which shall be fluidized within a container by passing 
air uniformly from below. It is common practice to fluidize such 
materials to form a fluidized powder bed and then dip the part to be 
coated into the bed in a manner similar to that used in liquid dipping. 
Such beds are also used as sources for powder spray operations.
    (2) Spraying area. Any area in which dangerous quantities of 
flammable vapors or mists, or combustible residues, dusts, or deposits 
are present due to the operation of spraying processes.

[[Page 261]]

    (3) Spray booth. A power-ventilated structure provided to enclose or 
accommodate a spraying operation to confine and limit the escape of 
spray, vapor, and residue, and to safely conduct or direct them to an 
exhaust system.
    (4) Waterwash spray booth. A spray booth equipped with a water 
washing system designed to minimize dusts or residues entering exhaust 
ducts and to permit the recovery of overspray finishing material.
    (5) Dry spray booth. A spray booth not equipped with a water washing 
system as described in subparagraph (4) of this paragraph. A dry spray 
booth may be equipped with (i) distribution or baffle plates to promote 
an even flow of air through the booth or cause the deposit of overspray 
before it enters the exhaust duct; or (ii) overspray dry filters to 
minimize dusts; or (iii) overspray dry filters to minimize dusts or 
residues entering exhaust ducts; or (iv) overspray dry filter rolls 
designed to minimize dusts or residues entering exhaust ducts; or (v) 
where dry powders are being sprayed, with powder collection systems so 
arranged in the exhaust to capture oversprayed material.
    (6) Fluidized bed. A container holding powder coating material which 
is aerated from below so as to form an air-supported expanded cloud of 
such material through which the preheated object to be coated is 
immersed and transported.
    (7) Electrostatic fluidized bed. A container holding powder coating 
material which is aerated from below so as to form an air-supported 
expanded cloud of such material which is electrically charged with a 
charge opposite to the charge of the object to be coated; such object is 
transported, through the container immediately above the charged and 
aerated materials in order to be coated.
    (8) Approved. Shall mean approved and listed by a nationally 
recognized testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for definition of 
nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (9) Listed. See ``approved'' in Sec. 1910.107(a)(8).
    (b) Spray booths--(1) Construction. Spray booths shall be 
substantially constructed of steel, securely and rigidly supported, or 
of concrete or masonry except that aluminum or other substantial 
noncombustible material may be used for intermittent or low volume 
spraying. Spray booths shall be designed to sweep air currents toward 
the exhaust outlet.
    (2) Interiors. The interior surfaces of spray booths shall be smooth 
and continuous without edges and otherwise designed to prevent pocketing 
of residues and facilitate cleaning and washing without injury.
    (3) Floors. The floor surface of a spray booth and operator's 
working area, if combustible, shall be covered with noncombustible 
material of such character as to facilitate the safe cleaning and 
removal of residues.
    (4) Distribution or baffle plates. Distribution or baffle plates, if 
installed to promote an even flow of air through the booth or cause the 
deposit of overspray before it enters the exhaust duct, shall be of 
noncombustible material and readily removable or accessible on both 
sides for cleaning. Such plates shall not be located in exhaust ducts.
    (5) Dry type overspray collectors--(exhaust air filters). In 
conventional dry type spray booths, overspray dry filters or filter 
rolls, if installed, shall conform to the following:
    (i) The spraying operations except electrostatic spraying operations 
shall be so designed, installed and maintained that the average air 
velocity over the open face of the booth (or booth cross section during 
spraying operations) shall be not less than 100 linear feet per minute. 
Electrostatic spraying operations may be conducted with an air velocity 
over the open face of the booth of not less than 60 linear feet per 
minute, or more, depending on the volume of the finishing material being 
applied and its flammability and explosion characteristics. Visible 
gauges or audible alarm or pressure activated devices shall be installed 
to indicate or insure that the required air velocity is maintained. 
Filter rolls shall be inspected to insure proper replacement of filter 
media.
    (ii) All discarded filter pads and filter rolls shall be immediately 
removed to a safe, well-detached location or placed in a water-filled 
metal container and

[[Page 262]]

disposed of at the close of the day's operation unless maintained 
completely in water.
    (iii) The location of filters in a spray booth shall be so as to not 
reduce the effective booth enclosure of the articles being sprayed.
    (iv) Space within the spray booth on the downstream and upstream 
sides of filters shall be protected with approved automatic sprinklers.
    (v) Filters or filter rolls shall not be used when applying a spray 
material known to be highly susceptible to spontaneous heating and 
ignition.
    (vi) Clean filters or filter rolls shall be noncombustible or of a 
type having a combustibility not in excess of class 2 filters as listed 
by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Filters and filter rolls shall not 
be alternately used for different types of coating materials, where the 
combination of materials may be conducive to spontaneous ignition. See 
also paragraph (g)(6) of this section.
    (6) Frontal area. Each spray booth having a frontal area larger than 
9 square feet shall have a metal deflector or curtain not less than 2\1/
2\ inches deep installed at the upper outer edge of the booth over the 
opening.
    (7) Conveyors. Where conveyors are arranged to carry work into or 
out of spray booths, the openings therefor shall be as small as 
practical.
    (8) Separation of operations. Each spray booth shall be separated 
from other operations by not less than 3 feet, or by a greater distance, 
or by such partition or wall as to reduce the danger from juxtaposition 
of hazardous operations. See also paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (9) Cleaning. Spray booths shall be so installed that all portions 
are readily accessible for cleaning. A clear space of not less than 3 
feet on all sides shall be kept free from storage or combustible 
construction.
    (10) Illumination. When spraying areas are illuminated through glass 
panels or other transparent materials, only fixed lighting units shall 
be used as a source of illumination. Panels shall effectively isolate 
the spraying area from the area in which the lighting unit is located, 
and shall be of a noncombustible material of such a nature or so 
protected that breakage will be unlikely. Panels shall be so arranged 
that normal accumulations of residue on the exposed surface of the panel 
will not be raised to a dangerous temperature by radiation or conduction 
from the source of illumination.
    (c) Electrical and other sources of ignition--(1) Conformance. All 
electrical equipment, open flames and other sources of ignition shall 
conform to the requirements of this paragraph, except as follows:
    (i) Electrostatic apparatus shall conform to the requirements of 
paragraphs (h) and (i) of this section;
    (ii) Drying, curing, and fusion apparatus shall conform to the 
requirements of paragraph (j) of this section;
    (iii) Automobile undercoating spray operations in garages shall 
conform to the requirements of paragraph (k) of this section;
    (iv) Powder coating equipment shall conform to the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (2) Minimum separation. There shall be no open flame or spark 
producing equipment in any spraying area nor within 20 feet thereof, 
unless separated by a partition.
    (3) Hot surfaces. Space-heating appliances, steampipes, or hot 
surfaces shall not be located in a spraying area where deposits of 
combustible residues may readily accumulate.
    (4) Wiring conformance. Electrical wiring and equipment shall 
conform to the provisions of this paragraph and shall otherwise be in 
accordance with subpart S of this part.
    (5) Combustible residues, areas. Unless specifically approved for 
locations containing both deposits of readily ignitable residue and 
explosive vapors, there shall be no electrical equipment in any spraying 
area, whereon deposits of combustible residues may readily accumulate, 
except wiring in rigid conduit or in boxes or fittings containing no 
taps, splices, or terminal connections.
    (6) Wiring type approved. Electrical wiring and equipment not 
subject to deposits of combustible residues but located in a spraying 
area as herein defined shall be of explosion-proof type approved for 
Class I, group D locations and shall otherwise conform to the provisions 
of subpart S of this part, for

[[Page 263]]

Class I, Division 1, Hazardous Locations. Electrical wiring, motors, and 
other equipment outside of but within twenty (20) feet of any spraying 
area, and not separated therefrom by partitions, shall not produce 
sparks under normal operating conditions and shall otherwise conform to 
the provisions of subpart S of this part for Class I, Division 2 
Hazardous Locations.
    (7) Lamps. Electric lamps outside of, but within twenty (20) feet of 
any spraying area, and not separated therefrom by a partition, shall be 
totally enclosed to prevent the falling of hot particles and shall be 
protected from mechanical injury by suitable guards or by location.
    (8) Portable lamps. Portable electric lamps shall not be used in any 
spraying area during spraying operations. Portable electric lamps, if 
used during cleaning or repairing operations, shall be of the type 
approved for hazardous Class I locations.
    (9) Grounding. (i) All metal parts of spray booths, exhaust ducts, 
and piping systems conveying flammable or combustible liquids or aerated 
solids shall be properly electrically grounded in an effective and 
permanent manner.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (d) Ventilation--(1) Conformance. Ventilating and exhaust systems 
shall be in accordance with the Standard for Blower and Exhaust Systems 
for Vapor Removal, NFPA No. 91-1961, which is incorporated by reference 
as specified in Sec. 1910.6, where applicable and shall also conform to 
the provisions of this section.
    (2) General. All spraying areas shall be provided with mechanical 
ventilation adequate to remove flammable vapors, mists, or powders to a 
safe location and to confine and control combustible residues so that 
life is not endangered. Mechanical ventilation shall be kept in 
operation at all times while spraying operations are being conducted and 
for a sufficient time thereafter to allow vapors from drying coated 
articles and drying finishing material residue to be exhausted.
    (3) Independent exhaust. Each spray booth shall have an independent 
exhaust duct system discharging to the exterior of the building, except 
that multiple cabinet spray booths in which identical spray finishing 
material is used with a combined frontal area of not more than 18 square 
feet may have a common exhaust. If more than one fan serves one booth, 
all fans shall be so interconnected that one fan cannot operate without 
all fans being operated.
    (4) Fan-rotating element. The fan-rotating element shall be 
nonferrous or nonsparking or the casing shall consist of or be lined 
with such material. There shall be ample clearance between the fan-
rotating element and the fan casing to avoid a fire by friction, 
necessary allowance being made for ordinary expansion and loading to 
prevent contact between moving parts and the duct or fan housing. Fan 
blades shall be mounted on a shaft sufficiently heavy to maintain 
perfect alignment even when the blades of the fan are heavily loaded, 
the shaft preferably to have bearings outside the duct and booth. All 
bearings shall be of the self-lubricating type, or lubricated from the 
outside duct.
    (5) Electric motors. Electric motors driving exhaust fans shall not 
be placed inside booths or ducts. See also paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (6) Belts. Belts shall not enter the duct or booth unless the belt 
and pulley within the duct or booth are thoroughly enclosed.
    (7) Exhaust ducts. Exhaust ducts shall be constructed of steel and 
shall be substantially supported. Exhaust ducts without dampers are 
preferred; however, if dampers are installed, they shall be maintained 
so that they will be in a full open position at all times the 
ventilating system is in operation.
    (i) Exhaust ducts shall be protected against mechanical damage and 
have a clearance from unprotected combustible construction or other 
combustible material of not less than 18 inches.
    (ii) If combustible construction is provided with the following 
protection applied to all surfaces within 18 inches, clearances may be 
reduced to the distances indicated:

(a) 28-gage sheet metal on \1/4\-inch        12 inches.
 asbestos mill board.
(b) 28-gage sheet metal on \1/8\-inch        9 inches.
 asbestos mill board spaced out 1 inch on
 noncombustible spacers.
(c) 22-gage sheet metal on 1-inch rockwool   3 inches.
 batts reinforced with wire mesh or the
 equivalent.

[[Page 264]]

(d) Where ducts are protected with an
 approved automatic sprinkler system,
 properly maintained, the clearance
 required in subdivision (i) of this
 subparagraph may be reduced to 6 inches.

    (8) Discharge clearance. Unless the spray booth exhaust duct 
terminal is from a water-wash spray booth, the terminal discharge point 
shall be not less than 6 feet from any combustible exterior wall or roof 
nor discharge in the direction of any combustible construction or 
unprotected opening in any noncombustible exterior wall within 25 feet.
    (9) Air exhaust. Air exhaust from spray operations shall not be 
directed so that it will contaminate makeup air being introduced into 
the spraying area or other ventilating intakes, nor directed so as to 
create a nuisance. Air exhausted from spray operations shall not be 
recirculated.
    (10) Access doors. When necessary to facilitate cleaning, exhaust 
ducts shall be provided with an ample number of access doors.
    (11) Room intakes. Air intake openings to rooms containing spray 
finishing operations shall be adequate for the efficient operation of 
exhaust fans and shall be so located as to minimize the creation of dead 
air pockets.
    (12) Drying spaces. Freshly sprayed articles shall be dried only in 
spaces provided with adequate ventilation to prevent the formation of 
explosive vapors. In the event adequate and reliable ventilation is not 
provided such drying spaces shall be considered a spraying area. See 
also paragraph (j) of this section.
    (e) Flammable and combustible liquids--storage and handling--(1) 
Conformance. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in 
connection with spraying operations shall conform to the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.106, where applicable.
    (2) Quantity. The quantity of flammable or combustible liquids kept 
in the vicinity of spraying operations shall be the minimum required for 
operations and should ordinarily not exceed a supply for 1 day or one 
shift. Bulk storage of portable containers of flammable or combustible 
liquids shall be in a separate, constructed building detached from other 
important buildings or cut off in a standard manner.
    (3) Containers. Original closed containers, approved portable tanks, 
approved safety cans or a properly arranged system of piping shall be 
used for bringing flammable or combustible liquids into spray finishing 
room. Open or glass containers shall not be used.
    (4) Transferring liquids. Except as provided in paragraph (e)(5) of 
this section the withdrawal of flammable and combustible liquids from 
containers having a capacity of greater than 60 gallons shall be by 
approved pumps. The withdrawal of flammable or combustible liquids from 
containers and the filling of containers, including portable mixing 
tanks, shall be done only in a suitable mixing room or in a spraying 
area when the ventilating system is in operation. Adequate precautions 
shall be taken to protect against liquid spillage and sources of 
ignition.
    (5) Spraying containers. Containers supplying spray nozzles shall be 
of closed type or provided with metal covers kept closed. Containers not 
resting on floors shall be on metal supports or suspended by wire 
cables. Containers supplying spray nozzles by gravity flow shall not 
exceed 10 gallons capacity. Original shipping containers shall not be 
subject to air pressure for supplying spray nozzles. Containers under 
air pressure supplying spray nozzles shall be of limited capacity, not 
exceeding that necessary for 1 day's operation; shall be designed and 
approved for such use; shall be provided with a visible pressure gage; 
and shall be provided with a relief valve set to operate in conformance 
with the requirements of the Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels, Section 
VIII of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code--1968, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. Containers under 
air pressure supplying spray nozzles, air-storage tanks and coolers 
shall conform to the standards of the Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels, 
Section VIII of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code--1968 for 
construction, tests, and maintenance.
    (6) Pipes and hoses. (i) All containers or piping to which is 
attached a hose or flexible connection shall be provided with a shutoff 
valve at the connection. Such valves shall be kept shut when

[[Page 265]]

spraying operations are not being conducted.
    (ii) When a pump is used to deliver products, automatic means shall 
be provided to prevent pressure in excess of the design working pressure 
of accessories, piping, and hose.
    (iii) All pressure hose and couplings shall be inspected at regular 
intervals appropriate to this service. The hose and couplings shall be 
tested with the hose extended, and using the ``inservice maximum 
operating pressures.'' Any hose showing material deteriorations, signs 
of leakage, or weakness in its carcass or at the couplings, shall be 
withdrawn from service and repaired or discarded.
    (iv) Piping systems conveying flammable or combustible liquids shall 
be of steel or other material having comparable properties of resistance 
to heat and physical damage. Piping systems shall be properly bonded and 
grounded.
    (7) Spray liquid heaters. Electrically powered spray liquid heaters 
shall be approved and listed for the specific location in which used 
(see paragraph (c) of this section). Heaters shall not be located in 
spray booths nor other locations subject to the accumulation of deposits 
or combustible residue. If an electric motor is used, see paragraph (c) 
of this section.
    (8) Pump relief. If flammable or combustible liquids are supplied to 
spray nozzles by positive displacement pumps, the pump discharge line 
shall be provided with an approved relief valve discharging to a pump 
suction or a safe detached location, or a device provided to stop the 
prime mover if the discharge pressure exceeds the safe operating 
pressure of the system.
    (9) Grounding. Whenever flammable or combustible liquids are 
transferred from one container to another, both containers shall be 
effectively bonded and grounded to prevent discharge sparks of static 
electricity.
    (f) Protection--(1) Conformance. In sprinklered buildings, the 
automatic sprinkler system in rooms containing spray finishing 
operations shall conform to the requirements of Sec. 1910.159. In 
unsprinklered buildings where sprinklers are installed only to protect 
spraying areas, the installation shall conform to such standards insofar 
as they are applicable. Sprinkler heads shall be located so as to 
provide water distribution throughout the entire booth.
    (2) Valve access. Automatic sprinklers protecting each spray booth 
(together with its connecting exhaust) shall be under an accessibly 
located separate outside stem and yoke (OS&Y) subcontrol valve.
    (3) Cleaning of heads. Sprinklers protecting spraying areas shall be 
kept as free from deposits as practical by cleaning daily if necessary. 
(See also paragraph (g) of this section.)
    (4) Portable extinguishers. An adequate supply of suitable portable 
fire extinguishers shall be installed near all spraying areas.
    (g) Operations and maintenance--(1) Spraying. Spraying shall not be 
conducted outside of predetermined spraying areas.
    (2) Cleaning. All spraying areas shall be kept as free from the 
accumulation of deposits of combustible residues as practical, with 
cleaning conducted daily if necessary. Scrapers, spuds, or other such 
tools used for cleaning purposes shall be of nonsparking material.
    (3) Residue disposal. Residue scrapings and debris contaminated with 
residue shall be immediately removed from the premises and properly 
disposed of. Approved metal waste cans shall be provided wherever rags 
or waste are impregnated with finishing material and all such rags or 
waste deposited therein immediately after use. The contents of waste 
cans shall be properly disposed of at least once daily or at the end of 
each shift.
    (4) Clothing storage. Spray finishing employees' clothing shall not 
be left on the premises overnight unless kept in metal lockers.
    (5) Cleaning solvents. The use of solvents for cleaning operations 
shall be restricted to those having flashpoints not less than 100 deg. 
F.; however, for cleaning spray nozzles and auxiliary equipment, 
solvents having flashpoints not less than those normally used in spray 
operations may be used. Such cleaning shall be conducted inside spray 
booths and ventilating equipment operated during cleaning.
    (6) Hazardous materials combinations. Spray booths shall not be 
alternately

[[Page 266]]

used for different types of coating materials, where the combination of 
the materials may be conducive to spontaneous ignition, unless all 
deposits of the first used material are removed from the booth and 
exhaust ducts prior to spraying with the second used material.
    (7) ``No Smoking'' signs. ``No smoking'' signs in large letters on 
contrasting color background shall be conspicuously posted at all 
spraying areas and paint storage rooms.
    (h) Fixed electrostatic apparatus--(1) Conformance. Where 
installation and use of electrostatic spraying equipment is used, such 
installation and use shall conform to all other paragraphs of this 
section, and shall also conform to the requirements of this paragraph.
    (2) Type approval. Electrostatic apparatus and devices used in 
connection with coating operations shall be of approved types.
    (3) Location. Transformers, power packs, control apparatus, and all 
other electrical portions of the equipment, with the exception of high-
voltage grids, electrodes, and electrostatic atomizing heads and their 
connections, shall be located outside of the spraying area, or shall 
otherwise conform to the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section.
    (4) Support. Electrodes and electrostatic atomizing heads shall be 
adequately supported in permanent locations and shall be effectively 
insulated from the ground. Electrodes and electrostatic atomizing heads 
which are permanently attached to their bases, supports, or 
reciprocators, shall be deemed to comply with this section. Insulators 
shall be nonporous and noncombustible.
    (5) Insulators, grounding. High-voltage leads to electrodes shall be 
properly insulated and protected from mechanical injury or exposure to 
destructive chemicals. Electrostatic atomizing heads shall be 
effectively and permanently supported on suitable insulators and shall 
be effectively guarded against accidental contact or grounding. An 
automatic means shall be provided for grounding the electrode system 
when it is electrically deenergized for any reason. All insulators shall 
be kept clean and dry.
    (6) Safe distance. A safe distance shall be maintained between goods 
being painted and electrodes or electrostatic atomizing heads or 
conductors of at least twice the sparking distance. A suitable sign 
indicating this safe distance shall be conspicuously posted near the 
assembly.
    (7) Conveyors required. Goods being painted using this process are 
to be supported on conveyors. The conveyors shall be so arranged as to 
maintain safe distances between the goods and the electrodes or 
electrostatic atomizing heads at all times. Any irregularly shaped or 
other goods subject to possible swinging or movement shall be rigidly 
supported to prevent such swinging or movement which would reduce the 
clearance to less than that specified in paragraph (h)(6) of this 
section.
    (8) Prohibition. This process is not acceptable where goods being 
coated are manipulated by hand. When finishing materials are applied by 
electrostatic equipment which is manipulated by hand, see paragraph (i) 
of this section for applicable requirements.
    (9) Fail-safe controls. Electrostatic apparatus shall be equipped 
with automatic controls which will operate without time delay to 
disconnect the power supply to the high voltage transformer and to 
signal the operator under any of the following conditions:
    (i) Stoppage of ventilating fans or failure of ventilating equipment 
from any cause.
    (ii) Stoppage of the conveyor carrying goods through the high 
voltage field.
    (iii) Occurrence of a ground or of an imminent ground at any point 
on the high voltage system.
    (iv) Reduction of clearance below that specified in paragraph (h)(6) 
of this section.
    (10) Guarding. Adequate booths, fencing, railings, or guards shall 
be so placed about the equipment that they, either by their location or 
character or both, assure that a safe isolation of the process is 
maintained from plant storage or personnel. Such railings, fencing, and 
guards shall be of conducting material, adequately grounded.
    (11) Ventilation. Where electrostatic atomization is used the 
spraying area

[[Page 267]]

shall be so ventilated as to insure safe conditions from a fire and 
health standpoint.
    (12) Fire protection. All areas used for spraying, including the 
interior of the booth, shall be protected by automatic sprinklers where 
this protection is available. Where this protection is not available, 
other approved automatic extinguishing equipment shall be provided.
    (i) Electrostatic hand spraying equipment--(1) Application. This 
paragraph shall apply to any equipment using electrostatically charged 
elements for the atomization and/or, precipitation of materials for 
coatings on articles, or for other similar purposes in which the 
atomizing device is hand held and manipulated during the spraying 
operation.
    (2) Conformance. Electrostatic hand spraying equipment shall conform 
with the other provisions of this section.
    (3) Equipment approval and specifications. Electrostatic hand spray 
apparatus and devices used in connection with coating operations shall 
be of approved types. The high voltage circuits shall be designed so as 
to not produce a spark of sufficient intensity to ignite any vapor-air 
mixtures nor result in appreciable shock hazard upon coming in contact 
with a grounded object under all normal operating conditions. The 
electrostatically charged exposed elements of the handgun shall be 
capable of being energized only by a switch which also controls the 
coating material supply.
    (4) Electrical support equipment. Transformers, powerpacks, control 
apparatus, and all other electrical portions of the equipment, with the 
exception of the handgun itself and its connections to the power supply 
shall be located outside of the spraying area or shall otherwise conform 
to the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section.
    (5) Spray gun ground. The handle of the spraying gun shall be 
electrically connected to ground by a metallic connection and to be so 
constructed that the operator in normal operating position is in 
intimate electrical contact with the grounded handle.
    (6) Grounding--general. All electrically conductive objects in the 
spraying area shall be adequately grounded. This requirement shall apply 
to paint containers, wash cans, and any other objects or devices in the 
area. The equipment shall carry a prominent permanently installed 
warning regarding the necessity for this grounding feature.
    (7) Maintenance of grounds. Objects being painted or coated shall be 
maintained in metallic contact with the conveyor or other grounded 
support. Hooks shall be regularly cleaned to insure this contact and 
areas of contact shall be sharp points or knife edges where possible. 
Points of support of the object shall be concealed from random spray 
where feasible and where the objects being sprayed are supported from a 
conveyor, the point of attachment to the conveyor shall be so located as 
to not collect spray material during normal operation.
    (8) Interlocks. The electrical equipment shall be so interlocked 
with the ventilation of the spraying area that the equipment cannot be 
operated unless the ventilation fans are in operation.
    (9) Ventilation. The spraying operation shall take place within a 
spray area which is adequately ventilated to remove solvent vapors 
released from the operation.
    (j) Drying, curing, or fusion apparatus--(1) Conformance. Drying, 
curing, or fusion apparatus in connection with spray application of 
flammable and combustible finishes shall conform to the Standard for 
Ovens and Furnaces, NFPA 86A-1969, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6, where applicable and shall also conform with 
the following requirements of this paragraph.
    (2) Alternate use prohibited. Spray booths, rooms, or other 
enclosures used for spraying operations shall not alternately be used 
for the purpose of drying by any arrangement which will cause a material 
increase in the surface temperature of the spray booth, room, or 
enclosure.
    (3) Adjacent system interlocked. Except as specifically provided in 
paragraph (j)(4) of this section, drying, curing, or fusion units 
utilizing a heating system having open flames or which may produce 
sparks shall not be installed in a spraying area, but may be installed

[[Page 268]]

adjacent thereto when equipped with an interlocked ventilating system 
arranged to:
    (i) Thoroughly ventilate the drying space before the heating system 
can be started;
    (ii) Maintain a safe atmosphere at any source of ignition;
    (iii) Automatically shut down the heating system in the event of 
failure of the ventilating system.
    (4) Alternate use permitted. Automobile refinishing spray booths or 
enclosures, otherwise installed and maintained in full conformity with 
this section, may alternately be used for drying with portable 
electrical infrared drying apparatus when conforming with the following:
    (i) Interior (especially floors) of spray enclosures shall be kept 
free of overspray deposits.
    (ii) During spray operations, the drying apparatus and electrical 
connections and wiring thereto shall not be located within spray 
enclosure nor in any other location where spray residues may be 
deposited thereon.
    (iii) The spraying apparatus, the drying apparatus, and the 
ventilating system of the spray enclosure shall be equipped with 
suitable interlocks so arranged that:
    (a) The spraying apparatus cannot be operated while the drying 
apparatus is inside the spray enclosure.
    (b) The spray enclosure will be purged of spray vapors for a period 
of not less than 3 minutes before the drying apparatus can be energized.
    (c) The ventilating system will maintain a safe atmosphere within 
the enclosure during the drying process and the drying apparatus will 
automatically shut off in the event of failure of the ventilating 
system.
    (iv) All electrical wiring and equipment of the drying apparatus 
shall conform with the applicable sections of subpart S of this part. 
Only equipment of a type approved for Class I, Division 2 hazardous 
locations shall be located within 18 inches of floor level. All metallic 
parts of the drying apparatus shall be properly electrically bonded and 
grounded.
    (v) The drying apparatus shall contain a prominently located, 
permanently attached warning sign indicating that ventilation should be 
maintained during the drying period and that spraying should not be 
conducted in the vicinity that spray will deposit on apparatus.
    (k) Automobile undercoating in garages. Automobile undercoating 
spray operations in garages, conducted in areas having adequate natural 
or mechanical ventilation, are exempt from the requirements pertaining 
to spray finishing operations, when using undercoating materials not 
more hazardous than kerosene (as listed by Underwriters' Laboratories in 
respect to fire hazard rating 30-40) or undercoating materials using 
only solvents listed as having a flash point in excess of 100 deg. F. 
Undercoating spray operations not conforming to these provisions are 
subject to all requirements of this section pertaining to spray 
finishing operations.
    (l) Powder coating--(1) Electrical and other sources of ignition. 
Electrical equipment and other sources of ignition shall conform to the 
requirements of paragraphs (c)(1) (i)-(iv), (8) and (9)(i) of this 
section and subpart S of this part.
    (2) Ventilation. (i) In addition to the provisions of paragraph (d) 
of this section, where applicable, exhaust ventilation shall be 
sufficient to maintain the atmosphere below the lowest explosive limits 
for the materials being applied. All nondeposited air-suspended powders 
shall be safely removed via exhaust ducts to the powder recovery cyclone 
or receptacle. Each installation shall be designed and operated to meet 
the foregoing performance specification.
    (ii) Powders shall not be released to the outside atmosphere.
    (3) Drying, curing, or fusion equipment. The provisions of the 
Standard for ovens and furnaces, NFPA No. 86A-1969 shall apply where 
applicable.
    (4) Operation and maintenance. (i) All areas shall be kept free of 
the accumulation of powder coating dusts, particularly such horizontal 
surfaces as ledges, beams, pipes, hoods, booths, and floors.
    (ii) Surfaces shall be cleaned in such manner as to avoid scattering 
dust to other places or creating dust clouds.
    (iii) ``No Smoking'' signs in large letters on contrasting color 
background shall be conspicuously posted at all

[[Page 269]]

powder coating areas and powder storage rooms.
    (5) Fixed electrostatic spraying equipment. The provisions of 
paragraph (h) of this section and other subparagraphs of this paragraph 
shall apply to fixed electrostatic equipment, except that electrical 
equipment not covered therein shall conform to paragraph (l)(1) of this 
section.
    (6) Electrostatic hand spraying equipment. The provisions of 
paragraph (i) of this section and other subparagraphs of this paragraph, 
shall apply to electrostatic handguns when used in powder coating, 
except that electrical equipment not covered therein shall conform to 
paragraph (l)(1) of this section.
    (7) Electrostatic fluidized beds. (i) Electrostatic fluidized beds 
and associated equipment shall be of approved types. The maximum surface 
temperature of this equipment in the coating area shall not exceed 
150 deg. F. The high voltage circuits shall be so designed as to not 
produce a spark of sufficient intensity to ignite any powder-air 
mixtures nor result in appreciable shock hazard upon coming in contact 
with a grounded object under normal operating conditions.
    (ii) Transformers, powerpacks, control apparatus, and all other 
electrical portions of the equipment, with the exception of the charging 
electrodes and their connections to the power supply shall be located 
outside of the powder coating area or shall otherwise conform to the 
requirements of paragraph (l)(1) of this section.
    (iii) All electrically conductive objects within the charging 
influence of the electrodes shall be adequately grounded. The powder 
coating equipment shall carry a prominent, permanently installed warning 
regarding the necessity for grounding these objects.
    (iv) Objects being coated shall be maintained in contact with the 
conveyor or other support in order to insure proper grounding. Hangers 
shall be regularly cleaned to insure effective contact and areas of 
contact shall be sharp points or knife edges where possible.
    (v) The electrical equipment shall be so interlocked with the 
ventilation system that the equipment cannot be operated unless the 
ventilation fans are in operation.
    (m) Organic peroxides and dual component coatings--(1) Conformance. 
All spraying operations involving the use of organic peroxides and other 
dual component coatings shall be conducted in approved sprinklered spray 
booths meeting the requirements of this section.
    (2) Smoking. Smoking shall be prohibited and ``No Smoking'' signs 
shall be prominently displayed and only nonsparking tools shall be used 
in any area where organic peroxides are stored, mixed or applied.
    (n) Scope. This section applies to flammable and combustible 
finishing materials when applied as a spray by compressed air, 
``airless'' or ``hydraulic atomization,'' steam, electrostatic methods, 
or by any other means in continuous or intermittent processes. The 
section also covers the application of combustible powders by powder 
spray guns, electrostatic powder spray guns, fluidized beds, or 
electrostatic fluidized beds. The section does not apply to outdoor 
spray application of buildings, tanks, or other similar structures, nor 
to small portable spraying apparatus not used repeatedly in the same 
location.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 45 FR 60704, Sept. 12, 1980; 
49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 53 FR 12121, Apr. 12, 1988; 61 FR 9237, Mar. 
7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.108  Dip tanks containing flammable or combustible liquids.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section--(1) Dip tank. Shall mean 
a tank, vat, or container of flammable or combustible liquid in which 
articles or materials are immersed for the purpose of coating, 
finishing, treating, or similar processes.
    (2) Vapor area. Shall mean any area containing dangerous quantities 
of flammable vapors in the vicinity of dip tanks, their drainboards or 
associated drying conveying, or other equipment, during operation or 
shutdown periods.
    (3) Approved. Unless otherwise indicated, approval or listing by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for 
definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.

[[Page 270]]

    (4) Lister. See ``approved'' in paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
    (b) Ventilation--(1) Vapor area ventilation. Vapor areas as defined 
in paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall be limited to the smallest 
practical space by maintaining a properly designed system of mechanical 
ventilation arranged to move air from all directions towards the vapor 
area origin and thence to a safe outside location. Ventilating systems 
shall conform to the Standards for Blower and Exhaust Systems (NFPA 
Pamphlet No. 91-1969), which are incorporated by reference as specified 
in Sec. 1910.6. Required ventilating systems shall be so arranged that 
the failure of any ventilating fan shall automatically stop any dipping 
conveyor system. See also paragraph (c)(6) of this section.
    (2) Ventilation combined with drying. When a required ventilating 
system serves associated drying operations utilizing a heating system 
which may be a source of ignition, means shall be provided for 
preventilation before the heating system can be started; the failure of 
any ventilating fan shall automatically shut down the heating system; 
and the installation shall otherwise conform to the Standard for Ovens 
and Furnaces (NFPA No. 86A-1969), which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (c) Construction of dip tanks--(1) General. Dip tanks, including 
drainboards if provided, shall be constructed of substantial 
noncombustible material, and their supports shall be of heavy metal, 
reinforced concrete, or masonry.
    (2) Overflow pipes. (i) Dip tanks of over 150 gallons in capacity or 
10 square feet in liquid surface area shall be equipped with a properly 
trapped overflow pipe leading to a safe location outside buildings.
    (ii) Overflow pipes shall be of sufficient capacity to overflow the 
maximum delivery of dip tank liquid fill pipes but shall not be less 
than 3 inches in diameter and shall be increased in size depending upon 
the area of the liquid surface and the length and pitch of pipe.
    (iii) Piping connections on drains and overflow lines shall be 
designed so as to permit ready access for inspection and cleaning of the 
interior.
    (iv) The bottom of the overflow connection shall be not less than 6 
inches below the top of the tank. See also paragraph (c)(6) of this 
section and paragraph (g)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (3) Bottom drains. (i) Dip tanks over 500 gallons in liquid capacity 
shall be equipped with bottom drains automatically and manually arranged 
to quickly drain the tank in the event of fire, unless the viscosity of 
the liquid at normal atmospheric temperature makes this impractical. 
Manual operation shall be from a safely accessible location. Where 
gravity flow is not practicable, automatic pumps shall be required.
    (ii) Such drain shall be trapped and discharge to a closed properly 
vented salvage tank or to a safe location outside which will not 
endanger property.
    (iii) According to tank capacity the diameter of bottom drainpipe 
shall be not less than the following:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Gallons                              Inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
500 to 750..................................................           3
750 to 1,000................................................           4
1,000 to 2,500..............................................           5
2,500 to 4,000..............................................           6
Over 4,000..................................................           8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Salvage tanks. The capacity of the salvage tank shall be greater 
than the capacity of the dip tank or tanks to which they are connected.
    (5) Automatic extinguishing facilities. Except as noted in paragraph 
(h)(1)(v) of this section (applying to hardening and tempering tanks), 
all dip tanks exceeding 150 gallons liquid capacity or having a liquid 
surface area exceeding 4 square feet shall be protected with at least 
one of the automatic extinguishing facilities conforming to paragraph 
(g) (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of this section.
    (6) Conveyor systems. Dip tanks utilizing a conveyor system shall be 
so arranged that in the event of fire, the conveyor system shall 
automatically cease motion and required bottom drains shall open. 
Conveyor systems shall automatically cease motion unless required 
ventilation is in full operation. See also paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section.
    (7) Heating dip tank liquids. When dip tank liquids are artificially 
heated, either by the dipping of heated articles, or by other 
application of heat to the

[[Page 271]]

liquid, provision shall be made to prevent a temperature rise greater 
than 50 deg. F. below the flashpoint of the liquid. See also paragraph 
(h)(1) of this section.
    (d) Liquids used in dip tanks, storage and handling. The storage of 
flammable and combustible liquids in connection with dipping operation 
shall conform to the requirements of Sec. 1910.106, where applicable. 
Where portable containers are used for the replenishment of flammable 
and combustible liquids, provision shall be made so that both the 
container and tank shall be positively grounded and electrically bonded 
to prevent static electric sparks.
    (e) Electrical and other sources of ignition--(1) Vapor areas. (i) 
There shall be no open flames, spark producing devices, or heated 
surfaces having a temperature sufficient to ignite vapors in any vapor 
area. Except as specifically permitted in paragraph (h)(3) of this 
section, relating to electrostatic apparatus, electrical wiring and 
equipment in any vapor area (as defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section) shall be explosion proof type according to the requirements of 
subpart S of this part for Class I, Group D locations and shall 
otherwise conform to subpart S of this part.
    (ii) Unless specifically approved for locations containing both 
deposits of readily ignitable residues and explosive vapors, there shall 
be no electrical equipment in the vicinity of dip tanks or associated 
drainboards or drying operations which are subject to splashing or 
dripping of dip tank liquids, except wiring in rigid conduit or in 
threaded boxes or fittings containing no taps, splices, or terminal 
connections, and except as specifically permitted in paragraph (h)(3) of 
this section.
    (2) Adjacent areas. In any floorspace outside a vapor area but 
within 20 feet therefrom, and not separated by tight partitions, there 
shall be no open flames or spark producing devices except as 
specifically permitted in NFPA Standard No. 86A-1969, Ovens and 
Furnaces, paragraph 200-7, and electrical wiring and equipment shall 
conform to the provisions of subpart S of this part.
    (f) Operations and maintenance--(1) General. Areas in the vicinity 
of dip tanks shall be kept as clear of combustible stock as practical 
and shall be kept entirely free of combustible debris.
    (2) Waste cans. When waste or rags are used in connection with 
dipping operations, approved metal waste cans shall be provided and all 
impregnated rags or waste deposited therein immediately after use. The 
contents of waste cans shall be properly disposed of at least once daily 
at the end of each shift.
    (3) Inspection. Periodic inspection or tests of all dip tank 
facilities shall be made, including covers, overflow pipe inlets and 
discharge, bottom drains and valves, electrical wiring and equipment and 
grounding connections, ventilating facilities, and all extinguishing 
equipment. Any defects found shall be promptly corrected.
    (4) Warning signs. ``No Smoking'' signs in large letters on 
contrasting color background shall be conspicuously posted in the 
vicinity of dip tanks.
    (g) Extinguishment--(1) Extinguishers. Areas in the vicinity of dip 
tanks shall be provided with manual fire extinguishers suitable for 
flammable and combustible liquid fires, conforming to Sec. 1910.157.
    (2) Automatic water spray extinguishing systems. Automatic water 
spray extinguishing systems shall conform to Sec. 1910.163 and shall be 
arranged to protect tanks, drainboards, and stock over drainboards.
    (3) Automatic foam extinguishing systems. Automatic foam 
extinguishing systems shall conform to Sec. 1910.163 and;
    (i) Foam producing material selected shall be suitable for intended 
use, taking into account characteristics of the dip tank liquid;
    (ii) Overflow pipe shall be arranged to prevent the floating away of 
foam and clogging overflow pipe. This may be accomplished by either of 
the following:
    (a) Overflow pipe may be extended through tank wall and terminated 
in an ell pointing downward.
    (b) Overflow pipe inlet may be provided with a removable screen of 
\1/4\-inch mesh having an area at least twice the cross-sectional area 
of overflow pipe. Screens which may be

[[Page 272]]

clogged by dip tank ingredients shall be inspected and cleaned 
periodically.
    (4) Automatic carbon dioxide systems. Automatic carbon dioxide 
systems shall conform to Sec. 1910.162 and shall be arranged to protect 
both dip tanks and drainboards, and unless stock over drainboards is 
otherwise protected with automatic extinguishing facilities shall also 
be arranged to protect such stock.
    (5) Dry chemical extinguishing systems. Dry chemical extinguishing 
systems shall conform to Sec. 1910.161 and shall be arranged to protect 
both dip tanks and drainboards, and unless stock over drainboards is 
otherwise protected with automatic extinguishing facilities, they shall 
also be arranged to protect such stock.
    (6) Dip tank covers. (i) Covers arranged to close automatically in 
the event of fire shall be actuated by approved automatic devices and 
shall also be arranged for manual operation.
    (ii) Covers shall be of substantial noncombustible material or of 
tin-clad type with enclosing metal applied with locked joints.
    (iii) Chains or wire rope shall be used for cover support or 
operating mechanism where the burning of a cord would interfere with the 
action of a device.
    (iv) Covers shall be kept closed when tanks are not in use.
    (h) Special dip tank applications--(1) Hardening and tempering 
tanks. (i) Tanks shall be located as far as practicable from furnaces 
and shall not be located on or near combustible floors.
    (ii) Tanks shall be provided with a noncombustible hood and vent or 
other equally effective means of venting to the outside of the building 
to serve as a vent in case of fire. All such vent ducts shall be treated 
as flues and be kept well away from combustible roofs or materials.
    (iii) Tanks shall be so designed that the maximum workload is 
incapable of raising the temperature of the cooling medium to within 
50 deg. below its flashpoint, or such tanks shall be equipped with 
circulating cooling systems which will accomplish the same result.
    (iv) Tanks shall be equipped with a high temperature limit switch 
arranged to sound an alarm when the temperature of the quenching medium 
reaches within 50 deg. F. below the flashpoint. If practical from an 
operating standpoint, such limit switches shall also shut down conveying 
equipment supplying work to the tank.
    (v) The provisions of paragraph (c)(5) of this section shall apply 
to tanks having a liquid surface area of 25 square feet or more or a 
capacity of 500 gallons or more.
    (vi) Air under pressure shall not be used to fill or to agitate oil 
tanks.
    (vii) Drain facilities from the bottom of the tank may be combined 
with the oil circulating system or arranged independently to drain the 
oil to a safe location. The drain valve shall be operated automatically 
with approved heat actuated devices or manually, and if the latter, the 
valve shall be operated from a safe distance.
    (2) Flow coat; general. (i) Except as modified in this paragraph, 
all of the preceding standards for dip tanks apply.
    (ii) All piping shall be strongly erected and rigidly supported.
    (iii) Paint shall be supplied by direct low-pressure pumping 
arranged to automatically shut down by means of approved heat actuated 
devices, in the case of fire, or paint may be supplied by a gravity tank 
not exceeding 10 gallons in capacity.
    (iv) The area of the sump and any areas on which paint flows should 
be considered the area of dip tank.
    (3) Electrostatic apparatus; general. (i) Installation and use of 
electrostatic detearing equipment shall conform to paragraphs (a) 
through (g) of this section.
    (ii) Electrostatic apparatus and devices used in connection with 
paint detearing operation shall be of approved types.
    (iii) Transformers, powerpacks, control apparatus, and all other 
electrical portions of the equipment, with the exception of high voltage 
grid and their connections, shall be located outside the vapor area or 
shall conform to the requirements of paragraph (e) of this section.
    (iv) Electrodes shall be of substantial construction, shall be 
rigidly supported in permanent locations and shall be effectively 
insulated from ground.

[[Page 273]]

Insulators shall be nonporous and noncombustible.
    (v) High voltage leads to electrodes shall be effectively and 
permanently supported on suitable insulators, and shall be effectively 
guarded against accidental contact or grounding. An automatic means 
shall be provided for grounding and discharging any accumulated residual 
charge on the electrode assembly or the secondary circuit of the high 
voltage transformer when the transformer primary is disconnected from 
the source of supply.
    (vi) A space shall be maintained between goods being deteared and 
electrodes or conductors of at least twice the sparking distance. A 
suitable sign stating the sparking distance shall be conspicuously 
posted near the assembly.
    (vii) Goods being deteared using this electrostatic process are to 
be supported on conveyors. The conveyors shall be so arranged as to 
maintain safe distances between the goods and the electrodes at all 
times. All goods shall be so supported as to prevent any swinging or 
movement which would reduce the clearance to less than specified in 
paragraph (h)(3)(vi) of this section.
    (viii) This electrostatic process is not approved where goods being 
deteared are manipulated by hand.
    (ix) Electrostatic apparatus shall be equipped with automatic 
controls which will operate without time delay to disconnect the power 
supply to the high voltage transformer and to signal the operator under 
any of the following conditions:
    (a) Stoppage of ventilating fans or failure of ventilating equipment 
from any cause.
    (b) Stoppage of the conveyor carrying goods past the high voltage 
grid.
    (c) Occurrence of a ground or of an imminent ground at any point on 
the high voltage system.
    (d) Reduction of clearance below that specified in paragraph (h)(vi) 
of this section.
    (x) Adequate fencing, railings, or guards shall be so placed about 
the equipment that they, either by their location or character or both, 
assure that a safe isolation of the process is maintained from plant 
storage or personnel. Such railings, fencing and guards shall be of 
conducting material, adequately grounded.
    (xi) Electrode insulators shall be kept clean and dry.
    (xii) The detearing area shall be ventilated by exhausting adequate 
air from the area as specified in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (xiii) All areas for detearing shall be protected by automatic 
sprinklers where this protection is available. Where this protection is 
not available, other approved automatic extinguishing equipment shall be 
provided.
    (xiv) Drip plates and screens subject to paint deposits shall be 
removable and shall be taken to a safe place for cleaning.
    (4) Roll coating. (i) The processes of roll coating, spreading, and 
impregnating, in which fabrics, paper, or other materials are passed 
directly through a tank or trough containing flammable or combustible 
liquids, or over the surface of a roller that revolves partially 
submerged in a Class I or Class II liquid, as these terms are defined in 
Sec. 1910.106 (a), shall conform to the applicable requirements of 
paragraphs (a) through (g) of this section, and in addition shall 
conform to paragraph (h)(4)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) Adequate arrangements shall be made to prevent sparks from 
static electricity by electrically bonding and grounding all metallic 
rotating and other parts of machinery and equipment and by the 
installation of static collectors or maintaining a conductive atmosphere 
such as a high relative humidity.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 45 FR 60704, Sept. 12, 1980; 
49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 53 FR 12121, Apr. 12, 1988; 61 FR 9237, Mar. 
7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.109  Explosives and blasting agents.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section--(1) Blasting agent. 
Blasting agent--any material or mixture, consisting of a fuel and 
oxidizer, intended for blasting, not otherwise classified as an 
explosive and in which none of the ingredients are classified as an 
explosive, provided that the finished product, as mixed and packaged for 
use or shipment, cannot be detonated by

[[Page 274]]

means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined.
    (2) Explosive-actuated power devices. Explosive-actuated power 
device--any tool or special mechanized device which is actuated by 
explosives, but not including propellant-actuated power devices. 
Examples of explosive-actuated power devices are jet tappers and jet 
perforators.
    (3) Explosive. Explosive--any chemical compound, mixture, or device, 
the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion, 
i.e., with substantially instantaneous release of gas and heat, unless 
such compound, mixture, or device is otherwise specifically classified 
by the U.S. Department of Transportation; see 49 CFR chapter I. The term 
``explosives'' shall include all material which is classified as Class 
A, Class B, and Class C explosives by the U.S. Department of 
Transportation, and includes, but is not limited to dynamite, black 
powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric 
blasting caps, safety fuse, fuse lighters, fuse igniters, squibs, 
cordeau detonant fuse, instantaneous fuse, igniter cord, igniters, small 
arms ammunition, small arms ammunition primers, smokeless propellant, 
cartridges for propellant-actuated power devices, and cartridges for 
industrial guns. Commercial explosives are those explosives which are 
intended to be used in commercial or industrial operations.

    Note 1: Classification of explosives is described by the U.S. 
Department of Transportation as follows (see 49 CFR chapter I):

    (i) Class A explosives. Possessing, detonating, or otherwise maximum 
hazard; such as dynamite, nitroglycerin, picric acid, lead azide, 
fulminate of mercury, black powder, blasting caps, and detonating 
primers.
    (ii) Class B explosives. Possessing flammable hazard, such as 
propellant explosives (including some smokeless propellants), 
photographic flash powders, and some special fireworks.
    (iii) Class C explosives. Includes certain types of manufactured 
articles which contain Class A or Class B explosives, or both, as 
components but in restricted quantities.
    (iv) Forbidden or not acceptable explosives. Explosives which are 
forbidden or not acceptable for transportation by common carriers by 
rail freight, rail express, highway, or water in accordance with the 
regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation, 49 CFR chapter I.
    (4) Highway. Highway--any public street, public alley, or public 
road.
    (5) [Reserved]
    (6) Magazine. Magazine--any building or structure, other than an 
explosives manufacturing building, used for the storage of explosives.
    (7) Motor vehicle. Motor vehicle--any self-propelled vehicle, truck, 
tractor, semitrailer, or truck-full trailers used for the transportation 
of freight over public highways.
    (8) Propellant-actuated power devices. Propellant-actuated power 
devices--any tool or special mechanized device or gas generator system 
which is actuated by a smokeless propellant or which releases and 
directs work through a smokeless propellant charge.
    (9) [Reserved]
    (10) Pyrotechnics. Pyrotechnics--any combustible or explosive 
compositions or manufactured articles designed and prepared for the 
purpose of producing audible or visible effects which are commonly 
referred to as fireworks.
    (11) [Reserved]
    (12) Semiconductive hose. Semiconductive hose--a hose with an 
electrical resistance high enough to limit flow of stray electric 
currents to safe levels, yet not so high as to prevent drainage of 
static electric charges to ground; hose of not more than 2 megohms 
resistance over its entire length and of not less than 5,000 ohms per 
foot meets the requirement.
    (13) Small arms ammunition. Small arms ammunition--any shotgun, 
rifle, pistol, or revolver cartridge, and cartridges for propellant-
actuated power devices and industrial guns. Military-type ammunition 
containing explosive-bursting charges, incendiary, tracer, spotting, or 
pyrotechnic projectiles is excluded from this definition.
    (14) Small arms ammunition primers. Small arms ammunition primers--
small percussion-sensitive explosive charges, encased in a cup, used to 
ignite propellant powder.
    (15) Smokeless propellants. Smokeless propellants--solid 
propellants, commonly called smokeless powders in the

[[Page 275]]

trade, used in small arms ammunition, cannon, rockets, propellant-
actuated power devices, etc.
    (16) Special industrial explosives devices. Special industrial 
explosives devices--explosive-actuated power devices and propellant-
actuated power devices.
    (17) Special industrial explosives materials. Special industrial 
explosives materials--shaped materials and sheet forms and various other 
extrusions, pellets, and packages of high explosives, which include 
dynamite, trinitrotoluene (TNT), pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN), 
hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-s-triazine (RDX), and other similar compounds 
used for high-energy-rate forming, expanding, and shaping in metal 
fabrication, and for dismemberment and quick reduction of scrap metal.
    (18) Water gels or slurry explosives. These comprise a wide variety 
of materials used for blasting. They all contain substantial proportions 
of water and high proportions of ammonium nitrate, some of which is in 
solution in the water. Two broad classes of water gels are (i) those 
which are sensitized by a material classed as an explosive, such as TNT 
or smokeless powder, (ii) those which contain no ingredient classified 
as an explosive; these are sensitized with metals such as aluminum or 
with other fuels. Water gels may be premixed at an explosives plant or 
mixed at the site immediately before delivery into the borehole.
    (19) DOT specifications. Regulations of the Department of 
Transportation published in 49 CFR chapter I.
    (b) Miscellaneous provisions--(1) General hazard. No person shall 
store, handle, or transport explosives or blasting agents when such 
storage, handling, and transportation of explosives or blasting agents 
constitutes an undue hazard to life.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (c) Storage of explosives--(1) General provisions. (i) All Class A, 
Class B, Class C explosives, and special industrial explosives, and any 
newly developed and unclassified explosives, shall be kept in magazines 
which meet the requirements of this paragraph.
    (ii) Blasting caps, electric blasting caps, detonating primers, and 
primed cartridges shall not be stored in the same magazine with other 
explosives.
    (iii) Ground around magazines shall slope away for drainage. The 
land surrounding magazines shall be kept clear of brush, dried grass, 
leaves, and other materials for a distance of at least 25 feet.
    (iv) Magazines as required by this paragraph shall be of two 
classes; namely, Class I magazines, and Class II magazines.
    (v) Class I magazines shall be required where the quantity of 
explosives stored is more than 50 pounds. Class II magazines may be used 
where the quantity of explosives stored is 50 pounds or less.
    (vi) Class I magazines shall be located away from other magazines in 
conformity with Table H-21.

 Table H-21--American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives \1\<SUP>-
                                   \5\
 [As revised and approved by the Institute of Makers of Explosives, June
                                5, 1964]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Explosives                     Distances in feet when
------------------------------------------------  storage is barricaded:
      Pounds over            Pounds not over     Separation of magazines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2......................                 5                        6
5......................                10                        8
10.....................                20                       10
20.....................                30                       11
30.....................                40                       12
40.....................                50                       14
50.....................                75                       15
75.....................               100                       16
100....................               125                       18
125....................               150                       19
150....................               200                       21
200....................               250                       23
250....................               300                       24
300....................               400                       27
400....................               500                       29
500....................               600                       31
600....................               700                       32
700....................               800                       33
800....................               900                       35
900....................             1,000                       36
1,000..................             1,200                       39
1,200..................             1,400                       41
1,400..................             1,600                       43
1,600..................             1,800                       44
1,800..................             2,000                       45
2,000..................             2,500                       49
2,500..................             3,000                       52
3,000..................             4,000                       58
4,000..................             5,000                       61
5,000..................             6,000                       65
6,000..................             7,000                       68
7,000..................             8,000                       72
8,000..................             9,000                       75
9,000..................            10,000                       78
10,000.................            12,000                       82
12,000.................            14,000                       87
14,000.................            16,000                       90

[[Page 276]]

16,000.................            18,000                       94
18,000.................            20,000                       98
20,000.................            25,000                      105
25,000.................            30,000                      112
30,000.................            35,000                      119
35,000.................            40,000                      124
40,000.................            45,000                      129
45,000.................            50,000                      135
50,000.................            55,000                      140
55,000.................            60,000                      145
60,000.................            65,000                      150
65,000.................            70,000                      155
70,000.................            75,000                      160
75,000.................            80,000                      165
80,000.................            85,000                      170
85,000.................            90,000                      175
90,000.................            95,000                      180
95,000.................           100,000                      185
100,000................           110,000                      195
110,000................           120,000                      205
120,000................           130,000                      215
130,000................           140,000                      225
140,000................           150,000                      235
150,000................           160,000                      245
160,000................           170,000                      255
170,000................           180,000                      265
180,000................           190,000                      275
190,000................           200,000                      285
200,000................           210,000                      295
210,000................           230,000                      315
230,000................           250,000                      335
250,000................           275,000                      360
275,000................           300,000                      385
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Natural barricade'' means natural features of the ground, such as
  hills, or timber of sufficient density that the surrounding exposures
  which require protection cannot be seen from the magazine when the
  trees are bare of leaves.
\2\ ``Artificial barricade'' means an artificial mound or revetted wall
  of earth of a minimum thickness of three feet.
\3\ ``Barricaded'' means that a building containing explosives is
  effectually screened from a magazine, building, railway, or highway,
  either by a natural barricade, or by an artificial barricade of such
  height that a straight line from the top of any sidewall of the
  building containing explosives to the eave line of any magazine, or
  building, or to a point 12 feet above the center of a railway or
  highway, will pass through such intervening natural or artificial
  barricade.
\4\ When two or more storage magazines are located on the same property,
  each magazine must comply with the minimum distances specified from
  inhabited buildings, railways, and highways, and in addition, they
  should be separated from each other by not less than the distances
  shown for ``Separation of Magazines,'' except that the quantity of
  explosives contained in cap magazines shall govern in regard to the
  spacing of said cap magazines from magazines containing other
  explosives. If any two or more magazines are separated from each other
  by less than the specified ``Separation of Magazines'' distances, then
  such two or more magazines, as a group, must be considered as one
  magazine, and the total quantity of explosives stored in such group
  must be treated as if stored in a single magazine located on the site
  of any magazine of the group, and must comply with the minimum of
  distances specified from other magazines, inhabited buildings,
  railways, and highways.
\5\ This table applies only to the permanent storage of commercial
  explosives. It is not applicable to transportation of explosives, or
  any handling or temporary storage necessary or incident thereto. It is
  not intended to apply to bombs, projectiles, or other heavily encased
  explosives.

    (vii) Except as provided in subdivision (viii) of this subparagraph, 
class II magazines shall be located in conformity with Table H-21, but 
may be permitted in warehouses and in wholesale and retail 
establishments when located on a floor which has an entrance at outside 
grade level and the magazine is located not more than 10 feet from such 
an entrance. Two class II magazines may be located in the same building 
when one is used only for blasting caps in quantities not in excess of 
5,000 caps and a distance of 10 feet is maintained between magazines.
    (viii) When used for temporary storage at a site for blasting 
operations, class II magazines shall be located away from other 
magazines. A distance of at least one hundred and fifty (150) feet shall 
be maintained between class II magazines and the work in progress when 
the quantity of explosives kept therein is in excess of 25 pounds, and 
at least 50 feet when the quantity of explosives is 25 pounds, or less.
    (ix) This paragraph (c) does not apply to:
    (a) Stocks of small arms ammunition, propellant-actuated power 
cartridges, small arms ammunition primers in quantities of less than 
750,000, or of smokeless propellants in quantities less than 750 pounds;
    (b) Explosive-actuated power devices when in quantities less than 50 
pounds net weight of explosives;
    (c) Fuse lighters and fuse igniters;
    (d) Safety fuses other than cordeau detonant fuses.
    (2) Construction of magazines--general. (i) Magazines shall be 
constructed in conformity with the provisions of this paragraph.
    (ii) Magazines for the storage of explosives, other than black 
powder, Class B and Class C explosives shall be bullet resistant, 
weather resistant, fire resistant, and ventilated sufficiently to 
protect the explosive in the specific locality. Magazines used only for 
storage of black powder, Class B and Class C explosives shall be weather 
resistant, fire-resistant, and have ventilation. Magazines for storage 
of blasting and electric blasting caps shall be weather resistant, fire-
resistant, and ventilated.

[[Page 277]]

    (iii) Property upon which Class I magazines are located and property 
where Class II magazines are located outside of buildings shall be 
posted with signs reading ``Explosives--Keep Off.''
    (iv) Magazines requiring heat shall be heated by either hot-water 
radiant heating with the magazine building; or air directed into the 
magazine building over either hot water or low pressure steam (15 
p.s.i.g.) coils located outside the magazine building.
    (v) The magazine heating systems shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (a) The radiant heating coils within the building shall be installed 
in such a manner that the explosives or explosives containers cannot 
contact the coils and air is free to circulate between the coils and the 
explosives or explosives containers.
    (b) The heating ducts shall be installed in such a manner that the 
hot-air discharge from the duct is not directed against the explosives 
or explosives containers.
    (c) The heating device used in connection with a magazine shall have 
controls which prevent the ambient building temperature from exceeding 
130 deg. F.
    (d) The electric fan or pump used in the heating system for a 
magazine shall be mounted outside and separate from the wall of the 
magazine and shall be grounded.
    (e) The electric fan motor and the controls for electrical heating 
devices used in heating water or steam shall have overloads and 
disconnects, which comply with subpart S of this part. All electrical 
switch gear shall be located a minimum distance of 25 feet from the 
magazine.
    (f) The heating source for water or steam shall be separated from 
the magazine by a distance of not less than 25 feet when electrical and 
50 feet when fuel fired. The area between the heating unit and the 
magazine shall be cleared of all combustible materials.
    (g) The storage of explosives and explosives containers in the 
magazine shall allow uniform air circulation so product temperature 
uniformity can be maintained.
    (vi) When lights are necessary inside the magazine, electric safety 
flashlight, or electric safety lanterns shall be used.
    (3) Construction of Class I magazines. (i) Class I magazines shall 
be of masonry construction or of wood or of metal construction, or a 
combination of these types. Thickness of masonry units shall not be less 
than 8 inches. Hollow masonry units used in construction required to be 
bullet resistant shall have all hollow spaces filled with weak cement or 
well-tamped sand. Wood constructed walls, required to be bullet 
resistant, shall have at least a 6-inch space between interior and 
exterior sheathing and the space between sheathing shall be filled with 
well-tamped sand. Metal wall construction, when required to be bullet 
resistant, shall be lined with brick at least 4 inches in thickness or 
shall have at least a 6-inch sandfill between interior and exterior 
walls.
    (ii) Floors and roofs of masonry magazines may be of wood 
construction. Wood floors shall be tongue and grooved lumber having a 
nominal thickness of 1 inch.
    (iii) Roofs required to be bullet resistant shall be protected by a 
sand tray located at the line of eaves and covering the entire area 
except that necessary for ventilation. Sand in the sand tray shall be 
maintained at a depth of not less than 4 inches.
    (iv) All wood at the exterior of magazines, including eaves, shall 
be protected by being covered with black or galvanized steel or aluminum 
metal of thickness of not less than No. 26 gage. All nails exposed to 
the interior of magazines shall be well countersunk.
    (v) Foundations for magazines shall be of substantial construction 
and arranged to provide good cross ventilation.
    (vi) Magazines shall be ventilated sufficiently to prevent dampness 
and heating of stored explosives. Ventilating openings shall be screened 
to prevent the entrance of sparks.
    (vii) Openings to magazines shall be restricted to that necessary 
for the placement and removal of stocks of explosives. Doors for 
openings in magazines for Class A explosives shall be bullet resistant. 
Doors for magazines not required to be bullet resistant shall

[[Page 278]]

be designed to prevent unauthorized entrance to the magazine.
    (viii) [Reserved]
    (ix) Provisions shall be made to prevent the piling of stocks of 
explosives directly against masonry walls, brick-lined or sand-filled 
metal walls and single-thickness metal walls; such protection, however, 
shall not interfere with proper ventilation at the interior of side and 
end walls.
    (4) Construction of Class II magazines. (i) Class II magazines shall 
be of wood or metal construction, or a combination thereof.
    (ii) Wood magazines of this class shall have sides, bottom, and 
cover constructed of 2-inch hardwood boards well braced at corners and 
protected by being entirely covered with sheet metal of not less than 
No. 20 gage. All nails exposed to the interior of the magazine shall be 
well countersunk. All metal magazines of this class shall have sides, 
bottom, and cover constructed of sheet metal, and shall be lined with 
three-eighths-inch plywood or equivalent. Edges of metal covers shall 
overlap sides at least 1 inch.
    (iii) Covers for both wood- and metal-constructed magazines of this 
class shall be provided with substantial strap hinges and shall be 
provided with substantial means for locking.
    (iv) Magazines of this class shall be painted red and shall bear 
lettering in white, on all sides and top, at least 3 inches high, 
``Explosives--Keep Fire Away.'' Class II magazines when located in 
warehouses, and in wholesale and retail establishments shall be provided 
with substantial wheels or casters to facilitate easy removal in the 
case of fire. Where necessary due to climatic conditions, Class II 
magazines shall be ventilated.
    (5) Storage within magazines. (i) Packages of explosives shall be 
laid flat with top side up. Black powder when stored in magazines with 
other explosives shall be stored separately. Black powder stored in kegs 
shall be stored on ends, bungs down, or on side, seams down. 
Corresponding grades and brands shall be stored together in such a 
manner that brands and grade marks show. All stocks shall be stored so 
as to be easily counted and checked. Packages of explosives shall be 
piled in a stable manner. When any kind of explosive is removed from a 
magazine for use, the oldest explosive of that particular kind shall 
always be taken first.
    (ii) Packages of explosives shall not be unpacked or repacked in a 
magazine nor within 50 feet of a magazine or in close proximity to other 
explosives. Tools used for opening packages of explosives shall be 
constructed of nonsparking materials, except that metal slitters may be 
used for opening fiberboard boxes. A wood wedge and a fiber, rubber, or 
wood mallet shall be used for opening or closing wood packages of 
explosives. Opened packages of explosives shall be securely closed 
before being returned to a magazine.
    (iii) Magazines shall not be used for the storage of any metal tools 
nor any commodity except explosives, but this restriction shall not 
apply to the storage of blasting agents and blasting supplies.
    (iv) Magazine floors shall be regularly swept, kept clean, dry, free 
of grit, paper, empty used packages, and rubbish. Brooms and other 
cleaning utensils shall not have any spark-producing metal parts. 
Sweepings from floors of magazines shall be properly disposed of. 
Magazine floors stained with nitroglycerin shall be cleaned according to 
instructions by the manufacturer.
    (v) When any explosive has deteriorated to an extent that it is in 
an unstable or dangerous condition, or if nitroglycerin leaks from any 
explosives, then the person in possession of such explosive shall 
immediately proceed to destroy such explosive in accordance with the 
instructions of the manufacturer. Only experienced persons shall be 
allowed to do the work of destroying explosives.
    (vi) When magazines need inside repairs, all explosives shall be 
removed therefrom and the floors cleaned. In making outside repairs, if 
there is a possibility of causing sparks or fire the explosives shall be 
removed from the magazine. Explosives removed from a magazine under 
repair shall either be placed in another magazine or placed a safe 
distance from the magazine where

[[Page 279]]

they shall be properly guarded and protected until repairs have been 
completed, when they shall be returned to the magazine.
    (vii) Smoking, matches, open flames, spark-producing devices, and 
firearms (except firearms carried by guards) shall not be permitted 
inside of or within 50 feet of magazines. The land surrounding a 
magazine shall be kept clear of all combustible materials for a distance 
of at least 25 feet. Combustible materials shall not be stored within 50 
feet of magazines.
    (viii) Magazines shall be in the charge of a competent person at all 
times and who shall be held responsible for the enforcement of all 
safety precautions.
    (ix) Explosives recovered from blasting misfires shall be placed in 
a separate magazine until competent personnel has determined from the 
manufacturer the method of disposal. Caps recovered from blasting 
misfires shall not be reused. Such explosives and caps shall then be 
disposed of in the manner recommended by the manufacturer.
    (d) Transportation of explosives--(1) General provisions. (i) No 
employee shall be allowed to smoke, carry matches or any other flame-
producing device, or carry any firearms or loaded cartridges while in or 
near a motor vehicle transporting explosives; or drive, load, or unload 
such vehicle in a careless or reckless manner.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Explosives shall not be transferred from one vehicle to 
another within the confines of any jurisdiction (city, county, State, or 
other area) without informing the fire and police departments thereof. 
In the event of breakdown or collision the local fire and police 
departments shall be promptly notified to help safeguard such 
emergencies. Explosives shall be transferred from the disabled vehicle 
to another only, when proper and qualified supervision is provided.
    (iv) Blasting caps or electric blasting caps shall not be 
transported over the highways on the same vehicles with other 
explosives, unless packaged, segregated, and transported in accordance 
with the Department of Transportation's Hazardous Materials Regulations 
(49 CFR parts 177-180).
    (2) Transportation vehicles. (i) Vehicles used for transporting 
explosives shall be strong enough to carry the load without difficulty 
and be in good mechanical condition. If vehicles do not have a closed 
body, the body shall be covered with a flameproof and moistureproof 
tarpaulin or other effective protection against moisture and sparks. All 
vehicles used for the transportation of explosives shall have tight 
floors and any exposed spark-producing metal on the inside of the body 
shall be covered with wood or other nonsparking materials to prevent 
contact with packages of explosives. Packages of explosives shall not be 
loaded above the sides of an open-body vehicle.
    (ii) Every vehicle used for transporting explosives and oxidizing 
materials listed in paragraph (d)(2)(ii)(a) of this section shall be 
marked as follows:
    (a) Exterior markings or placards required on applicable vehicles 
shall be as follows for the various classes of commodities:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Commodity                   Type of marking or placard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Explosives, Class A, any quantity or a      Explosives A (Red letters on
 combination of Class A and Class B          white background).
 explosives.
Explosives, Class B, and quantity.........  Explosives B (Red letters on
                                             white background).
Oxidizing material (blasting agents,        Oxidizers (Yellow letters on
 ammonium nitrate, etc.), 1,000 pounds or    black background).
 more gross weight.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Such markings or placards shall be displayed at the front, rear, 
and on each side of the motor vehicle or trailer, or other cargo 
carrying body while it contains explosives or other dangerous articles 
of such type and in such quantity as specified in paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii)(a) of this subdivision. The front marking or placard may be 
displayed on the front of either the truck, truck body, truck tractor or 
the trailer.
    (d) Any motor vehicle, trailer, or other cargo-carrying body 
containing more than one kind of explosive as well as an oxidizing 
material requiring a placard under the provisions of paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii)(a), the aggregate gross weight of which totals 1,000 pounds 
or more, shall be marked or placarded ``Dangerous'' as well as 
``Explosive A''

[[Page 280]]

or ``Explosive B'' as appropriate. If explosives Class A and explosives 
Class B are loaded on the same vehicle, the ``Explosives B'' marking 
need not be displayed.
    (e) In any combination of two or more vehicles containing explosives 
or other dangerous articles each vehicle shall be marked or placarded as 
to its contents and in accordance with paragraphs (d)(2)(ii) (a) and (c) 
of this subdivision.
    (iii) Each motor vehicle used for transporting explosives shall be 
equipped with a minimum of two extinguishers, each having a rating of at 
least 10-BC.
    (a) Only extinguishers listed or approved by a nationally recognized 
testing laboratory shall be deemed suitable for use on explosives-
carrying vehicles. Refer to Sec. 1910.155(c)(3)(iv)(A) for definition of 
listed, and Sec. 1910.7 for nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (b) Extinguishers shall be filled and ready for immediate use and 
located near the driver's seat. Extinguishers shall be examined 
periodically by a competent person.
    (iv) A motor vehicle used for transporting explosives shall be given 
the following inspection to determine that it is in proper condition for 
safe transportation of explosives:
    (a) Fire extinguishers shall be filled and in working order.
    (b) All electrical wiring shall be completely protected and securely 
fastened to prevent short-circuiting.
    (c) Chassis, motor, pan, and underside of body shall be reasonably 
clean and free of excess oil and grease.
    (d) Fuel tank and feedline shall be secure and have no leaks.
    (e) Brakes, lights, horn, windshield wipers, and steering apparatus 
shall function properly.
    (f) Tires shall be checked for proper inflation and defects.
    (g) The vehicle shall be in proper condition in every other respect 
and acceptable for handling explosives.
    (3) Operation of transportation vehicles. (i) Vehicles transporting 
explosives shall only be driven by and be in the charge of a driver who 
is familiar with the traffic regulations, State laws, and the provisions 
of this section.
    (ii) Except under emergency conditions, no vehicle transporting 
explosives shall be parked before reaching its destination, even though 
attended, on any public street adjacent to or in proximity to any place 
where people work.
    (iii) Every motor vehicle transporting any quantity of Class A or 
Class B explosives shall, at all times, be attended by a driver or other 
attendant of the motor carrier. This attendant shall have been made 
aware of the class of the explosive material in the vehicle and of its 
inherent dangers, and shall have been instructed in the measures and 
procedures to be followed in order to protect the public from those 
dangers. He shall have been made familiar with the vehicle he is 
assigned, and shall be trained, supplied with the necessary means, and 
authorized to move the vehicle when required.
    (a) For the purpose of this subdivision, a motor vehicle shall be 
deemed ``attended'' only when the driver or other attendant is 
physically on or in the vehicle, or has the vehicle within his field of 
vision and can reach it quickly and without any kind of interference 
``attended'' also means that the driver or attendant is awake, alert, 
and not engaged in other duties or activities which may divert his 
attention from the vehicle, except for necessary communication with 
public officers, or representatives of the carrier shipper, or 
consignee, or except for necessary absence from the vehicle to obtain 
food or to provide for his physical comfort.
    (b) However, an explosive-laden vehicle may be left unattended if 
parked within a securely fenced or walled area with all gates or 
entrances locked where parking of such vehicle is otherwise permissible, 
or at a magazine site established solely for the purpose of storing 
explosives.
    (iv) No spark-producing metal, spark-producing metal tools, oils, 
matches, firearms, electric storage batteries, flammable substances, 
acids, oxidizing materials, or corrosive compounds shall be carried in 
the body of any motor truck and/or vehicle transporting explosives, 
unless the loading of such dangerous articles and the explosives comply 
with U.S. Department of Transportation regulations.

[[Page 281]]

    (v) Vehicles transporting explosives shall avoid congested areas and 
heavy traffic. Where routes through congested areas have been designated 
by local authorities such routes shall be followed.
    (vi) Delivery shall only be made to authorized persons and into 
authorized magazines or authorized temporary storage or handling areas.
    (e) Use of explosives and blasting agents--(1) General provisions. 
(i) While explosives are being handled or used, smoking shall not be 
permitted and no one near the explosives shall possess matches, open 
light or other fire or flame. No person shall be allowed to handle 
explosives while under the influence of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, 
or other dangerous drugs.
    (ii) Original containers or Class II magazines shall be used for 
taking detonators and other explosives from storage magazines to the 
blasting area.
    (iii) When blasting is done in congested areas or in close proximity 
to a structure, or any other installation that may be damaged, the blast 
shall be covered before firing with a mat constructed so that it is 
capable of preventing fragments from being thrown.
    (iv) Persons authorized to prepare explosive charges or conduct 
blasting operations shall use every reasonable precaution, including but 
not limited to warning signals, flags, barricades, or woven wire mats to 
insure the safety of the general public and workmen.
    (v) Blasting operations shall be conducted during daylight hours.
    (vi) Whenever blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of gas, 
electric, water, fire alarm, telephone, telegraph, and steam utilities, 
the blaster shall notify the appropriate representatives of such 
utilities at least 24 hours in advance of blasting, specifying the 
location and intended time of such blasting. Verbal notice shall be 
confirmed with written notice.
    (vii) Due precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental discharge 
of electric blasting caps from current induced by radar, radio 
transmitters, lightning, adjacent powerlines, dust storms, or other 
sources of extraneous electricity. These precautions shall include:
    (a) The suspension of all blasting operations and removal of persons 
from the blasting area during the approach and progress of an electric 
storm.
    (b) The posting of signs warning against the use of mobile radio 
transmitters on all roads within 350 feet of the blasting operations.
    (2) Storage at use sites. (i) Empty containers and paper and fiber 
packing materials which have previously contained explosive materials 
shall be disposed of in a safe manner, or reused in accordance with the 
Department of Transportation's Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 CFR 
parts 177-180).
    (ii) Containers of explosives shall not be opened in any magazine or 
within 50 feet of any magazine. In opening kegs or wooden cases, no 
sparking metal tools shall be used; wooden wedges and either wood, fiber 
or rubber mallets shall be used. Nonsparking metallic slitters may be 
used for opening fiberboard cases.
    (iii) Explosives or blasting equipment that are obviously 
deteriorated or damaged shall not be used.
    (iv) No explosives shall be abandoned.
    (3) Loading of explosives in blast holes. (i) All drill holes shall 
be sufficiently large to admit freely the insertion of the cartridges of 
explosives.
    (ii) Tamping shall be done only with wood rods without exposed metal 
parts, but nonsparking metal connectors may be used for jointed poles. 
Violent tamping shall be avoided. Primed cartridges shall not be tamped.
    (iii) When loading blasting agents pneumatically over electric 
blasting caps, semiconductive delivery hose shall be used and the 
equipment shall be bonded and grounded.
    (iv) No holes shall be loaded except those to be fired in the next 
round of blasting. After loading, all remaining explosives shall be 
immediately returned to an authorized magazine.
    (v) Drilling shall not be started until all remaining butts of old 
holes are examined with a wooden stick for unexploded charges, and if 
any are found, they shall be refired before work proceeds.
    (vi) No person shall be allowed to deepen drill holes which have 
contained explosives.
    (vii) After loading for a blast is completed, all excess blasting 
caps or electric blasting caps and other explosives

[[Page 282]]

shall immediately be returned to their separate storage magazines.
    (4) Initiation of explosive charges.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) When fuse is used, the blasting cap shall be securely attached 
to the safety fuse with a standard-ring type cap crimper. All primers 
shall be assembled at least 50 feet from any magazine.
    (iii) Primers shall be made up only as required for each round of 
blasting.
    (iv) No blasting cap shall be inserted in the explosives without 
first making a hole in the cartridge for the cap with a wooden punch of 
proper size or standard cap crimper.
    (v) Explosives shall not be extracted from a hole that has once been 
charged or has misfired unless it is impossible to detonate the 
unexploded charge by insertion of a fresh additional primer.
    (vi) If there are any misfires while using cap and fuse, all persons 
shall be required to remain away from the charge for at least 1 hour. If 
electric blasting caps are used and a misfire occurs, this waiting 
period may be reduced to 30 minutes. Misfires shall be handled under the 
direction of the person in charge of the blasting and all wires shall be 
carefully traced and search made for unexploded charges.
    (vii) Blasters, when testing circuits to charged holes, shall use 
only blasting galvanometers designed for this purpose.
    (viii) Only the employee making leading wire connections in 
electrical firing shall be allowed to fire the shot. Leading wires shall 
remain shorted and not be connected to the blasting machine or other 
source of current until the charge is to be fired.
    (5) Warning required. Before a blast is fired, the employer shall 
require that a loud warning signal be given by the person in charge, who 
has made certain that all surplus explosives are in a safe place, all 
persons and vehicles are at a safe distance or under sufficient cover, 
and that an adequate warning has been given.
    (f) Explosives at piers, railway stations, and cars or vessels not 
otherwise specified in this standard--(1) Railway cars. Except in an 
emergency and with permission of the local authority, no person shall 
have or keep explosives in a railway car unless said car and contents 
and methods of loading are in accordance with the U.S. Department of 
Transportation Regulations for the Transportation of Explosives, 49 CFR 
chapter I.
    (2) Packing and marking. No person shall deliver any explosive to 
any carrier unless such explosive conforms in all respects, including 
marking and packing, to the U.S. Department of Transportation 
Regulations for the Transportation of Explosives.
    (3) Marking cars. Every railway car containing explosives which has 
reached its designation, or is stopped in transit so as no longer to be 
in interstate commerce, shall have attached to both sides and ends of 
the car, cards with the words ``Explosives--Handle Carefully--Keep Fire 
Away'' in red letters at least 1\1/2\ inches high on a white background.
    (4) Storage. Any explosives at a railway facility, truck terminal, 
pier, wharf harbor facility, or airport terminal whether for delivery to 
a consignee, or forwarded to some other destination shall be kept in a 
safe place, isolated as far as practicable and in such manner that they 
can be easily and quickly removed.
    (5) Hours of transfer. Explosives shall not be delivered to or 
received from any railway station, truck terminal, pier, wharf, harbor 
facility, or airport terminal between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
    (g) Blasting agents--(1) General. Unless otherwise set forth in this 
paragraph, blasting agents, excluding water gels, shall be transported, 
stored, and used in the same manner as explosives. Water gels are 
covered in paragraph (h) of this section.
    (2) Fixed location mixing. (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Buildings used for the mixing of blasting agents shall conform 
to the requirements of this section.
    (a) Buildings shall be of noncombustible construction or sheet metal 
on wood studs.
    (b) Floors in a mixing plant shall be of concrete or of other 
nonabsorbent materials.
    (c) All fuel oil storage facilities shall be separated from the 
mixing plant and located in such a manner that in case

[[Page 283]]

of tank rupture, the oil will drain away from the mixing plant building.
    (d) The building shall be well ventilated.
    (e) Heating units which do not depend on combustion processes, when 
properly designed and located, may be used in the building. All direct 
sources of heat shall be provided exclusively from units located outside 
the mixing building.
    (f) All internal-combustion engines used for electric power 
generation shall be located outside the mixing plant building, or shall 
be properly ventilated and isolated by a firewall. The exhaust systems 
on all such engines shall be located so any spark emission cannot be a 
hazard to any materials in or adjacent to the plant.
    (iii) Equipment used for mixing blasting agents shall conform to the 
requirements of this subdivision.
    (a) The design of the mixer shall minimize the possibility of 
frictional heating, compaction, and especially confinement. All bearings 
and drive assemblies shall be mounted outside the mixer and protected 
against the accumulation of dust. All surfaces shall be accessible for 
cleaning.
    (b) Mixing and packaging equipment shall be constructed of materials 
compatible with the fuel-ammonium nitrate composition.
    (c) Suitable means shall be provided to prevent the flow of fuel oil 
to the mixer in case of fire. In gravity flow systems an automatic 
spring-loaded shutoff valve with fusible link shall be installed.
    (iv) The provisions of this subdivision shall be considered when 
determining blasting agent compositions.
    (a) The sensitivity of the blasting agent shall be determined by 
means of a No. 8 test blasting cap at regular intervals and after every 
change in formulation.
    (b) Oxidizers of small particle size, such as crushed ammonium 
nitrate prills or fines, may be more sensitive than coarser products and 
shall, therefore, be handled with greater care.
    (c) No hydrocarbon liquid fuel with flashpoint lower than that of 
No. 2 diesel fuel oil 125 deg. F. minimum shall be used.
    (d) Crude oil and crankcase oil shall not be used.
    (e) Metal powders such as aluminum shall be kept dry and shall be 
stored in containers or bins which are moisture-resistant or 
weathertight. Solid fuels shall be used in such manner as to minimize 
dust explosion hazards.
    (f) Peroxides and chlorates shall not be used.
    (v) All electrical switches, controls, motors, and lights located in 
the mixing room shall conform to the requirements in subpart S of this 
part for Class II, Division 2 locations; otherwise they shall be located 
outside the mixing room. The frame of the mixer and all other equipment 
that may be used shall be electrically bonded and be provided with a 
continuous path to the ground.
    (vi) Safety precautions at mixing plants shall include the 
requirements of this subdivision.
    (a) Floors shall be constructed so as to eliminate floor drains and 
piping into which molten materials could flow and be confined in case of 
fire.
    (b) The floors and equipment of the mixing and packaging room shall 
be cleaned regularly and thoroughly to prevent accumulation of oxidizers 
or fuels and other sensitizers.
    (c) The entire mixing and packaging plant shall be cleaned regularly 
and thoroughly to prevent excessive accumulation of dust.
    (d) Smoking, matches, open flames, spark-producing devices, and 
firearms (except firearms carried by guards) shall not be permitted 
inside of or within 50 feet of any building or facility used for the 
mixing of blasting agents.
    (e) The land surrounding the mixing plant shall be kept clear of 
brush, dried grass, leaves, and other materials for a distance of at 
least 25 feet.
    (f) Empty ammonium nitrate bags shall be disposed of daily in a safe 
manner.
    (g) No welding shall be permitted or open flames used in or around 
the mixing or storage area of the plant unless the equipment or area has 
been completely washed down and all oxidizer material removed.
    (h) Before welding or repairs to hollow shafts, all oxidizer 
material shall

[[Page 284]]

be removed from the outside and inside of the shaft and the shaft vented 
with a minimum one-half inch diameter opening.
    (i) Explosives shall not be permitted inside of or within 50 feet of 
any building or facility used for the mixing of blasting agents.
    (3) Bulk delivery and mixing vehicles. (i) The provisions of this 
paragraph shall apply to off-highway private operations as well as to 
all public highway movements.
    (ii) A bulk vehicle body for delivering and mixing blasting agents 
shall conform with the requirements of this paragraph (ii).
    (a) The body shall be constructed of noncombustible materials.
    (b) Vehicles used to transport bulk premixed blasting agents on 
public highways shall have closed bodies.
    (c) All moving parts of the mixing system shall be designed as to 
prevent a heat buildup. Shafts or axles which contact the product shall 
have outboard bearings with 1-inch minimum clearance between the 
bearings and the outside of the product container. Particular attention 
shall be given to the clearances on all moving parts.
    (d) A bulk delivery vehicle shall be strong enough to carry the load 
without difficulty and be in good mechanical condition.
    (iii) Operation of bulk delivery vehicles shall conform to the 
requirements of this subdivision. These include the placarding 
requirements as specified by Department of Transportation.
    (a) The operator shall be trained in the safe operation of the 
vehicle together with its mixing, conveying, and related equipment. The 
employer shall assure that the operator is familiar with the commodities 
being delivered and the general procedure for handling emergency 
situations.
    (b) The hauling of either blasting caps or other explosives but not 
both, shall be permitted on bulk trucks provided that a special wood or 
nonferrous-lined container is installed for the explosives. Such 
blasting caps or other explosives shall be in DOT-specified shipping 
containers: see 49 CFR chapter I.
    (c) No person shall smoke, carry matches or any flame-producing 
device, or carry any firearms while in or about bulk vehicles effecting 
the mixing transfer or down-the-hole loading of blasting agents at or 
near the blasting site.
    (d) Caution shall be exercised in the movement of the vehicle in the 
blasting area to avoid driving the vehicle over or dragging hoses over 
firing lines, cap wires, or explosive materials. The employer shall 
assure that the driver, in moving the vehicle, has assistance of a 
second person to guide his movements.
    (e) No intransit mixing of materials shall be performed.
    (iv) Pneumatic loading from bulk delivery vehicles into blastholes 
primed with electric blasting caps or other static-sensitive systems 
shall conform to the requirements of this subdivision.
    (a) A positive grounding device shall be used to prevent the 
accumulation of static electricity.
    (b) A discharge hose shall be used that has a resistance range that 
will prevent conducting stray currents, but that is conductive enough to 
bleed off static buildup.
    (c) A qualified person shall evaluate all systems to determine if 
they will adequately dissipate static under potential field conditions.
    (v) Repairs to bulk delivery vehicles shall conform to the 
requirements of this section.
    (a) No welding or open flames shall be used on or around any part of 
the delivery equipment unless it has been completely washed down and all 
oxidizer material removed.
    (b) Before welding or making repairs to hollow shafts, the shaft 
shall be thoroughly cleaned inside and out and vented with a minimum 
one-half-inch diameter opening.
    (4) Bulk storage bins. (i) The bin, including supports, shall be 
constructed of compatible materials, waterproof, and adequately 
supported and braced to withstand the combination of all loads including 
impact forces arising from product movement within the bin and 
accidental vehicle contact with the support legs.
    (ii) The bin discharge gate shall be designed to provide a closure 
tight enough to prevent leakage of the

[[Page 285]]

stored product. Provision shall also be made so that the gate can be 
locked.
    (iii) Bin loading manways or access hatches shall be hinged or 
otherwise attached to the bin and be designed to permit locking.
    (iv) Any electrically driven conveyors for loading or unloading bins 
shall conform to the requirements of subpart S of this part. They shall 
be designed to minimize damage from corrosion.
    (v) Bins containing blasting agent shall be located, with respect to 
inhabited buildings, passenger railroads, and public highways, in 
accordance with Table-21 and separation from other blasting agent 
storage and explosives storage shall be in conformity with Table H-22.
    (vi) Bins containing ammonium nitrate shall be separated from 
blasting agent storage and explosives storage in conformity with Table 
H-22.

    Table H-22--Table of Recommended Separation Distances of Ammonium
 Nitrate and Blasting Agents From Explosives or Blasting Agents \1\<SUP>-\6\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Donor weight        Minimum separation distance
-----------------------  of receptor when barricaded   Minimum thickness
                                  \2\ (ft.)              of artificial
  Pounds    Pounds not -------------------------------   barricades \5\
   over        over         Ammonium       Blasting          (in.)
                          nitrate \3\      agent \4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ........       100              3             11               12
100.......       300              4             14               12
300.......       600              5             18               12
600.......     1,000              6             22               12
1,000.....     1,600              7             25               12
1,600.....     2,000              8             29               12
2,000.....     3,000              9             32               15
3,000.....     4,000             10             36               15
4,000.....     6,000             11             40               15
6,000.....     8,000             12             43               20
8,000.....    10,000             13             47               20
10,000....    12,000             14             50               20
12,000....    16,000             15             54               25
16,000....    20,000             16             58               25
20,000....    25,000             18             65               25
25,000....    30,000             19             68               30
30,000....    35,000             20             72               30
35,000....    40,000             21             76               30
40,000....    45,000             22             79               35
45,000....    50,000             23             83               35
50,000....    55,000             24             86               35
55,000....    60,000             25             90               35
60,000....    70,000             26             94               40
70,000....    80,000             28            101               40
80,000....    90,000             30            108               40
90,000....   100,000             32            115               40
100,000...   120,000             34            122               50
120,000...   140,000             37            133               50
140,000...   160,000             40            144               50
160,000...   180,000             44            158               50
180,000...   200,000             48            173               50
200,000...   220,000             52            187               60
220,000...   250,000             56            202               60
250,000...   275,000             60            216               60
275,000...   300,000             64            230               60
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These distances apply to the separation of stores only. Table H-21
  shall be used in determining separation distances from inhabited
  buildings, passenger railways, and public highways.
\2\ When the ammonium nitrate and/or blasting agent is not barricaded,
  the distances shown in the table shall be multiplied by six. These
  distances allow for the possibility of high velocity metal fragments
  from mixers, hoppers, truck bodies, sheet metal structures, metal
  container, and the like which may enclose the ``donor''. Where storage
  is in bullet-resistant magazines recommended for explosives or where
  the storage is protected by a bullet-resistant wall, distances, and
  barricade thicknesses in excess of those prescribed in Table H-21 are
  not required.
\3\ The distances in the table apply to ammonium nitrate that passes the
  insensitivity test prescribed in the definition of ammonium nitrate
  fertilizer promulgated by the National Plant Food Institute*; and
  ammonium nitrate failing to pass said test shall be stored at
  separation distances determined by competent persons. (*Definition and
  Test Procedures for Ammonium Nitrate Fertilizer, National Plant Food
  Institute, November 1964.)
\4\ These distances apply to nitro-carbo-nitrates and blasting agents
  which pass the insensitivity test prescribed in the U.S. Department of
  Transportation (DOT) regulations.
\5\ Earth, or sand dikes, or enclosures filled with the prescribed
  minimum thickness of earth or sand are acceptable artificial
  barricades. Natural barricades, such as hills or timber of sufficient
  density that the surrounding exposures which require protection cannot
  be seen from the ``donor'' when the trees are bare of leaves, are also
  acceptable.
\6\ When the ammonium nitrate must be counted in determining the
  distances to be maintained from inhabited buildings, passenger
  railways and public highways, it may be counted at one-half its actual
  weight because its blast effect is lower.
Note 7: Guide to use of table of recommended separation distances of
  ammonium nitrate and blasting agents from explosives or blasting
  agents.
(a) Sketch location of all potential donor and acceptor materials
  together with the maximum mass of material to be allowed in that
  vicinity. (Potential donors are high explosives, blasting agents, and
  combination of masses of detonating materials. Potential acceptors are
  high explosives, blasting agents, and ammonium nitrate.)
(b) Consider separately each donor mass in combination with each
  acceptor mass. If the masses are closer than table allowance
  (distances measured between nearest edges), the combination of masses
  becomes a new potential donor of weight equal to the total mass. When
  individual masses are considered as donors, distances to potential
  acceptors shall be measured between edges. When combined masses within
  propagating distance of each other are considered as a donor, the
  appropriate distance to the edge of potential acceptors shall be
  computed as a weighted distance from the combined masses.
Calculation of weighted distance from combined masses:
Let M<INF>2, M<INF>3 . . . M<INF>n be donor masses to be combined.
M<INF>1 is a potential acceptor mass.
D<INF>12 is distance from M<INF>1 to M<INF>2 (edge to edge).
D<INF>13 is distance from M<INF>1 to M<INF>3 (edge to edge), etc.
To find weighted distance [D<INF>1(<INF>2,<INF>3 . . . <INF>n)] from combined masses to M<INF>1,
  add the products of the individual masses and distances and divide the
  total by the sum of the masses thus:
D<INF>1(<INF>2, <INF>3 . . . <INF>n)=M<INF>2 x D<INF>12+M<INF>3 x D<INF>12 . . . +M<INF>n x D<INF>12M<INF>2+M<INF>3 . . . +M<INF>n
Propagation is possible if either an individual donor mass is less than
  the tabulated distance from an acceptor or a combined mass is less
  than the weighted distance from an acceptor.

[[Page 286]]

(c) In determining the distances separating highways, railroads, and
  inhabited buildings from potential explosions (as prescribed in Table
  H-21), the sum of all masses which may propagate (i.e., lie at
  distances less than prescribed in the Table) from either individual or
  combined donor masses are included. However, when the ammonium nitrate
  must be included, only 50 percent of its weight shall be used because
  of its reduced blast effects. In applying Table H-21 to distances from
  highways, railroads, and inhabited buildings, distances are measured
  from the nearest edge of potentially explodable material as prescribed
  in Table H-21, Note 5.
(d) When all or part of a potential acceptor comprises Explosives Class
  A as defined in DOT regulations, storage in bullet-resistant magazines
  is required. Safe distances to stores in bullet-resistant magazines
  may be obtained from the intermagazine distances prescribed in Table H-
  21.
(e) Barricades must not have line-of-sight openings between potential
  donors and acceptors which permit blast or missiles to move directly
  between masses.
(f) Good housekeeping practices shall be maintained around any bin
  containing ammonium nitrate or blasting agent. This includes keeping
  weeds and other combustible materials cleared within 25 feet of such
  bin. Accumulation of spilled product on the ground shall be prevented.

    (5) Storage of blasting agents and supplies. (i) Blasting agents and 
oxidizers used for mixing of blasting agents shall be stored in the 
manner set forth in this subdivision.
    (a) Blasting agents or ammonium nitrate, when stored in conjunction 
with explosives, shall be stored in the manner set forth in paragraph 
(c) of this section for explosives. The mass of blasting agents and one-
half the mass of ammonium nitrate shall be included when computing the 
total quantity of explosives for determining distance requirements.
    (b) Blasting agents, when stored entirely separate from explosives, 
may be stored in the manner set forth in paragraph (c) of this section 
or in one-story warehouses (without basements) which shall be:
    (1) Noncombustible or fire resistive;
    (2) Constructed so as to eliminate open floor drains and piping into 
which molten materials could flow and be confined in case of fire;
    (3) Weather resistant;
    (4) Well ventilated; and
    (5) Equipped with a strong door kept securely locked except when 
open for business.
    (c) Semitrailer or full-trailer vans used for highway or onsite 
transportation of the blasting agents are satisfactory for temporarily 
storing these materials, provided they are located in accordance with 
Table H-22 with respect to one another. Trailers shall be provided with 
substantial means for locking, and the trailer doors shall be kept 
locked, except during the time of placement and removal of stocks of 
blasting agents.
    (ii) Warehouses used for the storage of blasting agents separate 
from explosives shall be located as set forth in this subdivision.
    (a) Warehouses used for the storage of blasting agents shall be 
located in Table H-22 with respect to one another.
    (b) If both blasting agents and ammonium nitrate are handled or 
stored within the distance limitations prescribed through paragraph 
(g)(2) of this section, one-half the mass of the ammonium nitrate shall 
be added to the mass of the blasting agent when computing the total 
quantity of explosives for determining the proper distance for 
compliance with Table H-21.
    (iii) Smoking, matches, open flames, spark producing devices, and 
firearms are prohibited inside of or within 50 feet of any warehouse 
used for the storage of blasting agents. Combustible materials shall not 
be stored within 50 feet of warehouses used for the storage of blasting 
agents.
    (iv) The interior of warehouses used for the storage of blasting 
agents shall be kept clean and free from debris and empty containers. 
Spilled materials shall be cleaned up promptly and safely removed. 
Combustible materials, flammable liquids, corrosive acids, chlorates, or 
nitrates shall not be stored in any warehouse used for blasting agents 
unless separated therefrom by a fire resistive separation of not less 
than 1 hour resistance. The provisions of this subdivision shall not 
prohibit the storage of blasting agents together with nonexplosive 
blasting supplies.
    (v) Piles of ammonium nitrate and warehouses containing ammonium 
nitrate shall be adequately separated from readily combustible fuels.
    (vi) Caked oxidizers, either in bags or in bulk, shall not be 
loosened by blasting.
    (vii) Every warehouse used for the storage of blasting agents shall 
be under the supervision of a competent person.
    (6) Transportation of packaged blasting agents. (i) When blasting 
agents are transported in the same vehicle with explosives, all of the 
requirements of paragraph (d) of this section shall be complied with.
    (ii) Vehicles transporting blasting agents shall only be driven by 
and be in

[[Page 287]]

charge of a driver in possession of a valid motor vehicle operator's 
license. Such a person shall also be familiar with the State's vehicle 
and traffic laws.
    (iii) No matches, firearms, acids, or other corrosive liquids shall 
be carried in the bed or body of any vehicle containing blasting agents.
    (iv) No person shall be permitted to ride upon, drive, load, or 
unload a vehicle containing blasting agents while smoking or under the 
influence of intoxicants, narcotics, or other dangerous drugs.
    (v) [Reserved]
    (vi) Vehicles transporting blasting agents shall be in safe 
operating condition at all times.
    (7) Use of blasting agents. Persons using blasting agents shall 
comply with all of the applicable provisions of paragraph (e) of this 
section.
    (h) Water gel (Slurry) explosives and blasting agents--(1) General 
provisions. Unless otherwise set forth in this paragraph, water gels 
shall be transported, stored and used in the same manner as explosives 
or blasting agents in accordance with the classification of the product.
    (2) Types and classifications. (i) Water gels containing a substance 
in itself classified as an explosive shall be classified as an explosive 
and manufactured, transported, stored, and used as specified for 
``explosives'' in this section, except as noted in subdivision (iv) of 
this subparagraph.
    (ii) Water gels containing no substance in itself classified as an 
explosive and which are cap-sensitive as defined in paragraph (a) of 
this section under Blasting Agent shall be classified as an explosive 
and manufactured, transported, stored and used as specified for 
``explosives'' in this section.
    (iii) Water gels containing no substance in itself classified as an 
explosive and which are not cap-sensitive as defined in paragraph (a) of 
this section under Blasting Agent shall be classified as blasting agents 
and manufactured, transported, stored, and used as specified for 
``blasting agents'' in this section.
    (iv) When tests on specific formulations of water gels result in 
Department of Transportation classification as a Class B explosive, 
bullet-resistant magazines are not required, see paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of 
this section.
    (3) Fixed location mixing.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Buildings used for the mixing of water gels shall conform to 
the requirements of this subdivision.
    (a) Buildings shall be of noncombustible construction or sheet metal 
on wood studs.
    (b) Floors in a mixing plant shall be of concrete or of other 
nonabsorbent materials.
    (c) Where fuel oil is used all fuel oil storage facilities shall be 
separated from the mixing plant and located in such a manner that in 
case of tank rupture, the oil will drain away from the mixing plant 
building.
    (d) The building shall be well ventilated.
    (e) Heating units that do not depend on combustion processes, when 
properly designed and located, may be used in the building. All direct 
sources of heat shall be provided exclusively from units located outside 
of the mixing building.
    (f) All internal-combustion engines used for electric power 
generation shall be located outside the mixing plant building, or shall 
be properly ventilated and isolated by a firewall. The exhaust systems 
on all such engines shall be located so any spark emission cannot be a 
hazard to any materials in or adjacent to the plant.
    (iii) Ingredients of water gels shall conform to the requirements of 
this subdivision.
    (a) Ingredients in themselves classified as Class A or Class B 
explosives shall be stored in conformity with paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (b) Nitrate-water solutions may be stored in tank cars, tank trucks, 
or fixed tanks without quantity or distance limitations. Spills or leaks 
which may contaminate combustible materials shall be cleaned up 
immediately.
    (c) Metal powders such as aluminum shall be kept dry and shall be 
stored in containers or bins which are moisture-resistant or 
weathertight. Solid fuels shall be used in such manner as to minimize 
dust explosion hazards.
    (d) Ingredients shall not be stored with incompatible materials.

[[Page 288]]

    (e) Peroxides and chlorates shall not be used.
    (iv) Mixing equipment shall comply with the requirements of this 
subdivision.
    (a) The design of the processing equipment, including mixing and 
conveying equipment, shall be compatible with the relative sensitivity 
of the materials being handled. Equipment shall be designed to minimize 
the possibility of frictional heating, compaction, overloading, and 
confinement.
    (b) Both equipment and handling procedures shall be designed to 
prevent the introduction of foreign objects or materials.
    (c) Mixers, pumps, valves, and related equipment shall be designed 
to permit regular and periodic flushing, cleaning, dismantling, and 
inspection.
    (d) All electrical equipment including wiring, switches, controls, 
motors, and lights, shall conform to the requirements of subpart S of 
this part.
    (e) All electric motors and generators shall be provided with 
suitable overload protection devices. Electrical generators, motors, 
proportioning devices, and all other electrical enclosures shall be 
electrically bonded. The grounding conductor to all such electrical 
equipment shall be effectively bonded to the service-entrance ground 
connection and to all equipment ground connections in a manner so as to 
provide a continuous path to ground.
    (v) Mixing facilities shall comply with the fire prevention 
requirements of this subdivision.
    (a) The mixing, loading, and ingredient transfer areas where 
residues or spilled materials may accumulate shall be cleaned 
periodically. A cleaning and collection system for dangerous residues 
shall be provided. ,
    (b) A daily visual inspection shall be made of mixing, conveying, 
and electrical equipment to establish that such equipment is in good 
operating condition. A program of systematic maintenance shall be 
conducted on regular schedule.
    (c) Heaters which are not dependent on the combustion process within 
the heating unit may be used within the confines of processing 
buildings, or compartments, if provided with temperature and safety 
controls and located away from combustible materials and the finished 
product.
    (4) Bulk delivery and mixing vehicles. (i) The design of vehicles 
shall comply with the requirements of this subdivision.
    (a) Vehicles used over public highways for the bulk transportation 
of water gels or of ingredients classified as dangerous commodities, 
shall meet the requirements of the Department of Transportation and 
shall meet the requirements of paragraphs (d) and (g)(6) of this 
section.
    (b) When electric power is supplied by a self-contained motor 
generator located on the vehicle the generator shall be at a point 
separate from where the water gel is discharged.
    (c) The design of processing equipment and general requirements 
shall conform to subparagraphs (3) (iii) and (iv) of this paragraph.
    (d) A positive action parking brake, which will set the wheel brakes 
on at least one axle shall be provided on vehicles when equipped with 
air brakes and shall be used during bulk delivery operations. Wheel 
chocks shall supplement parking brakes whenever conditions may require.
    (ii) Operation of bulk delivery and mixing vehicles shall comply 
with the requirements of this subdivision.
    (a) The placarding requirements contained in DOT regulations apply 
to vehicles carrying water gel explosives or blasting agents.
    (b) The operator shall be trained in the safe operation of the 
vehicle together with its mixing, conveying, and related equipment. He 
shall be familiar with the commodities being delivered and the general 
procedure for handling emergency situations.
    (c) The hauling of either blasting caps or other explosives, but not 
both, shall be permitted on bulk trucks provided that a special wood or 
nonferrous-lined container is installed for the explosives. Such 
blasting caps or other explosives shall be in DOT-specified shipping 
containers; see 49 CFR chapter I.
    (d) No person shall be allowed to smoke, carry matches or any flame-
producing device, or carry any firearms while in or about bulk vehicles 
effecting the mixing, transfer, or down-the-

[[Page 289]]

hole loading of water gels at or near the blasting site.
    (e) Caution shall be exercised in the movement of the vehicle in the 
blasting area to avoid driving the vehicle over or dragging hoses over 
firing lines, cap wires, or explosive materials. The employer shall 
furnish the driver the assistance of a second person to guide the 
driver's movements.
    (f) No intransit mixing of materials shall be performed.
    (g) The location chosen for water gel or ingredient transfer from a 
support vehicle into the borehole loading vehicle shall be away from the 
blasthole site when the boreholes are loaded or in the process of being 
loaded.
    (i) Storage of ammonium nitrate--(1) Scope and definitions. (i)(a) 
Except as provided in paragraph (i)(1)(i)(d) of this paragraph applies 
to the storage of ammonium nitrate in the form of crystals, flakes, 
grains, or prills including fertilizer grade, dynamite grade, nitrous 
oxide grade, technical grade, and other mixtures containing 60 percent 
or more ammonium nitrate by weight but does not apply to blasting 
agents.
    (b) This paragraph does not apply to the transportation of ammonium 
nitrate.
    (c) This paragraph does not apply to storage under the jurisdiction 
of and in compliance with the regulations of the U.S. Coast Guard (see 
46 CFR parts 146-149).
    (d) The storage of ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitrate mixtures 
that are more sensitive than allowed by the ``Definition of Test 
Procedures for Ammonium Nitrate Fertilizer'' is prohibited.
    (ii)(a) [Reserved]
    (b) The standards for ammonium nitrate (nitrous oxide grade) are 
those found in the ``Specifications, Properties, and Recommendations for 
Packaging, Transportation, Storage, and Use of Ammonium Nitrate'', 
available from the Compressed Gas Association, Inc., which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) General provisions. (i) This paragraph applies to all persons 
storing, having, or keeping ammonium nitrate, and to the owner or lessee 
of any building, premises, or structure in which ammonium nitrate is 
stored in quantities of 1,000 pounds or more.
    (ii) Approval of large quantity storage shall be subject to due 
consideration of the fire and explosion hazards, including exposure to 
toxic vapors from burning or decomposing ammonium nitrate.
    (iii)(a) Storage buildings shall not have basements unless the 
basements are open on at least one side. Storage buildings shall not be 
over one story in height.
    (b) Storage buildings shall have adequate ventilation or be of a 
construction that will be self-ventilating in the event of fire.
    (c) The wall on the exposed side of a storage building within 50 
feet of a combustible building, forest, piles of combustible materials 
and similar exposure hazards shall be of fire-resistive construction. In 
lieu of the fire-resistive wall, other suitable means of exposure 
protection such as a free standing wall may be used. The roof coverings 
shall be Class C or better, as defined in the Manual on Roof Coverings, 
NFPA 203M-1970, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (d) All flooring in storage and handling areas, shall be of 
noncombustible material or protected against impregnation by ammonium 
nitrate and shall be without open drains, traps, tunnels, pits, or 
pockets into which any molten ammonium nitrate could flow and be 
confined in the event of fire.
    (e) The continued use of an existing storage building or structure 
not in strict conformity with this paragraph may be approved in cases 
where such continued use will not constitute a hazard to life.
    (f) Buildings and structures shall be dry and free from water 
seepage through the roof, walls, and floors.
    (3) Storage of ammonium nitrate in bags, drums, or other containers. 
(i)(a) Bags and containers used for ammonium nitrate must comply with 
specifications and standards required for use in interstate commerce 
(see 49 CFR chapter I).
    (b) Containers used on the premises in the actual manufacturing or 
processing need not comply with provisions of paragraph (i)(3)(i)(a) of 
this paragraph.

[[Page 290]]

    (ii)(a) Containers of ammonium nitrate shall not be accepted for 
storage when the temperature of the ammonium nitrate exceeds 130 deg. F.
    (b) Bags of ammonium nitrate shall not be stored within 30 inches of 
the storage building walls and partitions.
    (c) The height of piles shall not exceed 20 feet. The width of piles 
shall not exceed 20 feet and the length 50 feet except that where the 
building is of noncombustible construction or is protected by automatic 
sprinklers the length of piles shall not be limited. In no case shall 
the ammonium nitrate be stacked closer than 36 inches below the roof or 
supporting and spreader beams overhead.
    (d) Aisles shall be provided to separate piles by a clear space of 
not less than 3 feet in width. At least one service or main aisle in the 
storage area shall be not less than 4 feet in width.
    (4) Storage of bulk ammonium nitrate. (i)(a) Warehouses shall have 
adequate ventilation or be capable of adequate ventilation in case of 
fire.
    (b) Unless constructed of noncombustible material or unless adequate 
facilities for fighting a roof fire are available, bulk storage 
structures shall not exceed a height of 40 feet.
    (ii)(a) Bins shall be clean and free of materials which may 
contaminate ammonium nitrate.
    (b) Due to the corrosive and reactive properties of ammonium 
nitrate, and to avoid contamination, galvanized iron, copper, lead, and 
zinc shall not be used in a bin construction unless suitably protected. 
Aluminum bins and wooden bins protected against impregnation by ammonium 
nitrate are permissible. The partitions dividing the ammonium nitrate 
storage from other products which would contaminate the ammonium nitrate 
shall be of tight construction.
    (c) The ammonium nitrate storage bins or piles shall be clearly 
identified by signs reading ``Ammonium Nitrate'' with letters at least 2 
inches high.
    (iii)(a) Piles or bins shall be so sized and arranged that all 
material in the pile is moved out periodically in order to minimize 
possible caking of the stored ammonium nitrate.
    (b) Height or depth of piles shall be limited by the pressure-
setting tendency of the product. However, in no case shall the ammonium 
nitrate be piled higher at any point than 36 inches below the roof or 
supporting and spreader beams overhead.
    (c) Ammonium nitrate shall not be accepted for storage when the 
temperature of the product exceeds 130 deg. F.
    (d) Dynamite, other explosives, and blasting agents shall not be 
used to break up or loosen caked ammonium nitrate.
    (5) Contaminants. (i)(a) Ammonium nitrate shall be in a separate 
building or shall be separated by approved type firewalls of not less 
than 1 hour fire-resistance rating from storage of organic chemicals, 
acids, or other corrosive materials, materials that may require blasting 
during processing or handling, compressed flammable gases, flammable and 
combustible materials or other contaminating substances, including but 
not limited to animal fats, baled cotton, baled rags, baled scrap paper, 
bleaching powder, burlap or cotton bags, caustic soda, coal, coke, 
charcoal, cork, camphor, excelsior, fibers of any kind, fish oils, fish 
meal, foam rubber, hay, lubricating oil, linseed oil, or other 
oxidizable or drying oils, naphthalene, oakum, oiled clothing, oiled 
paper, oiled textiles, paint, straw, sawdust, wood shavings, or 
vegetable oils. Walls referred to in this subdivision need extend only 
to the underside of the roof.
    (b) In lieu of separation walls, ammonium nitrate may be separated 
from the materials referred to in paragraph (a) of this section by a 
space of at least 30 feet.
    (c) Flammable liquids such as gasoline, kerosene, solvents, and 
light fuel oils shall not be stored on the premises except when such 
storage conforms to Sec. 1910.106, and when walls and sills or curbs are 
provided in accordance with paragraphs (i)(5)(i) (a) or (b) of this 
section.
    (d) LP-Gas shall not be stored on the premises except when such 
storage conforms to Sec. 1910.110.
    (ii)(a) Sulfur and finely divided metals shall not be stored in the 
same building with ammonium nitrate except when such storage conforms to 
paragraphs (a) through (h) of this section.

[[Page 291]]

    (b) Explosives and blasting agents shall not be stored in the same 
building with ammonium nitrate except on the premises of makers, 
distributors, and user-compounders of explosives or blasting agents.
    (c) Where explosives or blasting agents are stored in separate 
buildings, other than on the premises of makers, distributors, and user-
compounders of explosives or blasting agents, they shall be separated 
from the ammonium nitrate by the distances and/or barricades specified 
in Table H-22 of this subpart, but by not less than 50 feet.
    (d) Storage and/or operations on the premises of makers, 
distributors, and user-compounders of explosives or blasting agents 
shall be in conformity with paragraphs (a) through (h) of this section.
    (6) General precautions. (i) Electrical installations shall conform 
to the requirements of subpart S of this part, for ordinary locations. 
They shall be designed to minimize damage from corrosion.
    (ii) In areas where lightning storms are prevalent, lightning 
protection shall be provided. (See the Lightning Protection Code, NFPA 
78-1968, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.)
    (iii) Provisions shall be made to prevent unauthorized personnel 
from entering the ammonium nitrate storage area.
    (7) Fire protection. (i) Not more than 2,500 tons (2270 tonnes) of 
bagged ammonium nitrate shall be stored in a building or structure not 
equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. Sprinkler systems shall be 
of the approved type and installed in accordance with Sec. 1910.159.
    (ii)(a) Suitable fire control devices such as small hose or portable 
fire extinguishers shall be provided throughout the warehouse and in the 
loading and unloading areas. Suitable fire control devices shall comply 
with the requirements of Secs. 1910.157 and 1910.158.
    (b) Water supplies and fire hydrants shall be available in 
accordance with recognized good practices.
    (j) Small arms ammunition, small arms primers, and small arms 
propellants--(1) Scope. This paragraph does not apply to in-process 
storage and intraplant transportation during manufacture of small arms 
ammunition, small arms primers, and smokeless propellants.
    (2) Small arms ammunition. (i) No quantity limitations are imposed 
on the storage of small arms ammunition in warehouses, retail stores, 
and other general occupancy facilities, except those imposed by 
limitations of storage facilities.
    (ii) Small arms ammunition shall be separated from flammable 
liquids, flammable solids as classified in 49 CFR part 172, and from 
oxidizing materials, by a fire-resistive wall of 1-hour rating or by a 
distance of 25 feet.
    (iii) Small arms ammunition shall not be stored together with Class 
A or Class B explosives unless the storage facility is adequate for this 
latter storage.
    (3) Smokeless propellants. (i) All smokeless propellants shall be 
stored in shipping containers specified in 49 CFR 173.93 for smokeless 
propellants.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Commercial stocks of smokeless propellants over 20 pounds and 
not more than 100 pounds shall be stored in portable wooden boxes having 
walls of at least 1 inch nominal thickness.
    (iv) Commercial stocks in quantities not to exceed 750 pounds shall 
be stored in nonportable storage cabinets having wooden walls of at 
least 1 inch nominal thickness. Not more than 400 pounds shall be 
permitted in any one cabinet.
    (v) Quantities in excess of 750 pounds shall be stored in magazines 
in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (4) Small arms ammunition primers. (i) Small arms ammunition primers 
shall not be stored except in the original shipping container in 
accordance with the requirements of 49 CFR 173.107 for small arms 
ammunition primers.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Small arms ammunition primers shall be separated from 
flammable liquids, flammable solids as classified in 49 CFR part 172, 
and oxidizing materials by a fire-resistive wall of 1-hour rating or by 
a distance of 25 feet.
    (iv) Not more than 750,000 small arms ammunition primers shall be 
stored in any one building, except as provided in paragraph (j)(4)(v) of 
this paragraph. Not more than 100,000 shall be stored in

[[Page 292]]

any one pile. Piles shall be at least 15 feet apart.
    (v) Quantities of small arms ammunition primers in excess of 750,000 
shall be stored in magazines in accordance with paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (k) Scope. (1) This section applies to the manufacture, keeping, 
having, storage, sale, transportation, and use of explosives, blasting 
agents, and pyrotechnics. The section does not apply to the sale and use 
(public display) of pyrotechnics, commonly known as fireworks, nor the 
use of explosives in the form prescribed by the official U.S. 
Pharmacopeia.
    (2) The manufacture of explosives as defined in paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section shall also meet the requirements contained in 
Sec. 1910.119.
    (3) The manufacture of pyrotechnics as defined in paragraph (a)(10) 
of this section shall also meet the requirements contained in 
Sec. 1910.119.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49747, Oct. 24, 1978; 
45 FR 60704, Sept. 12, 1980; 53 FR 12122, Apr. 12, 1988; 57 FR 6403, 
Feb. 24, 1992; 58 FR 35309, June 30, 1993; 61 FR 9237, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 
FR 33466, June 18, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.109 
was amended in paragraph (c)(1)(vi) by removing the phrase ``from 
inhabited buildings, passenger railways, and public highways and'' from 
the text and by removing the words ``manufacture and'' from the first 
sentence in footnote number 5 of Table H-21 and by revising paragraphs 
(d)(1)(iv) and (e)(2)(i), effective Aug. 17, 1998. For the convenience 
of the user, the superseded text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 1910.109  Explosives and blasting agents.

                                * * * * *

    (d) * * *
    (1) * * *
    (iv) Blasting caps or electric blasting caps shall not be 
transported over the highways on the same vehicles with other 
explosives.

                                * * * * *

    (e) * * *
    (2) * * *
    (i) Empty boxes and paper and fiber packing materials which have 
previously contained high explosives shall not be used again for any 
purpose, but shall be destroyed by burning at an approved isolated 
location out of doors, and no person shall be nearer than 100 feet after 
the burning has started.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 1910.110  Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section. As used in this section:
    (1) API-ASME container--A container constructed in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (2) ASME container--A container constructed in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section.
    (3) Container assembly--An assembly consisting essentially of the 
container and fittings for all container openings, including shutoff 
valves, excess flow valves, liquid-level gaging devices, safety relief 
devices, and protective housing.
    (4) Containers--All vessels, such as tanks, cylinders, or drums, 
used for transportation or storing liquefied petroleum gases.
    (5) DOT--Department of Transportation.
    (6) DOT container--A container constructed in accordance with the 
applicable requirements of 49 CFR chapter 1.
    (7) ``Liquified petroleum gases''-- ``LPG'' and ``LP-Gas''--Any 
material which is composed predominantly of any of the following 
hydrocarbons, or mixtures of them; propane, propylene, butanes (normal 
butane or iso-butane), and butylenes.
    (8) Movable fuel storage tenders or farm carts--Containers not in 
excess of 1,200 gallons water capacity, equipped with wheels to be towed 
from one location of usage to another. They are basically nonhighway 
vehicles, but may occasionally be moved over public roads or highways. 
They are used as a fuel supply for farm tractors, construction machinery 
and similar equipment.
    (9) P.S.I.G.--pounds per square inch gauge.
    (10) P.S.I.A.--pounds per square inch absolute.
    (11) Systems--an assembly of equipment consisting essentially of the 
container or containers, major devices such as vaporizers, safety relief 
valves,

[[Page 293]]

excess flow valves, regulators, and piping connecting such parts.
    (12) Vaporizer-burner--an integral vaporizer-burner unit, dependent 
upon the heat generated by the burner as the source of heat to vaporize 
the liquid used for dehydrators or dryers.
    (13) Ventilation, adequate--when specified for the prevention of 
fire during normal operation, ventilation shall be considered adequate 
when the concentration of the gas in a gas-air mixture does not exceed 
25 percent of the lower flammable limit.
    (14) Approved--unless otherwise indicated, listing or approval by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for 
definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (15) Listed--see ``approved'' in Sec. 1910.110(14).
    (16) DOT Specifications--regulations of the Department of 
Transportation published in 49 CFR chapter I.
    (17)-(18) [Reserved]
    (19) DOT cylinders--cylinders meeting the requirements of 49 CFR 
chapter I.
    (b) Basic rules--(1) Odorizing gases. (i) All liquefied petroleum 
gases shall be effectively odorized by an approved agent of such 
character as to indicate positively, by distinct odor, the presence of 
gas down to concentration in air of not over one-fifth the lower limit 
of flammability. Odorization, however, is not required if harmful in the 
use of further processing of the liquefied petroleum gas, or if 
odorization will serve no useful purpose as a warning agent in such use 
or further processing.
    (ii) The odorization requirement of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this 
section shall be considered to be met by the use of 1.0 pounds of ethyl 
mercaptan, 1.0 pounds of thiophane or 1.4 pounds of amyl mercaptan per 
10,000 gallons of LP-Gas. However, this listing of odorants and 
quantities shall not exclude the use of other odorants that meet the 
odorization requirements of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.
    (2) Approval of equipment and systems. (i) Each system utilizing DOT 
containers in accordance with 49 CFR part 178 shall have its container 
valves, connectors, manifold valve assemblies, and regulators approved.
    (ii) Each system for domestic or commercial use utilizing containers 
of 2,000 gallons or less water capacity, other than those constructed in 
accordance with 49 CFR part 178, shall consist of a container assembly 
and one or more regulators, and may include other parts. The system as a 
unit or the container assembly as a unit, and the regulator or 
regulators, shall be individually listed.
    (iii) In systems utilizing containers of over 2,000 gallons water 
capacity, each regulator, container valve, excess flow valve, gaging 
device, and relief valve installed on or at the container, shall have 
its correctness as to design, construction, and performance determined 
by listing by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to 
Sec. 1910.7 for definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (3) Requirements for construction and original test of containers. 
(i) Containers used with systems embodied in paragraphs (d), (e), (g), 
and (h) of this section, except as provided in paragraphs (e)(3)(iii) 
and (g)(2)(i) of this section, shall be designed, constructed, and 
tested in accordance with the Rules for Construction of Unfired Pressure 
Vessels, section VIII, Division 1, American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers (ASME) Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 1968 edition, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) Containers constructed according to the 1949 and earlier 
editions of the ASME Code do not have to comply with paragraphs U-2 
through U-10 and U-19 thereof. Containers constructed according to 
paragraph U-70 in the 1949 and earlier editions are not authorized.
    (iii) Containers designed, constructed, and tested prior to July 1, 
1961, according to the Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels for Petroleum 
Liquids and Gases, 1951 edition with 1954 Addenda, of the American 
Petroleum Institute and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, shall be 
considered in conformance. Containers constructed according to API-ASME 
Code do not have to comply with section I or with appendix to section I. 
Paragraphs W-601 to W-606

[[Page 294]]

inclusive in the 1943 and earlier editions do not apply.
    (iv) The provisions of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section shall not 
be construed as prohibiting the continued use or reinstallation of 
containers constructed and maintained in accordance with the standard 
for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases NFPA No. 58 in 
effect at the time of fabrication.
    (v) Containers used with systems embodied in paragraph (b), 
(d)(3)(iii), and (f) of this section, shall be constructed, tested, and 
stamped in accordance with DOT specifications effective at the date of 
their manufacture.
    (4) Welding of containers. (i) Welding to the shell, head, or any 
other part of the container subject to internal pressure, shall be done 
in compliance with the code under which the tank was fabricated. Other 
welding is permitted only on saddle plates, lugs, or brackets attached 
to the container by the tank manufacturer.
    (ii) Where repair or modification involving welding of DOT 
containers is required, the container shall be returned to a qualified 
manufacturer making containers of the same type, and the repair or 
modification made in compliance with DOT regulations.
    (5) Markings on containers. (i) Each container covered in paragraph 
(b)(3)(i) of this section, except as provided in paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of 
this section shall be marked as specified in the following:
    (a) With a marking identifying compliance with, and other markings 
required by, the rules of the reference under which the container is 
constructed; or with the stamp and other markings required by the 
National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors.
    (b) With notation as to whether the container is designed for 
underground or aboveground installation or both. If intended for both 
and different style hoods are provided, the marking shall indicate the 
proper hood for each type of installation.
    (c) With the name and address of the supplier of the container, or 
with the trade name of the container.
    (d) With the water capacity of the container in pounds or gallons, 
U.S. Standard.
    (e) With the pressure in p.s.i.g., for which the container is 
designed.
    (f) With the wording ``This container shall not contain a product 
having a vapor pressure in excess of -- p.s.i.g. at 100 deg. F.,'' see 
subparagraph (14)(viii) of this paragraph.
    (g) With the tare weight in pounds or other identified unit of 
weight for containers with a water capacity of 300 pounds or less.
    (h) With marking indicating the maximum level to which the container 
may be filled with liquid at temperatures between 20 deg. F. and 
130 deg. F., except on containers provided with fixed maximum level 
indicators or which are filled by weighing. Markings shall be increments 
of not more than 20 deg. F. This marking may be located on the liquid 
level gaging device.
    (i) With the outside surface area in square feet.
    (ii) Markings specified shall be on a metal nameplate attached to 
the container and located in such a manner as to remain visible after 
the container is installed.
    (iii) When LP-Gas and one or more other gases are stored or used in 
the same area, the containers shall be marked to identify their content. 
Marking shall be in compliance with American National Standard Z48.1-
1954, ``Method of Marking Portable Compressed Gas Containers To Identify 
the Material Contained'', which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (6) Location of containers and regulating equipment. (i) Containers, 
and first stage regulating equipment if used, shall be located outside 
of buildings, except under one or more of the following:
    (a) In buildings used exclusively for container charging, 
vaporization pressure reduction, gas mixing, gas manufacturing, or 
distribution.
    (b) When portable use is necessary and in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(5) of this section.
    (c) LP-Gas fueled stationary or portable engines in accordance with 
paragraph (e) (11) or (12) of this section.
    (d) LP-Gas fueled industrial trucks used in accordance with 
paragraph (e)(13) of this section.

[[Page 295]]

    (e) LP-Gas fueled vehicles garaged in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(14) of this section.
    (f) Containers awaiting use or resale when stored in accordance with 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (ii) Each individual container shall be located with respect to the 
nearest important building or group of buildings in accordance with 
Table H-23.

                                                   Table H-23
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   Minimum distances
                                      --------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Water capacity per container                         Containers
                                      --------------------------------------------------   Between aboveground
                                             Underground              Aboveground               containers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Less than 125 gals.\1\...............  10 feet................  None...................  None.
125 to 250 gals......................  10 feet................  10 feet................  None.
251 to 500 gals......................  10 feet................  10 feet................  3 feet.
501 to 2,000 gals....................  25 feet \2\............  25 feet \2\............  3 feet.
2,001 to 30,000 gals.................  50 feet................  50 feet................  5 feet.
30,001 to 70,000 gals................  50 feet................  75 feet.\3\............
70,001 to 90,000 gals................  50 feet................  100 feet.\3\...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ If the aggregate water capacity of a multi-container installation at a consumer site is 501 gallons or
  greater, the minimum distance shall comply with the appropriate portion of this table, applying the aggregate
  capacity rather than the capacity per container. If more than one installation is made, each installation
  shall be separated from another installation by at least 25 feet. Do not apply the MINIMUM DISTANCES BETWEEN
  ABOVE-GROUND CONTAINERS to such installations.
\2\ The above distance requirements may be reduced to not less than 10 feet for a single container of 1,200
  gallons water capacity or less, providing such a container is at least 25 feet from any other LP-Gas container
  of more than 125 gallons water capacity.
\3\ \1/4\ of sum of diameters of adjacent containers.

    (iii) Containers installed for use shall not be stacked one above 
the other.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) In the case of buildings devoted exclusively to gas 
manufacturing and distributing operations, the distances required by 
Table H-23 may be reduced provided that in no case shall containers of 
water capacity exceeding 500 gallons be located closer than 10 feet to 
such gas manufacturing and distributing buildings.
    (vi) Readily ignitible material such as weeds and long dry grass 
shall be removed within 10 feet of any container.
    (vii) The minimum separation between liquefied petroleum gas 
containers and flammable liquid tanks shall be 20 feet, and the minimum 
separation between a container and the centerline of the dike shall be 
10 feet. The foregoing provision shall not apply when LP-Gas containers 
of 125 gallons or less capacity are installed adjacent to Class III 
flammable liquid tanks of 275 gallons or less capacity.
    (viii) Suitable means shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of 
flammable liquids under adjacent liquified petroleum gas containers, 
such as by diking, diversion curbs, or grading.
    (ix) When dikes are used with flammable liquid tanks, no liquefied 
petroleum gas containers shall be located within the diked area.
    (7) Container valves and container accessories. (i) Valves, 
fittings, and accessories connected directly to the container including 
primary shutoff valves, shall have a rated working pressure of at least 
250 p.s.i.g. and shall be of material and design suitable for LP-Gas 
service. Cast iron shall not be used for container valves, fittings, and 
accessories. This does not prohibit the use of container valves made of 
malleable or nodular iron.
    (ii) Connections to containers, except safety relief connections, 
liquid level gaging devices, and plugged openings, shall have shutoff 
valves located as close to the container as practicable.
    (iii) Excess flow valves, where required shall close automatically 
at the rated flows of vapor or liquid as specified by the manufacturer. 
The connections or line including valves, fittings, etc., being 
protected by an excess flow valve shall have a greater capacity than the 
rated flow of the excess flow valve.
    (iv) Liquid level gaging devices which are so constructed that 
outward flow of container contents shall not exceed that passed by a No. 
54 drill size opening, need not be equipped with excess flow valves.
    (v) Openings from container or through fittings attached directly on 
container to which pressure gage connection is made, need not be 
equipped with shutoff or excess flow valves if such openings are 
restricted to not larger than No. 54 drill size opening.
    (vi) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(5)(i)(b) of this section, 
excess flow and back pressure check valves where required by this 
section shall be located inside of the container or at a point outside 
where the line enters the container; in the latter case, installation 
shall be made in such manner that any undue strain beyond the excess

[[Page 296]]

flow or back pressure check valve will not cause breakage between the 
container and such valve.
    (vii) Excess flow valves shall be designed with a bypass, not to 
exceed a No. 60 drill size opening to allow equalization of pressures.
    (viii) Containers of more than 30 gallons water capacity and less 
than 2,000 gallons water capacity, filled on a volumetric basis, and 
manufactured after December 1, 1963, shall be equipped for filling into 
the vapor space.
    (8) Piping--including pipe, tubing, and fittings. (i) Pipe, except 
as provided in paragraphs (e)(6)(i) and (g)(10)(iii), of this section 
shall be wrought iron or steel (black or galvanized), brass, copper, or 
aluminum alloy. Aluminum alloy pipe shall be at least Schedule 40 in 
accordance with the specifications for Aluminum Alloy Pipe, American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) H38.7-1969 (ASTM, B241-69), which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, except that the 
use of alloy 5456 is prohibited and shall be suitably marked at each end 
of each length indicating compliance with American National Standard 
Institute Specifications. Aluminum Alloy pipe shall be protected against 
external corrosion when it is in contact with dissimilar metals other 
than galvanized steel, or its location is subject to repeated wetting by 
such liquids as water (except rain water), detergents, sewage, or 
leaking from other piping, or it passes through flooring, plaster, 
masonry, or insulation. Galvanized sheet steel or pipe, galvanized 
inside and out, may be considered suitable protection. The maximum 
nominal pipe size for aluminum pipe shall be three-fourths inch and 
shall not be used for pressures exceeding 20 p.s.i.g. Aluminum alloy 
pipe shall not be installed within 6 inches of the ground.
    (a) Vapor piping with operating pressures not exceeding 125 p.s.i.g. 
shall be suitable for a working pressure of at least 125 p.s.i.g. Pipe 
shall be at least Schedule 40 (ASTM A-53-69, Grade B Electric Resistance 
Welded and Electric Flash Welded Pipe, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, or equal).
    (b) Vapor piping with operating pressures over 125 p.s.i.g. and all 
liquid piping shall be suitable for a working pressure of at least 250 
p.s.i.g. Pipe shall be at least Schedule 80 if joints are threaded or 
threaded and back welded. At least Schedule 40 (ASTM A-53-69 Grade B 
Electric Resistance Welded and Electric Flash Welded Pipe or equal) 
shall be used if joints are welded, or welded and flanged.
    (ii) Tubing shall be seamless and of copper, brass, steel, or 
aluminum alloy. Copper tubing shall be of type K or L or equivalent as 
covered in the Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube, ANSI H23.1-
1970 (ASTM B88-69), which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6. Aluminum alloy tubing shall be of Type A or B or equivalent 
as covered in Specification ASTM B210-68 (which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6) and shall be suitably marked 
every 18 inches indicating compliance with ASTM Specifications. The 
minimum nominal wall thickness of copper tubing and aluminum alloy 
tubing shall be as specified in Table H-24 and Table H-25.

Aluminum alloy tubing shall be protected against external corrosion when 
it is in contact with dissimilar metals other than galvanized steel, or 
its location is subject to repeated wetting by liquids such as water 
(except rainwater), detergents, sewage, or leakage from other piping, or 
it passes through flooring, plaster, masonry, or insulation. Galvanized 
sheet steel or pipe, galvanized inside and out, may be considered 
suitable protection. The maximum outside diameter for aluminum alloy 
tubing shall be three-fourths inch and shall not be used for pressures 
exceeding 20 p.s.i.g. Aluminum alloy tubing shall not be installed 
within 6 inches of the ground.

             Table H-24--Wall Thickness of Copper Tubing \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Nominal wall thickness (inches)
   Standard size      Nominal outside  ---------------------------------
     (inches)        diameter (inches)       Type K           Type L
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.............         0.375              0.035            0.030
\3/8\.............         0.500              0.049            0.035
\1/2\.............         0.625              0.049            0.040
\5/8\.............         0.750              0.049            0.042
\3/4\.............         0.875              0.065            0.045
1  ...............         1.125              0.065            0.050
1\1/4\............         1.375              0.065            0.055
1\1/2\............         1.625              0.072            0.060

[[Page 297]]

2  ...............         2.125              0.083            0.070
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Based on data in Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube, ANSI
  H23.1-1970 (ASTM B-88-69).
Note: The standard size by which tube is designated is \1/8\ inch
  smaller than its nominal outside diameter.


         Table H-25--Wall Thickness of Aluminum Alloy Tubing \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Nominal wall thickness (inches)
    Outside diameter     -----------------------------------------------
        (inches)                  Type A                  Type B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3/8\      .............           0.035                   0.049
\1/2\      .............           0.035                   0.049
\5/8\      .............           0.042                   0.049
\3/4\      .............           0.049                   0.058
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Based on data in Standard Specification for Aluminum-Alloy Drawn
  Seamless Coiled Tubes for Special Purpose Applications, ASTM B210-68.

    (iii) In systems where the gas in liquid form without pressure 
reduction enters the building, only heavy walled seamless brass or 
copper tubing with an internal diameter not greater than three thirty-
seconds inch, and a wall thickness of not less than three sixty-fourths 
inch shall be used. This requirement shall not apply to research and 
experimental laboratories, buildings, or separate fire divisions of 
buildings used exclusively for housing internal combustion engines, and 
to commercial gas plants or bulk stations where containers are charged, 
nor to industrial vaporizer buildings, nor to buildings, structures, or 
equipment under construction or undergoing major renovation.
    (iv) Pipe joints may be screwed, flanged, welded, soldered, or 
brazed with a material having a melting point exceeding 1,000 deg. F. 
Joints on seamless copper, brass, steel, or aluminum alloy gas tubing 
shall be made by means of approved gas tubing fittings, or soldered or 
brazed with a material having a melting point exceeding 1,000 deg. F.
    (v) For operating pressures of 125 p.s.i.g. or less, fittings shall 
be designed for a pressure of at least 125 p.s.i.g. For operating 
pressures above 125 p.s.i.g., fittings shall be designed for a minimum 
of 250 p.s.i.g.
    (vi) The use of threaded cast iron pipe fittings such as ells, tees, 
crosses, couplings, and unions is prohibited. Aluminum alloy fittings 
shall be used with aluminum alloy pipe and tubing. Insulated fittings 
shall be used where aluminum alloy pipe or tubing connects with a 
dissimilar metal.
    (vii) Strainers, regulators, meters, compressors, pumps, etc., are 
not to be considered as pipe fittings. This does not prohibit the use of 
malleable, nodular, or higher strength gray iron for such equipment.
    (viii) All materials such as valve seats, packing, gaskets, 
diaphragms, etc., shall be of such quality as to be resistant to the 
action of liquefied petroleum gas under the service conditions to which 
they are subjected.
    (ix) All piping, tubing, or hose shall be tested after assembly and 
proved free from leaks at not less than normal operating pressures. 
After installation, piping and tubing of all domestic and commercial 
systems shall be tested and proved free of leaks using a manometer or 
equivalent device that will indicate a drop in pressure. Test shall not 
be made with a flame.
    (x) Provision shall be made to compensate for expansion, 
contraction, jarring, and vibration, and for settling. This may be 
accomplished by flexible connections.
    (xi) Piping outside buildings may be buried, above ground, or both, 
but shall be well supported and protected against physical damage. Where 
soil conditions warrant, all piping shall be protected against 
corrosion. Where condensation may occur, the piping shall be pitched 
back to the container, or suitable means shall be provided for 
revaporization of the condensate.
    (9) Hose specifications. (i) Hose shall be fabricated of materials 
that are resistant to the action of LP-Gas in the liquid and vapor 
phases. If wire braid is used for reinforcing the hose, it shall be of 
corrosion-resistant material such as stainless steel.
    (ii) Hose subject to container pressure shall be marked ``LP-Gas'' 
or ``LPG'' at not greater than 10-foot intervals.
    (iii) Hose subject to container pressure shall be designed for a 
bursting pressure of not less than 1,250 p.s.i.g.

[[Page 298]]

    (iv) Hose subject to container pressure shall have its correctness 
as to design construction and performance determined by being listed 
(see Sec. 1910.110(a)(15)).
    (v) Hose connections subject to container pressure shall be capable 
of withstanding, without leakage, a test pressure of not less than 500 
p.s.i.g.
    (vi) Hose and hose connections on the low-pressure side of the 
regulator or reducing valve shall be designed for a bursting pressure of 
not less than 125 p.s.i.g. or five times the set pressure of the relief 
devices protecting that portion of the system, whichever is higher.
    (vii) Hose may be used on the low-pressure side of regulators to 
connect to other than domestic and commercial gas appliances under the 
following conditions:
    (a) The appliances connected with hose shall be portable and need a 
flexible connection.
    (b) For use inside buildings the hose shall be of minimum practical 
length, but shall not exceed 6 feet except as provided in paragraph 
(c)(5)(i)(g) of this section and shall not extend from one room to 
another, nor pass through any walls, partitions, ceilings, or floors. 
Such hose shall not be concealed from view or used in a concealed 
location. For use outside of buildings, the hose may exceed this length 
but shall be kept as short as practical.
    (c) The hose shall be approved and shall not be used where it is 
likely to be subjected to temperatures above 125 deg. F. The hose shall 
be securely connected to the appliance and the use of rubber slip ends 
shall not be permitted.
    (d) The shutoff valve for an appliance connected by hose shall be in 
the metal pipe or tubing and not at the appliance end of the hose. When 
shutoff valves are installed close to each other, precautions shall be 
taken to prevent operation of the wrong valve.
    (e) Hose used for connecting to wall outlets shall be protected from 
physical damage.
    (10) Safety devices. (i) Every container except those constructed in 
accordance with DOT specifications and every vaporizer (except motor 
fuel vaporizers and except vaporizers described in paragraph 
(b)(11)(ii)(c) of this section and paragraph (d)(4)(v)(a) of this 
section) whether heated by artificial means or not, shall be provided 
with one or more safety relief valves of spring-loaded or equivalent 
type. These valves shall be arranged to afford free vent to the outer 
air with discharge not less than 5 feet horizontally away from any 
opening into the building which is below such discharge. The rate of 
discharge shall be in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(10)(ii) or (b)(10)(iii) of this section in the case of vaporizers.
    (ii) Minimum required rate of discharge in cubic feet per minute of 
air at 120 percent of the maximum permitted start to discharge pressure 
for safety relief valves to be used on containers other than those 
constructed in accordance with DOT specification shall be as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Flow rate
                   Surface area (sq. ft.)                       CFM air
------------------------------------------------------------------------
20 or less..................................................         626
25..........................................................         751
30..........................................................         872
35..........................................................         990
40..........................................................       1,100
45..........................................................       1,220
50..........................................................       1,330
55..........................................................       1,430
60..........................................................       1,540
65..........................................................       1,640
70..........................................................       1,750
75..........................................................       1,850
80..........................................................       1,950
85..........................................................       2,050
90..........................................................       2,150
95..........................................................       2,240
100.........................................................       2,340
105.........................................................       2,440
110.........................................................       2,530
115.........................................................       2,630
120.........................................................       2,720
125.........................................................       2,810
130.........................................................       2,900
135.........................................................       2,990
140.........................................................       3,080
145.........................................................       3,170
150.........................................................       3,260
155.........................................................       3,350
160.........................................................       3,440
165.........................................................       3,530
170.........................................................       3,620
175.........................................................       3,700
180.........................................................       3,790
185.........................................................       3,880
190.........................................................       3,960
195.........................................................       4,050
200.........................................................       4,130
210.........................................................       4,300
220.........................................................       4,470
230.........................................................       4,630
240.........................................................       4,800
250.........................................................       4,960
260.........................................................       5,130
270.........................................................       5,290
280.........................................................       5,450
290.........................................................       5,610

[[Page 299]]

300.........................................................       5,760
310.........................................................       5,920
320.........................................................       6,080
330.........................................................       6,230
340.........................................................       6,390
350.........................................................       6,540
360.........................................................       6,690
370.........................................................       6,840
380.........................................................       7,000
390.........................................................       7,150
400.........................................................       7,300
450.........................................................       8,040
500.........................................................       8,760
550.........................................................       9,470
600.........................................................      10,170
650.........................................................      10,860
700.........................................................      11,550
750.........................................................      12,220
800.........................................................      12,880
850.........................................................      13,540
900.........................................................      14,190
950.........................................................      14,830
1,000.......................................................      15,470
1,050.......................................................      16,100
1,100.......................................................      16,720
1,150.......................................................      17,350
1,200.......................................................      17,960
1,250.......................................................      18,570
1,300.......................................................      19,180
1,350.......................................................      19,780
1,400.......................................................      20,380
1,450.......................................................      20,980
1,500.......................................................      21,570
1,550.......................................................      22,160
1,600.......................................................      22,740
1,650.......................................................      23,320
1,700.......................................................      23,900
1,750.......................................................      24,470
1,800.......................................................      25,050
1,850.......................................................      25,620
1,900.......................................................      26,180
1,950.......................................................      26,750
2,000.......................................................      27,310
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Surface area=total outside surface area of container in square feet.

    When the surface area is not stamped on the nameplate or when the 
marking is not legible, the area can be calculated by using one of the 
following formulas:
    (1) Cylindrical container with hemispherical heads:

Area=Overall length x outside diameter x  3.1416.

    (2) Cylindrical container with other than hemispherical heads:

Area=(Overall length+0.3 outside diameter)  x outside diameter x 3.1416.

    Note: This formula is not exact, but will give results within the 
limits of practical accuracy for the sole purpose of sizing relief 
valves.

    (3) Spherical container:

Area=Outside diameter squared x 3.1416.
Flow Rate-CFM Air=Required flow capacity in cubic feet per minute of air 
at standard conditions, 60 F. and atmospheric pressure (14.7 p.s.i.a.).

    The rate of discharge may be interpolated for intermediate values of 
surface area. For containers with total outside surface area greater 
than 2,000 square feet, the required flow rate can be calculated using 
the formula, Flow Rate-CFM Air=53.632 A0.82.
    A=total outside surface area of the container in square feet.
    Valves not marked ``Air'' have flow rate marking in cubic feet per 
minute of liquefied petroleum gas. These can be converted to ratings in 
cubic feet per minute of air by multiplying the liquefied petroleum gas 
ratings by factors listed below. Air flow ratings can be converted to 
ratings in cubic feet per minute of liquefied petroleum gas by dividing 
the air ratings by the factors listed below.

                         Air Conversion Factors
Container type..................     100     125     150     175     200
Air conversion factor...........   1.162   1.142   1.113   1.078   1.010

    (iii) Minimum Required Rate of Discharge for Safety Relief Valves 
for Liquefied Petroleum Gas Vaporizers (Steam Heated, Water Heated, and 
Direct Fired).

The minimum required rate of discharge for safety relief valves shall be 
determined as follows:
    (a) Obtain the total surface area by adding the surface area of 
vaporizer shell in square feet directly in contact with LP-Gas and the 
heat exchanged surface area in square feet directly in contact with LP-
Gas.
    (b) Obtain the minimum required rate of discharge in cubic feet of 
air per minute, at 60 deg. F. and 14.7 p.s.i.a. from paragraph 
(b)(10)(ii) of this section, for this total surface area.
    (iv) Container and vaporizer safety relief valves shall be set to 
start-to-discharge, with relation to the design pressure of the 
container, in accordance with Table H-26.
    (v) Safety relief devices used with systems employing containers 
other than those constructed according to DOT specifications shall be so 
constructed as to discharge at not less than the rates shown in 
paragraph (b)(10)(ii) of this section, before the pressure is in excess 
of 120 percent of the maximum (not including the 10 percent referred to 
in paragraph (b)(10)(iv) of this section) permitted start to discharge 
pressure setting of the device.

[[Page 300]]



                               Table H-26
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Minimum     Maximum
                   Containers                      (percent)   (percent)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASME Code; Par. U-68, U-69--1949 and earlier
 editions.......................................         110      \1\ 25
ASME Code; Par. U-200, U-201--1949 edition......          88     \1\ 100
ASME Code--1950, 1952, 1956, 1959, 1962, 1965
 and 1968 (Division I) editions.................          88     \1\ 100
API--ASME Code--all editions....................          88     \1\ 100
DOT--As prescribed in 49 CFR Chapter I..........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Manufacturers of safety relief valves are allowed a plus tolerance
  not exceeding 10 percent of the set pressure marked on the valve.

    (vi) In certain locations sufficiently sustained high temperatures 
prevail which require the use of a lower vapor pressure product to be 
stored or the use of a higher designed pressure vessel in order to 
prevent the safety valves opening as the result of these temperatures. 
As an alternative the tanks may be protected by cooling devices such as 
by spraying, by shading, or other effective means.
    (vii) Safety relief valves shall be arranged so that the possibility 
of tampering will be minimized. If pressure setting or adjustment is 
external, the relief valves shall be provided with approved means for 
sealing adjustment.
    (viii) Shutoff valves shall not be installed between the safety 
relief devices and the container, or the equipment or piping to which 
the safety relief device is connected except that a shutoff valve may be 
used where the arrangement of this valve is such that full required 
capacity flow through the safety relief device is always afforded.
    (ix) Safety relief valves shall have direct communication with the 
vapor space of the container at all times.
    (x) Each container safety relief valve used with systems covered by 
paragraphs (d), (e), (g), and (h) of this section, except as provided in 
paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of this section shall be plainly and permanently 
marked with the following: ``Container Type'' of the pressure vessel on 
which the valve is designed to be installed; the pressure in p.s.i.g. at 
which the valve is set to discharge; the actual rate of discharge of the 
valve in cubic feet per minute of air at 60 deg. F. and 14.7 p.s.i.a.; 
and the manufacturer's name and catalog number, for example: T200-250-
4050 AIR--indicating that the valve is suitable for use on a Type 200 
container, that it is set to start to discharge at 250 p.s.i.g.; and 
that its rate of discharge is 4,050 cubic feet per minute of air as 
determined in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph.
    (xi) Safety relief valve assemblies, including their connections, 
shall be of sufficient size so as to provide the rate of flow required 
for the container on which they are installed.
    (xii) A hydrostatic relief valve shall be installed between each 
pair of shut-off valves on liquefied petroleum gas liquid piping so as 
to relieve into a safe atmosphere. The start-to-discharge pressure 
setting of such relief valves shall not be in excess of 500 p.s.i.g. The 
minimum setting on relief valves installed in piping connected to other 
than DOT containers shall not be lower than 140 percent of the container 
relief valve setting and in piping connected to DOT containers not lower 
than 400 p.s.i.g. The start-to-discharge pressure setting of such a 
relief valve, if installed on the discharge side of a pump, shall be 
greater than the maximum pressure permitted by the recirculation device 
in the system.
    (xiii) The discharge from any safety relief device shall not 
terminate in or beneath any building, except relief devices covered by 
paragraphs (b)(6)(i) (a) through (e) of this section, or paragraphs (c) 
(4)(i) or (5) of this section.
    (xiv) Container safety relief devices and regulator relief vents 
shall be located not less than five (5) feet in any direction from air 
openings into sealed combustion system appliances or mechanical 
ventilation air intakes.
    (11) Vaporizer and housing. (i) Indirect fired vaporizers utilizing 
steam, water, or other heating medium shall be constructed and installed 
as follows:
    (a) Vaporizers shall be constructed in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(3) (i)-(iii) of this section and shall be 
permanently marked as follows:
    (1) With the code marking signifying the specifications to which the 
vaporizer is constructed.
    (2) With the allowable working pressure and temperature for which 
the vaporizer is designed.

[[Page 301]]

    (3) With the sum of the outside surface area and the inside heat 
exchange surface area expressed in square feet.
    (4) With the name or symbol of the manufacturer.
    (b) Vaporizers having an inside diameter of 6 inches or less 
exempted by the ASME Unfired Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII of the 
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code--1968 shall have a design pressure 
not less than 250 p.s.i.g. and need not be permanently marked.
    (c) Heating or cooling coils shall not be installed inside a storage 
container.
    (d) Vaporizers may be installed in buildings, rooms, sheds, or lean-
tos used exclusively for gas manufacturing or distribution, or in other 
structures of light, noncombustible construction or equivalent, well 
ventilated near the floor line and roof.

When vaporizing and/or mixing equipment is located in a structure or 
building not used exclusively for gas manufacturing or distribution, 
either attached to or within such a building, such structure or room 
shall be separated from the remainder of the building by a wall designed 
to withstand a static pressure of at least 100 pounds per square foot. 
This wall shall have no openings or pipe or conduit passing through it. 
Such structure or room shall be provided with adequate ventilation and 
shall have a roof or at least one exterior wall of lightweight 
construction.
    (e) Vaporizers shall have, at or near the discharge, a safety relief 
valve providing an effective rate of discharge in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(10)(iii) of this section, except as provided in paragraph 
(d)(4)(v)(a), of this section.
    (f) The heating medium lines into and leaving the vaporizer shall be 
provided with suitable means for preventing the flow of gas into the 
heat systems in the event of tube rupture in the vaporizer. Vaporizers 
shall be provided with suitable automatic means to prevent liquid 
passing through the vaporizers to the gas discharge piping.
    (g) The device that supplies the necessary heat for producing steam, 
hot water, or other heating medium may be installed in a building, 
compartment, room, or lean-to which shall be ventilated near the 
floorline and roof to the outside. The device location shall be 
separated from all compartments or rooms containing liquefied petroleum 
gas vaporizers, pumps, and central gas mixing devices by a wall designed 
to withstand a static pressure of at least 100 pounds per square foot. 
This wall shall have no openings or pipes or conduit passing through it. 
This requirement does not apply to the domestic water heaters which may 
supply heat for a vaporizer in a domestic system.
    (h) Gas-fired heating systems supplying heat exclusively for 
vaporization purposes shall be equipped with automatic safety devices to 
shut off the flow of gas to main burners, if the pilot light should 
fail.
    (i) Vaporizers may be an integral part of a fuel storage container 
directly connected to the liquid section or gas section or both.
    (j) Vaporizers shall not be equipped with fusible plugs.
    (k) Vaporizer houses shall not have unprotected drains to sewers or 
sump pits.
    (ii) Atmospheric vaporizers employing heat from the ground or 
surrounding air shall be installed as follows:
    (a) Buried underground, or
    (b) Located inside the building close to a point at which pipe 
enters the building provided the capacity of the unit does not exceed 1 
quart.
    (c) Vaporizers of less than 1 quart capacity heated by the ground or 
surrounding air, need not be equipped with safety relief valves provided 
that adequate tests demonstrate that the assembly is safe without safety 
relief valves.
    (iii) Direct gas-fired vaporizers shall be constructed, marked, and 
installed as follows:
    (a)(1) In accordance with the requirements of the American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code--1968 that are 
applicable to the maximum working conditions for which the vaporizer is 
designed.
    (2) With the name of the manufacturer; rated BTU input to the 
burner; the area of the heat exchange surface in square feet; the 
outside surface of the vaporizer in square feet; and the maximum 
vaporizing capacity in gallons per hour.

[[Page 302]]

    (b)(1) Vaporizers may be connected to the liquid section or the gas 
section of the storage container, or both; but in any case there shall 
be at the container a manually operated valve in each connection to 
permit completely shutting off when desired, of all flow of gas or 
liquid from container to vaporizer.
    (2) Vaporizers with capacity not exceeding 35 gallons per hour shall 
be located at least 5 feet from container shutoff valves. Vaporizers 
having capacity of more than 35 gallons but not exceeding 100 gallons 
per hour shall be located at least 10 feet from the container shutoff 
valves. Vaporizers having a capacity greater than 100 gallons per hour 
shall be located at least 15 feet from container shutoff valves.
    (c) Vaporizers may be installed in buildings, rooms, housings, 
sheds, or lean-tos used exclusively for vaporizing or mixing of 
liquefied petroleum gas. Vaporizing housing structures shall be of 
noncombustible construction, well ventilated near the floorline and the 
highest point of the roof. When vaporizer and/or mixing equipment is 
located in a structure or room attached to or within a building, such 
structure or room shall be separated from the remainder of the building 
by a wall designed to withstand a static pressure of at least 100 pounds 
per square foot. This wall shall have no openings or pipes or conduit 
passing through it. Such structure or room shall be provided with 
adequate ventilation, and shall have a roof or at least one exterior 
wall of lightweight construction.
    (d) Vaporizers shall have at or near the discharge, a safety relief 
valve providing an effective rate of discharge in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(10)(iii) of this section. The relief valve shall be so 
located as not to be subjected to temperatures in excess of 140 deg. F.
    (e) Vaporizers shall be provided with suitable automatic means to 
prevent liquid passing from the vaporizer to the gas discharge piping of 
the vaporizer.
    (f) Vaporizers shall be provided with means for manually turning off 
the gas to the main burner and pilot.
    (g) Vaporizers shall be equipped with automatic safety devices to 
shut off the flow of gas to main burners if the pilot light should fail. 
When the flow through the pilot exceeds 2,000 B.t.u. per hour, the pilot 
also shall be equipped with an automatic safety device to shut off the 
flow of gas to the pilot should the pilot flame be extinguished.
    (h) Pressure regulating and pressure reducing equipment if located 
within 10 feet of a direct fire vaporizer shall be separated from the 
open flame by a substantially airtight noncombustible partition or 
partitions.
    (i) Except as provided in (c) of this subdivision, the following 
minimum distances shall be maintained between direct fired vaporizers 
and the nearest important building or group of buildings:

    Ten feet for vaporizers having a capacity of 15 gallons per hour or 
less vaporizing capacity.
    Twenty-five feet for vaporizers having a vaporizing capacity of 16 
to 100 gallons per hour.
    Fifty feet for vaporizers having a vaporizing capacity exceeding 100 
gallons per hour.

    (j) Direct fired vaporizers shall not raise the product pressure 
above the design pressure of the vaporizer equipment nor shall they 
raise the product pressure within the storage container above the 
pressure shown in the second column of Table H-31.
    (k) Vaporizers shall not be provided with fusible plugs.
    (l) Vaporizers shall not have unprotected drains to sewers or sump 
pits.
    (iv) Direct gas-fired tank heaters shall be constructed and 
installed as follows:
    (a) Direct gas-fired tank heaters, and tanks to which they are 
applied, shall only be installed above ground.
    (b) Tank heaters shall be permanently marked with the name of the 
manufacturer, the rated B.t.u. input to the burner, and the maximum 
vaporizing capacity in gallons per hour.
    (c) Tank heaters may be an integral part of a fuel storage container 
directly connected to the container liquid section, or vapor section, or 
both.
    (d) Tank heaters shall be provided with a means for manually turning 
off the gas to the main burner and pilot.
    (e) Tank heaters shall be equipped with an automatic safety device 
to shut off the flow of gas to main burners, if the pilot light should 
fail. When flow through pilot exceeds 2,000 B.t.u.

[[Page 303]]

per hour, the pilot also shall be equipped with an automatic safety 
device to shut off the flow of gas to the pilot should the pilot flame 
be extinguished.
    (f) Pressure regulating and pressure reducing equipment if located 
within 10 feet of a direct fired tank heater shall be separated from the 
open flame by a substantially airtight noncombustible partition.
    (g) The following minimum distances shall be maintained between a 
storage tank heated by a direct fired tank heater and the nearest 
important building or group of buildings:

    Ten feet for storage containers of less than 500 gallons water 
capacity.
    Twenty-five feet for storage containers of 500 to 1,200 gallons 
water capacity.
    Fifty feet for storage containers of over 1,200 gallons water 
capacity.

    (h) No direct fired tank heater shall raise the product pressure 
within the storage container over 75 percent of the pressure set out in 
the second column of Table H-31.
    (v) The vaporizer section of vaporizer-burners used for dehydrators 
or dryers shall be located outside of buildings; they shall be 
constructed and installed as follows:
    (a) Vaporizer-burners shall have a minimum design pressure of 250 
p.s.i.g. with a factor of safety of five.
    (b) Manually operated positive shut-off valves shall be located at 
the containers to shut off all flow to the vaporizer-burners.
    (c) Minimum distances between storage containers and vaporizer-
burners shall be as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Minimum
           Water capacity per container (gallons)              distances
                                                                (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Less than 501...............................................          10
501 to 2,000................................................          25
Over 2,000..................................................          50
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) The vaporizer section of vaporizer-burners shall be protected by 
a hydrostatic relief valve. The relief valve shall be located so as not 
to be subjected to temperatures in excess of 140 deg. F. The start-to-
discharge pressure setting shall be such as to protect the components 
involved, but not less than 250 p.s.i.g. The discharge shall be directed 
upward and away from component parts of the equipment and away from 
operating personnel.
    (e) Vaporizer-burners shall be provided with means for manually 
turning off the gas to the main burner and pilot.
    (f) Vaporizer-burners shall be equipped with automatic safety 
devices to shut off the flow of gas to the main burner and pilot in the 
event the pilot is extinguished.
    (g) Pressure regulating and control equipment shall be located or 
protected so that the temperatures surrounding this equipment shall not 
exceed 140 deg. F. except that equipment components may be used at 
higher temperatures if designed to withstand such temperatures.
    (h) Pressure regulating and control equipment when located 
downstream of the vaporizer shall be designed to withstand the maximum 
discharge temperature of the vapor.
    (i) The vaporizer section of vaporizer-burners shall not be provided 
with fusible plugs.
    (j) Vaporizer coils or jackets shall be made of ferrous metal or 
high temperature alloys.
    (k) Equipment utilizing vaporizer-burners shall be equipped with 
automatic shutoff devices upstream and downstream of the vaporizer 
section connected so as to operate in the event of excessive 
temperature, flame failure, and, if applicable, insufficient airflow.
    (12) Filling densities. (i) The ``filling density'' is defined as 
the percent ratio of the weight of the gas in a container to the weight 
of water the container will hold at 60 deg. F. All containers shall be 
filled according to the filling densities shown in Table H-27.

              Table H-27--Maximum Permitted Filling Density
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Above ground containers
                     ----------------------------------
                      0 to 1,200 U.S.  Over 1,200 U.S.
 Specific gravity at    gals. (1,000     gals. (1,000     Under ground
  60 deg. F. (15.6       imp. gal.,       imp. gal.,     containers, all
      deg. C.)         4,550 liters)    4,550 liters)      capacities
                        total water      total water
                            cap.             cap.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ..................      Percent          Percent          Percent
0 .496-0 .503.......             41               44               45
 .504- .510.........             42               45               46
 .511- .519.........             43               46               47
 .520- .527.........             44               47               48
 .528- .536.........             45               48               49
 .537- .544.........             46               49               50

[[Page 304]]

 .545- .552.........             47               50               51
 .553- .560.........             48               51               52
 .561- .568.........             49               52               53
 .569- .576.........             50               53               54
 .577- .584.........             51               54               55
 .585- .592.........             52               55               56
 .593- .600.........             53               56               57
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(12)(iii) of this section, 
any container including mobile cargo tanks and portable tank containers 
regardless of size or construction, shipped under DOT jurisdiction or 
constructed in accordance with 49 CFR chapter I Specifications shall be 
charged according to 49 CFR chapter I requirements.
    (iii) Portable containers not subject to DOT jurisdiction (such as, 
but not limited to, motor fuel containers on industrial and lift trucks, 
and farm tractors covered in paragraph (e) of this section, or 
containers recharged at the installation) may be filled either by 
weight, or by volume using a fixed length dip tube gaging device.
    (13) LP-Gas in buildings. (i) Vapor shall be piped into buildings at 
pressures in excess of 20 p.s.i.g. only if the buildings or separate 
areas thereof, (a) are constructed in accordance with this section; (b) 
are used excusively to house equipment for vaporization, pressure 
reduction, gas mixing, gas manufacturing, or distribution, or to house 
internal combustion engines, industrial processes, research and 
experimental laboratories, or equipment and processes using such gas and 
having similar hazard; (c) buildings, structures, or equipment under 
construction or undergoing major renovation.
    (ii) Liquid may be permitted in buildings as follows:
    (a) Buildings, or separate areas of buildings, used exclusively to 
house equipment for vaporization, pressure reduction, gas mixing, gas 
manufacturing, or distribution, or to house internal combustion engines, 
industrial processes, research and experimental laboratories, or 
equipment and processes using such gas and having similar hazard; and 
when such buildings, or separate areas thereof are constructed in 
accordance with this section.
    (b) Buildings, structures, or equipment under construction or 
undergoing major renovation provided the temporary piping meets the 
following conditions:
    (1) Liquid piping inside the building shall conform to the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(8) of this section, and shall not exceed 
three-fourths iron pipe size. Copper tubing with an outside diameter of 
three-fourths inch or less may be used provided it conforms to Type K of 
Specifications for Seamless Water Tube, ANSI H23.1-1970 (ASTM B88-69) 
(see Table H-24). All such piping shall be protected against 
construction hazards. Liquid piping inside buildings shall be kept to a 
minimum. Such piping shall be securely fastened to walls or other 
surfaces so as to provide adequate protection from breakage and so 
located as to subject the liquid line to lowest ambient temperatures.
    (2) A shutoff valve shall be installed in each intermediate branch 
line where it takes off the main line and shall be readily accessible. A 
shutoff valve shall also be placed at the appliance end of the 
intermediate branch line. Such shutoff valve shall be upstream of any 
flexible connector used with the appliance.
    (3) Suitable excess flow valves shall be installed in the container 
outlet line supplying liquid LP-Gas to the building. A suitable excess 
flow valve shall be installed immediately downstream of each shutoff 
valve. Suitable excess flow valves shall be installed where piping size 
is reduced and shall be sized for the reduced size piping.
    (4) Hydrostatic relief valves shall be installed in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(10)(xii) of this section.
    (5) The use of hose to carry liquid between the container and the 
building or at any point in the liquid line, except at the appliance 
connector, shall be prohibited.
    (6) Where flexible connectors are necessary for appliance 
installation, such connectors shall be as short as practicable and shall 
comply with paragraph (b)(8)(ii) or (9) of this section.

[[Page 305]]

    (7) Release of fuel when any section of piping or appliances is 
disconnected shall be minimized by either of the following methods:
    (i) Using an approved automatic quick-closing coupling (a type 
closing in both directions when coupled in the fuel line), or
    (ii) Closing the valve nearest to the appliance and allowing the 
appliance to operate until the fuel in the line is consumed.
    (iii) Portable containers shall not be taken into buildings except 
as provided in paragraph (b)(6)(i) of this section.
    (14) Transfer of liquids. The employer shall assure that (i) at 
least one attendant shall remain close to the transfer connection from 
the time the connections are first made until they are finally 
disconnected, during the transfer of the product.
    (ii) Containers shall be filled or used only upon authorization of 
the owner.
    (iii) Containers manufactured in accordance with specifications of 
49 CFR part 178 and authorized by 49 CFR chapter 1 as a ``single trip'' 
or ``nonrefillable container'' shall not be refilled or reused in LP-Gas 
service.
    (iv) Gas or liquid shall not be vented to the atmosphere to assist 
in transferring contents of one container to another, except as provided 
in paragraph (e)(5)(iv) of this section and except that this shall not 
preclude the use of listed pump utilizing LP-Gas in the vapor phase as a 
source of energy and venting such gas to the atmosphere at a rate not to 
exceed that from a No. 31 drill size opening and provided that such 
venting and liquid transfer shall be located not less than 50 feet from 
the nearest important building.
    (v) Filling of fuel containers for industrial trucks or motor 
vehicles from industrial bulk storage containers shall be performed not 
less than 10 feet from the nearest important masonry-walled building or 
not less than 25 feet from the nearest important building or other 
construction and, in any event, not less than 25 feet from any building 
opening.
    (vi) Filling of portable containers, containers mounted on skids, 
fuel containers on farm tractors, or similar applications, from storage 
containers used in domestic or commercial service, shall be performed 
not less than 50 feet from the nearest important building.
    (vii) The filling connection and the vent from the liquid level 
gages in containers, filled at point of installation, shall not be less 
than 10 feet in any direction from air openings into sealed combustion 
system appliances or mechanical ventilation air intakes.
    (viii) Fuel supply containers shall be gaged and charged only in the 
open air or in buildings especially provided for that purpose.
    (ix) The maximum vapor pressure of the product at 100 deg. F. which 
may be transferred into a container shall be in accordance with 
paragraphs (d)(2) and (e)(3) of this section. (For DOT containers use 
DOT requirements.)
    (x) Marketers and users shall exercise precaution to assure that 
only those gases for which the system is designed, examined, and listed, 
are employed in its operation, particularly with regard to pressures.
    (xi) Pumps or compressors shall be designed for use with LP-Gas. 
When compressors are used they shall normally take suction from the 
vapor space of the container being filled and discharge to the vapor 
space of the container being emptied.
    (xii) Pumping systems, when equipped with a positive displacement 
pump, shall include a recirculating device which shall limit the 
differential pressure on the pump under normal operating conditions to 
the maximum differential pressure rating of the pump. The discharge of 
the pumping system shall be protected so that pressure does not exceed 
350 p.s.i.g. If a recirculation system discharges into the supply tank 
and contains a manual shutoff valve, an adequate secondary safety 
recirculation system shall be incorporated which shall have no means of 
rendering it inoperative. Manual shutoff valves in recirculation systems 
shall be kept open except during an emergency or when repairs are being 
made to the system.
    (xiii) When necessary, unloading piping or hoses shall be provided 
with suitable bleeder valves for relieving pressure before 
disconnection.
    (xiv) Agricultural air moving equipment, including crop dryers, 
shall be

[[Page 306]]

shut down when supply containers are being filled unless the air intakes 
and sources of ignition on the equipment are located 50 feet or more 
from the container.
    (xv) Agricultural equipment employing open flames or equipment with 
integral containers, such as flame cultivators, weed burners, and, in 
addition, tractors, shall be shut down during refueling.
    (15) Tank car or transport truck loading or unloading points and 
operations. (i) The track of tank car siding shall be relatively level.
    (ii) A ``Tank Car Connected'' sign, as covered by DOT rules, shall 
be installed at the active end or ends of the siding while the tank car 
is connected.
    (iii) While cars are on sidetrack for loading or unloading, the 
wheels at both ends shall be blocked on the rails.
    (iv) The employer shall insure that an employee is in attendance at 
all times while the tank car, cars, or trucks are being loaded or 
unloaded.
    (v) A backflow check valve, excess-flow valve, or a shutoff valve 
with means of remote closing, to protect against uncontrolled discharge 
of LP-Gas from storage tank piping shall be installed close to the point 
where the liquid piping and hose or swing joint pipe is connected.
    (vi) Where practical, the distance of the unloading or loading point 
shall conform to the distances in subparagraph (6)(ii) of this 
paragraph.
    (16) Instructions. Personnel performing installation, removal, 
operation, and maintenance work shall be properly trained in such 
function.
    (17) Electrical equipment and other sources of ignition. (i) 
Electrical equipment and wiring shall be of a type specified by and 
shall be installed in accordance with subpart S of this part, for 
ordinary locations except that fixed electrical equipment in classified 
areas shall comply with subparagraph (18) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Open flames or other sources of ignition shall not be permitted 
in vaporizer rooms (except those housing direct-fired vaporizers), 
pumphouses, container charging rooms or other similar locations. Direct-
fired vaporizers shall not be permitted in pumphouses or container 
charging rooms.
    (iii) Liquefied petroleum gas storage containers do not require 
lightning protection.
    (iv) Since liquefied petroleum gas is contained in a closed system 
of piping and equipment, the system need not be electrically conductive 
or electrically bonded for protection against static electricity.
    (v) Open flames (except as provided for in paragraph (b)(11) of this 
section), cutting or welding, portable electric tools, and extension 
lights capable of igniting LP-Gas, shall not be permitted within 
classified areas specified in Table H-28 unless the LP-Gas facilities 
have been freed of all liquid and vapor, or special precautions observed 
under carefully controlled conditions.

                               Table H-28
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Equipment shall
                             Extent of classified area   be suitable for
  Part       Location                   \1\               Class 1, Group
                                                              D \2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A        Storage           Within 15 feet in all         Division 2.
          containers        directions from
          other than DOT    connections, except
          cylinders.        connections otherwise
                            covered in Table H-28.
B        Tank vehicle and  Within 5 feet in all          Division 1.
          tank car          directions from connections
          loading and       regularly made or
          unloading \3\.    disconnected for product
                            transfer.
                           Beyond 5 feet but within 15   Division 2.
                            feet in all directions from
                            a point where connections
                            are regularly made or
                            disconnected and within the
                            cylindrical volume between
                            the horizontal equator of
                            the sphere and grade. (See
                            Figure H-1).
C        Gage vent         Within 5 feet in all          Division 1.
          openings other    directions from point of
          than those on     discharge.
          DOT cylinders.   Beyond 5 feet but within 15
                            feet in all directions from
                            point of discharge.
                                                         Division 2.
D        Relief valve      Within direct path of         Division 1.
          discharge other   discharge.
          than those on
          DOT cylinders.
                           Within 5 feet in all          Division 1.
                            directions from point of
                            discharge.
                           Beyond 5 feet but within 15   Division 2.
                            feet in all directions from
                            point of discharge except
                            within the direct path of
                            discharge.

[[Page 307]]

E        Pumps,            ............................
          compressors,
          gas-air mixers
          and vaporizers
          other than
          direct fired.
         Indoors without   Entire room and any adjacent  Division 1.
          ventilation.      room not separated by a
                            gastight partition.
                           Within 15 feet of the         Division 2.
                            exterior side of any
                            exterior wall or roof that
                            is not vaportight or within
                            15 feet of any exterior
                            opening.
         Indoors with      Entire room and any adjacent  Division 2.
          adequate          room not separated by a
          ventilation \4\.  gastight partition.
         Outdoors in open  Within 15 feet in all         Division 2.
          air at or         directions from this
          abovegrade.       equipment and within the
                            cylindrical volume between
                            the horizontal equator of
                            the sphere and grade. See
                            Figure H-1.
F        Service Station   Entire space within           Division 1.
          Dispensing        dispenser enclosure, and 18
          Units.            inches horizontally from
                            enclosure exterior up to an
                            elevation 4 ft. above
                            dispenser base. Entire pit
                            or open space beneath
                            dispenser.
                           Up to 18 inches abovegrade    Division 2.
                            within 20 ft. horizontally
                            from any edge of enclosure.
                           Note: For pits within this
                            area, see Part F of this
                            table..
G        Pits or trenches  ............................
          containing or
          located beneath
          LP-Gas valves,
          pumps,
          compressors,
          regulators, and
          similar
          equipment.
         Without           Entire pit or trench........  Division 1.
          mechanical
          ventilation.
                           Entire room and any adjacent  Division 1.
                            room not separated by a
                            gastight partition.
                           Within 15 feet in all         Division 2.
                            directions from pit or
                            trench when located
                            outdoors.
         With adequate     Entire pit or trench........  Division 2.
          mechanical
          ventilation.
                           Entire room and any adjacent  Division 2.
                            room not separated by a
                            gastight partition.
                           Within 15 feet in all         Division 2.
                            directions from pit or
                            trench when located
                            outdoors.
H        Special           Entire room.................  Division 2.
          buildings or
          rooms for
          storage of
          portable
          containers.
         Pipelines and     Within 5 ft. in all           Division 1.
          connections       directions from point of
          containing        discharge.
          operational      Beyond 5 ft. from point of
          bleeds, drips,    discharge, same as Part E
          vents or drains.  of this table.
J          Container
          filling:.
         Indoors without   Entire room.................  Division 1.
          ventilation.
         Indoors with      Within 5 feet in all          Division 1.
          adequate          directions from connections
          ventilation \4\.  regularly made or
                            disconnected for product
                            transfer.
                           Beyond 5 feet and entire      Division 2.
                            room.
         Outdoors in open  Within 5 feet in all          Division 1.
          air.              directions from connections
                            regularly made or
                            disconnected for product
                            transfer.
                           Beyond 5 feet but within 15   Division 2.
                            feet in all directions from
                            a point where connections
                            are regularly made or
                            disconnected and within the
                            cylindrical volume between
                            the horizontal equator of
                            the sphere and grade. (See
                            Figure H-1).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The classified area shall not extend beyond an unpierced wall, roof,
  or solid vaportight partition.
\2\ See subpart S of this part.
\3\ When classifying extent of hazardous area, consideration shall be
  given to possible variations in the spotting of tank cars and tank
  vehicles at the unloading points and the effect these variations of
  actual spotting point may have on the point of connection.
\4\ Ventilation, either natural or mechanical, is considered adequate
  when the concentration of the gas in a gas-air mixture does not exceed
  25 percent of the lower flammable limit under normal operating
  conditions.


[[Page 308]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.025

                               Figure H-1
    (18) Fixed electrical equipment in classified areas. Fixed 
electrical equipment and wiring installed within classified areas 
specified in Table H-28 shall comply with Table H-28 and shall be 
installed in accordance with Subpart S of this part. This provision does 
not apply to fixed electrical equipment at residential or commercial 
installations of LP-Gas systems or to systems covered by paragraph (e) 
or (g) of this section.
    (19) Liquid-level gaging device. (i) Each container manufactured 
after December 31, 1965, and filled on a volumetric basis shall be 
equipped with a fixed liquid-level gage to indicate the maximum 
permitted filling level as provided in paragraph (b)(19)(v) of this 
section. Each container manufactured after December 31, 1969, shall have 
permanently attached to the container adjacent to the fixed level gage a 
marking showing the percentage full that will be shown by that gage. 
When a variable liquid-level gage is also provided, the fixed liquid-
level gage will also serve as a means for checking the variable gage. 
These gages shall be used in charging containers as required in 
paragraph (b)(12) of this section.
    (ii) All variable gaging devices shall be arranged so that the 
maximum liquid level for butane, for a 50-50 mixture of butane and 
propane, and for propane, to which the container may be charged is 
readily determinable. The markings indicating the various liquid levels 
from empty to full shall be on the system nameplate or gaging device or 
part may be on the system nameplate and part on the gaging device. Dials 
of magnetic or rotary gages shall show whether they are for cylindrical 
or spherical containers and whether for aboveground or underground 
service. The dials of gages intended for use only on aboveground 
containers of over 1,200 gallons water capacity shall be so marked.
    (iii) Gaging devices that require bleeding of the product to the 
atmosphere, such as the rotary tube, fixed tube, and slip tube, shall be 
designed so that the bleed valve maximum opening is not larger than a 
No. 54 drill size, unless provided with excess flow valve.
    (iv) Gaging devices shall have a design working pressure of at least 
250 p.s.i.g.
    (v) Length of tube or position of fixed liquid-level gage shall be 
designed to indicate the maximum level to which the container may be 
filled for the product contained. This level shall be based on the 
volume of the product at 40 deg. F. at its maximum permitted filling 
density for aboveground containers and at 50 deg. F. for underground 
containers. The employer shall calculate the filling point for which the 
fixed liquid level gage shall be designed according to the method in 
this subdivision.
    (a) It is impossible to set out in a table the length of a fixed dip 
tube for various capacity tanks because of the varying tank diameters 
and lengths and because the tank may be installed either in a vertical 
or horizontal position. Knowing the maximum permitted filling volume in 
gallons, however, the length of the fixed tube can be determined by the 
use of a strapping table obtained from the container manufacturer. The 
length of the fixed tube should be such that when its lower end touches 
the surface of the liquid in the container, the contents of the 
container will be the maximum permitted volume as determined by the 
following formula:

[(Water capacity (gals.) of container* x filling 
          density**)<divide>(Specific gravity of LP-Gas* x volume 
          correction factor  x  100)]=Maximum volume of LP-Gas

    *Measured at 60 deg. F.
    **From subparagraph (12) of this paragraph ``Filling Densities.''
    For aboveground containers the liquid temperature is assumed to be 
40 deg. F. and for underground containers the liquid temperature is 
assumed to be 50 deg. F. To correct the liquid volumes at these 
temperatures to 60 deg. F. the following factors shall be used.


[[Page 309]]


    (b) Formula for determining maximum volume of liquefied petroleum 
gas for which a fixed length of dip tube shall be set:

                  Table H-29--Volume Correction Factors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Specific gravity           Aboveground              Underground
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.500.................              1.033                    1.017
.510..................              1.031                    1.016
.520..................              1.029                    1.015
.530..................              1.028                    1.014
.540..................              1.026                    1.013
.550..................              1.025                    1.013
.560..................              1.024                    1.012
.570..................              1.023                    1.011
.580..................              1.021                    1.011
.590..................              1.020                    1.010
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The maximum volume of LP-Gas which can be placed in a container 
when determining the length of the dip tube expressed as a percentage of 
total water content of the container is calculated by the following 
formula.
    (d) The maximum weight of LP-Gas which may be placed in a container 
for determining the length of a fixed dip tube is determined by 
multiplying the maximum volume of liquefied petroleum gas obtained by 
the formula in paragraph (b)(19)(b) of this section by the pounds of 
liquefied petroleum gas in a gallon at 40 deg. F. for abovegound and at 
50 deg. F. for underground containers. For example, typical pounds per 
gallon are specified below:

    Example: Assume a 100-gallon total water capacity tank for 
aboveground storage of propane having a specific gravity of 0.510 of 
60 deg. F.
[(100 (gals.) x 42 (filling density from subparagraph (12) of this 
          paragraph))<divide>(0.510 x 1.031 (correction factor from 
          Table H-29) x 100)]=(4200<divide>52.6)

(4200<divide>52.6)=79.8 gallons propane, the maximum amount permitted to 
          be placed in a 100-gallon total water capacity aboveground 
          container equipped with a fixed dip tube.

[(Maximum volume of LP-Gas (from formula in subdivision (b) of this 
          subdivision) x 100)<divide>Total water content of container in 
          gallons]=Maximum percent of LP-Gas

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Aboveground,  Underground,
                                               pounds per    pounds per
                                                 gallon        gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Propane.....................................         4.37          4.31
N Butane....................................         4.97          4.92
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (vi) Fixed liquid-level gages used on containers other than DOT 
containers shall be stamped on the exterior of the gage with the letters 
``DT'' followed by the vertical distance (expressed in inches and 
carried out to one decimal place) from the top of container to the end 
of the dip tube or to the centerline of the gage when it is located at 
the maximum permitted filling level. For portable containers that may be 
filled in the horizontal and/or vertical position the letters ``DT'' 
shall be followed by ``V'' with the vertical distance from the top of 
the container to the end of the dip tube for vertical filling and with 
``H'' followed by the proper distance for horizontal filling. For DOT 
containers the stamping shall be placed both on the exterior of the gage 
and on the container. On above-ground or cargo containers where the 
gages are positioned at specific levels, the marking may be specified in 
percent of total tank contents and the marking shall be stamped on the 
container.
    (vii) Gage glasses of the columnar type shall be restricted to 
charging plants where the fuel is withdrawn in the liquid phase only. 
They shall be equipped with valves having metallic handwheels, with 
excess flow valves, and with extra-heavy glass adequately protected with 
a metal housing applied by the gage manufacturer. They shall be shielded 
against the direct rays of the sun. Gage glasses of the columnar type 
are prohibited on tank trucks, and on motor fuel tanks, and on 
containers used in domestic, commercial, and industrial installations.
    (viii) Gaging devices of the float, or equivalent type which do not 
require flow for their operation and having connections extending to a 
point outside the container do not have to be equipped with excess flow 
valves provided the piping and fittings are adequately designed to 
withstand the container pressure and are properly protected against 
physical damage and breakage.
    (20) Requirements for appliances. (i) Except as provided in 
paragraph (b)(20)(ii) of this section, new commercial and industrial gas 
consuming appliances shall be approved.

[[Page 310]]

    (ii) Any appliance that was originally manufactured for operation 
with a gaseous fuel other than LP-Gas and is in good condition may be 
used with LP-Gas only after it is properly converted, adapted, and 
tested for performance with LP-Gas before the appliance is placed in 
use.
    (iii) Unattended heaters used inside buildings for the purpose of 
animal or poultry production or care shall be equipped with an approved 
automatic device designed to shut off the flow of gas to the main 
burners, and pilot if used, in the event of flame extinguishment.
    (iv) All commercial, industrial, and agricultural appliances or 
equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this 
section and in accordance with the following NFPA consensus standards, 
which are incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6:
    (a) Domestic and commercial appliances--NFPA 54-1969, Standard for 
the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping.
    (b) Industrial appliances--NFPA 54A-1969, Standard for the 
Installation of Gas Piping and Gas Equipment on Industrial Premises and 
Certain Other Premises.
    (c) Standard for the Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion 
Engines and Gas Turbines--NFPA 37-1970.
    (d) Standard for the Installation of Equipment for the Removal of 
Smoke and Grease-Laden Vapors from Commercial Cooking Equipment, NFPA 
96-1970.
    (c) Cylinder systems--(1) Application. This paragraph applies 
specifically to systems utilizing containers constructed in accordance 
with DOT Specifications. All requirements of paragraph (b) of this 
section apply to this paragraph unless otherwise noted in paragraph (b) 
of this section.
    (2) Marking of containers. Containers shall be marked in accordance 
with DOT regulations. Additional markings not in conflict with DOT 
regulations may be used.
    (3) Description of a system. A system shall include the container 
base or bracket, containers, container valves, connectors, manifold 
valve assembly, regulators, and relief valves.
    (4) Containers and regulating equipment installed outside of 
buildings or structures. (i) Containers shall not be buried below 
ground. However, this shall not prohibit the installation in a 
compartment or recess below grade level such as a niche in a slope or 
terrace wall which is used for no other purpose, providing that the 
container and regulating equipment are not in contact with the ground 
and the compartment or recess is drained and ventilated horizontally to 
the outside air from its lowest level, with the outlet at least 3 feet 
away from any building opening which is below the level of such outlet.

Except as provided in paragraph (b)(10)(xiii) of this section, the 
discharge from safety relief devices shall be located not less than 3 
feet horizontally away from any building opening which is below the 
level of such discharge and shall not terminate beneath any building 
unless such space is well ventilated to the outside and is not enclosed 
on more than two sides.
    (ii) Containers shall be set upon firm foundation or otherwise 
firmly secured; the possible effect on the outlet piping of settling 
shall be guarded against by a flexible connection or special fitting.
    (5) Containers and equipment used inside of buildings or structures. 
(i) When operational requirements make portable use of containers 
necessary and their location outside of buildings or structure is 
impracticable, containers and equipment are permitted to be used inside 
of buildings or structures in accordance with (a) through (l) of this 
subdivision, and, in addition, such other provisions of this 
subparagraph as are applicable to the particular use or occupancy.
    (a) Containers in use shall mean connected for use.
    (b) Systems utilizing containers having a water capacity greater 
than 2\1/2\ pounds (nominal 1 pound LP-Gas capacity) shall be equipped 
with excess flow valves. Such excess flow valves shall be either 
integral with the container valves or in the connections to the 
container valve outlets. In either case, an excess flow valve shall be 
installed in such a manner that any undue strain beyond the excess flow 
valve will not cause breakage between

[[Page 311]]

the container and the excess flow valve. The installation of excess flow 
valves shall take into account the type of valve protection provided.
    (c) Regulators, if used, shall be either directly connected to the 
container valves or to manifolds connected to the container values. The 
regulator shall be suitable for use with LP-Gas. Manifolds and fittings 
connecting containers to pressure regulator inlets shall be designed for 
at least 250 p.s.i.g. service pressure.
    (d) Valves on containers having a water capacity greater than 50 
pounds (nominal 20 pounds LP-Gas capacity) shall be protected while in 
use.
    (e) Containers shall be marked in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(5)(iii) of this section and paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (f) Pipe or tubing shall conform to paragraph (b)(8) of this section 
except that aluminum pipe or tubing shall not be used.
    (g)(1) Hose shall be designed for a working pressure of at least 250 
p.s.i.g. Hose and hose connections shall have their correctness as to 
design, construction and performance determined by listing by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory. The hose length may exceed the 
length specified in paragraph (b)(9)(vii)(b) of this section, but shall 
be as short as practicable. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for definition of 
nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (2) Hose shall be long enough to permit compliance with spacing 
provisions of this subparagraph without kinking or straining or causing 
hose to be so close to a burner as to be damaged by heat.
    (h) Portable heaters, including salamanders, shall be equipped with 
an approved automatic device to shut off the flow of gas to the main 
burner, and pilot if used, in the event of flame extinguishment. Such 
heaters having inputs above 50,000 B.t.u. manufactured on or after May 
17, 1967, and such heaters having inputs above 100,000 B.t.u. 
manufactured before May 17, 1967, shall be equipped with either.
    (1) A pilot which must be lighted and proved before the main burner 
can be turned on; or
    (2) An electric ignition system.

The provisions of this paragraph (h) do not apply to tar kettle burners, 
torches, melting pots, nor do they apply to portable heaters under 7,500 
B.t.u.h. input when used with containers having a maximum water capacity 
of 2\1/2\ pounds. Container valves, connectors, regulators, manifolds, 
piping, and tubing shall not be used as structural supports for heaters.
    (i) Containers, regulating equipment, manifolds, pipe, tubing, and 
hose shall be located so as to minimize exposure to abnormally high 
temperatures (such as may result from exposure to convection or 
radiation from heating equipment or installation in confined spaces), 
physical damage, or tampering by unauthorized persons.
    (j) Heat producing equipment shall be located and used so as to 
minimize the possibility of ignition of combustibles.
    (k) Containers having a water capacity greater than 2\1/2\ pounds 
(nominal 1 pound LP-Gas capacity) connected for use, shall stand on a 
firm and substantially level surface and, when necessary, shall be 
secured in an upright position.
    (l) Containers, including the valve protective devices, shall be 
installed so as to minimize the probability of impingement of discharge 
of safety relief devices upon containers.
    (ii) Containers having a maximum water capacity of 2\1/2\ pounds 
(nominal 1 pound LP-Gas capacity) are permitted to be used inside of 
buildings as part of approved self-contained hand torch assemblies or 
similar appliances.
    (iii) Containers having a maximum water capacity of 12 pounds 
(nominal 5 pounds LP-Gas capacity) are permitted to be used temporarily 
inside of buildings for public exhibition or demonstration purposes, 
including use for classroom demonstrations.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Containers are permitted to be used in buildings or structures 
under construction or undergoing major renovation when such buildings or 
structures are not occupied by the public, as follows:
    (a) The maximum water capacity of individual containers shall be 245 
pounds (nominal 100 pounds LP-Gas capacity).

[[Page 312]]

    (b) For temporary heating such as curing concrete, drying plaster 
and similar applications, heaters (other than integral heater-container 
units) shall be located at least 6 feet from any LP-Gas container. This 
shall not prohibit the use of heaters specifically designed for 
attachment to the container or to a supporting standard, provided they 
are designed and installed so as to prevent direct or radiant heat 
application from the heater onto the container. Blower and radiant type 
heaters shall not be directed toward any LP-Gas container within 20 
feet.
    (c) If two or more heater-container units, of either the integral or 
nonintegral type, are located in an unpartitioned area on the same 
floor, the container or containers of each unit shall be separated from 
the container or containers of any other unit by at least 20 feet.
    (d) When heaters are connected to containers for use in an 
unpartitioned area on the same floor, the total water capacity of 
containers manifolded together for connection to a heater or heaters 
shall not be greater than 735 pounds (nominal 300 pounds LP-Gas 
capacity). Such manifolds shall be separated by at least 20 feet.
    (e) On floors on which heaters are not connected for use, containers 
are permitted to be manifolded together for connection to a heater or 
heaters on another floor, Provided:
    (1) The total water capacity of containers connected to any one 
manifold is not greater than 2,450 pounds (nominal 1,000 pounds LP-Gas 
capacity) and;
    (2) Where more than one manifold having a total water capacity 
greater than 735 pounds (nominal 300 pounds LP-Gas capacity) are located 
in the same unpartitioned area, they shall be separated by at least 50 
feet.
    (f) Storage of containers awaiting use shall be in accordance with 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (vi) Containers are permitted to be used in industrial occupancies 
for processing, research, or experimental purposes as follows:
    (a) The maximum water capacity of individual containers shall be 245 
pounds (nominal 100 pounds LP-Gas capacity).
    (b) Containers connected to a manifold shall have a total water 
capacity not greater than 735 pounds (nominal 300 pounds LP-Gas 
capacity) and not more than one such manifold may be located in the same 
room unless separated at least 20 feet from a similar unit.
    (c) The amount of LP-Gas in containers for research and experimental 
use shall be limited to the smallest practical quantity.
    (vii)(a) Containers are permitted to be used in industrial 
occupancies with essentially noncombustible contents where portable 
equipment for space heating is essential and where a permanent heating 
installation is not practical, as follows:
    (b) Containers and heaters shall comply with and be used in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(5)(v) of this section.
    (viii) Containers are permitted to be used in buildings for 
temporary emergency heating purposes, if necessary to prevent damage to 
the buildings or contents, when the permanent heating system is 
temporarily out of service, as follows:
    (a) Containers and heaters shall comply with and be used in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(5)(v) of this section.
    (b) The temporary heating equipment shall not be left unattended.
    (ix) Containers are permitted to be used temporarily in buildings 
for training purposes related in installation and use of LP-Gas systems, 
as follows:
    (a) The maximum water capacity of individual containers shall be 245 
pounds (nominal 100 pounds LP-Gas capacity), but the maximum quantity of 
LP-Gas that may be placed in each container shall be 20 pounds.
    (b) If more than one such container is located in the same room, the 
containers shall be separated by at least 20 feet.
    (6) Container valves and accessories.
    (i) Valves in the assembly of multiple container systems shall be 
arranged so that replacement of containers can be made without shutting 
off the flow of gas in the system.

    Note: This provision is not to be construed as requiring an 
automatic changeover device.


    (ii) Regulators and low-pressure relief devices shall be rigidly 
attached to

[[Page 313]]

the cylinder valves, cylinders, supporting standards, the building walls 
or otherwise rigidly secured and shall be so installed or protected that 
the elements (sleet, snow, or ice) will not affect their operation.
    (iii) Valves and connections to the containers shall be protected 
while in transit, in storage, and while being moved into final 
utilization, as follows:
    (a) By setting into the recess of the container to prevent the 
possibility of their being struck if the container is dropped upon a 
flat surface, or
    (b) By ventilated cap or collar, fastened to the container capable 
of withstanding a blow from any direction equivalent to that of a 30-
pound weight dropped 4 feet. Construction must be such that a blow will 
not be transmitted to the valve or other connection.
    (iv) When containers are not connected to the system, the outlet 
valves shall be kept tightly closed or plugged, even though containers 
are considered empty.
    (v) Containers having a water capacity in excess of 50 pounds 
(approximately 21 pounds LP-Gas capacity), recharged at the 
installation, shall be provided with excess flow or backflow check 
valves to prevent the discharge of container contents in case of failure 
of the filling or equalizing connection.
    (7) Safety devices. (i) Containers shall be provided with safety 
devices as required by DOT regulations.
    (ii) A final stage regulator of an LP-Gas system (excluding any 
appliance regulator) shall be equipped on the low-pressure side with a 
relief valve which is set to start to discharge within the limits 
specified in Table H-30.

                               Table H-30
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Relief valve start-to-
                                                    discharge pressure
                                                    setting (percent of
           Regulator delivery pressure              regulator delivery
                                                         pressure)
                                                 -----------------------
                                                    Minimum     Maximum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 p.s.i.g. or less..............................         200         300
Above 1 p.s.i.g. but not over 3 p.s.i.g.........         140         200
Above 3 p.s.i.g.................................         125         200
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) When a regulator or pressure relief valve is used inside a 
building for other than purposes specified in paragraphs (b)(6)(i) (a)-
(g) of this section, the relief valve and the space above the regulator 
and relief valve diaphragms shall be vented to the outside air with the 
discharge outlet located not less than 3 feet horizontally away from any 
building opening which is below such discharge. These provisions do not 
apply to individual appliance regulators when protection is otherwise 
provided nor to paragraph (c)(5) of this section and paragraph 
(b)(10)(xiii) of this section. In buildings devoted exclusively to gas 
distribution purposes, the space above the diaphragm need not be vented 
to the outside.
    (8) Reinstallation of containers. Containers shall not be 
reinstalled unless they are requalified in accordance with DOT 
regulations.
    (9) Permissible product. A product shall not be placed in a 
container marked with a service pressure less than four-fifths of the 
maximum vapor pressure of product at 130 deg. F.
    (d) Systems utilizing containers other than DOT containers--(1) 
Application. This paragraph applies specifically to systems utilizing 
storage containers other than those constructed in accordance with DOT 
specifications. Paragraph (b) of this section applies to this paragraph 
unless otherwise noted in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (2) Design pressure and classification of storage containers. 
Storage containers shall be designed and classified in accordance with 
Table H-31.

                               Table H-31
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Minimum design pressure of
                                       container, lb. per sq. in. gage
                                   -------------------------------------
                   For gases with                   1949 edition of ASME
                  vapor press. Not                  Code (Par. U-200, U-
                    to exceed lb.      1949 and       201); 1950, 1952,
 Container type   per sq. in. gage      earlier       1956, 1959, 1962,
                   at 100 deg. F.     editions of      1965, and 1968
                   (37.8 deg. C.)      ASME Code        (Division 1)
                                    (Par. U-68, U-    editions of ASME
                                          69)        Code; All editions
                                                    of API-ASME Code \3\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 80..........        \1\ 80           \1\ 80               \1\ 100
100.............           100              100                   125
125.............           125              125                   156
150.............           150              150                   187
175.............           175              175                   219
\2\ 200.........           215              200                   250
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ New storage containers of the 80 type have not been authorized since
  Dec. 31, 1947.

[[Page 314]]

\2\ Container type may be increased by increments of 25. The minimum
  design pressure of containers shall be 100% of the container type
  designation when constructed under 1949 or earlier editions of the
  ASME Code (Par. U-68 and U-69). The minimum design pressure of
  containers shall be 125% of the container type designation when
  constructed under: (1) the 1949 ASME Code (Par. U-200 and U-201), (2)
  1950, 1952, 1956, 1959, 1962, 1965, and 1968 (Division 1) editions of
  the ASME Code, and (3) all editions of the API-ASME Code.
\3\ Construction of containers under the API-ASME Code is not authorized
  after July 1, 1961.

    (3) Container valves and accessories, filler pipes, and discharge 
pipes. (i) The filling pipe inlet terminal shall not be located inside a 
building. For containers with a water capacity of 125 gallons or more, 
such terminals shall be located not less than 10 feet from any building 
(see paragraph (b)(6)(ii) of this section), and preferably not less than 
5 feet from any driveway, and shall be located in a protective housing 
built for the purpose.
    (ii) The filling connection shall be fitted with one of the 
following:
    (a) Combination back-pressure check valve and excess flow valve.
    (b) One double or two single back-pressure check valves.
    (c) A positive shutoff valve, in conjunction with either:
    (1) An internal back-pressure valve, or
    (2) An internal excess flow valve.
    (iii) All openings in a container shall be equipped with approved 
automatic excess flow valves except in the following: Filling 
connections as provided in paragraph (d)(3)(ii) of this section; safety 
relief connections, liquid-level gaging devices as provided in 
paragraphs (b)(7)(iv), (19)(iii), and (19)(viii) of this section; 
pressure gage connections as provided in paragraph (b)(7)(v) of this 
section, as provided in paragraphs (d) (iv), (vi), and (vii) of this 
section.
    (iv) An excess flow valve is not required in the withdrawal service 
line providing the following are complied with:
    (a) Such systems' total water capacity does not exceed 2,000 U.S. 
gallons.
    (b) The discharge from the service outlet is controlled by a 
suitable manually operated shutoff valve which is:
    (1) Threaded directly into the service outlet of the container; or
    (2) Is an integral part of a substantial fitting threaded into or on 
the service outlet of the container; or
    (3) Threaded directly into a substantial fitting threaded into or on 
the service outlet of the container.
    (c) The shutoff valve is equipped with an attached handwheel or the 
equivalent.
    (d) The controlling orifice between the contents of the container 
and the outlet of the shutoff valve does not exceed five-sixteenths inch 
in diameter for vapor withdrawal systems and one-eighth inch in diameter 
for liquid withdrawal systems.
    (e) An approved pressure-reducing regulator is directly attached to 
the outlet of the shutoff valve and is rigidly supported, or that an 
approved pressure-reducing regulator is attached to the outlet of the 
shutoff valve by means of a suitable flexible connection, provided the 
regulator is adequately supported and properly protected on or at the 
tank.
    (v) All inlet and outlet connections except safety relief valves, 
liquid level gaging devices and pressure gages on containers of 2,000 
gallons water capacity, or more, and on any container used to supply 
fuel directly to an internal combustion engine, shall be labeled to 
designate whether they communicate with vapor or liquid space. Labels 
may be on valves.
    (vi) In lieu of an excess flow valve openings may be fitted with a 
quick-closing internal valve which, except during operating periods 
shall remain closed. The internal mechanism for such valves may be 
provided with a secondary control which shall be equipped with a fusible 
plug (not over 220 deg. F. melting point) which will cause the internal 
valve to close automatically in case of fire.
    (vii) Not more than two plugged openings shall be permitted on a 
container of 2,000 gallons or less water capacity.
    (viii) Containers of 125 gallons water capacity or more manufactured 
after July 1, 1961, shall be provided with an approved device for liquid 
evacuation, the size of which shall be three-fourths inch National Pipe 
Thread minimum. A plugged opening will not satisfy this requirement.
    (4) Safety devices. (i) All safety devices shall comply with the 
following:

[[Page 315]]

    (a) All container safety relief devices shall be located on the 
containers and shall have direct communication with the vapor of space 
of the container.
    (b) In industrial and gas manufacturing plants, discharge pipe from 
safety relief valves on pipe lines within a building shall discharge 
vertically upward and shall be piped to a point outside a building.
    (c) Safety relief device discharge terminals shall be so located as 
to provide protection against physical damage and such discharge pipes 
shall be fitted with loose raincaps. Return bends and restrictive 
pipefittings shall not be permitted.
    (d) If desired, discharge lines from two or more safety relief 
devices located on the same unit, or similar lines from two or more 
different units, may be run into a common discharge header, provided 
that the cross-sectional area of such header be at least equal to the 
sum of the cross-sectional area of the individual discharge lines, and 
that the setting of safety relief valves are the same.
    (e) Each storage container of over 2,000 gallons water capacity 
shall be provided with a suitable pressure gage.
    (f) A final stage regulator of an LP-Gas system (excluding any 
appliance regulator) shall be equipped on the low-pressure side with a 
relief valve which is set to start to discharge within the limits 
specified in Table H-30.
    (g) When a regulator or pressure relief valve is installed inside a 
building, the relief valve and the space above the regulator and relief 
valve diaphragms shall be vented to the outside air with the discharge 
outlet located not less than 3 feet horizontally away from any opening 
into the building which is below such discharge. (These provisions do 
not apply to individual appliance regulators when protection is 
otherwise provided. In buildings devoted exclusively to gas distribution 
purposes, the space above the diaphragm need not be vented to the 
outside.)
    (ii) Safety devices for aboveground containers shall be provided as 
follows:
    (a) Containers of 1,200 gallons water capacity or less which may 
contain liquid fuel when installed above ground shall have the rate of 
discharge required by paragraph (b)(10)(ii) of this section provided by 
a spring-loaded relief valve or valves. In addition to the required 
spring-loaded relief valve(s), suitable fuse plug(s) may be used 
provided the total discharge area of the fuse plug(s) for each container 
does not exceed 0.25 square inch.
    (b) The fusible metal of the fuse plugs shall have a yield 
temperature of 208 deg. F. minimum and 220 deg. F. maximum. Relief 
valves and fuse plugs shall have direct communication with the vapor 
space of the container.
    (c) On a container having a water capacity greater than 125 gallons, 
but not over 2,000 gallons, the discharge from the safety relief valves 
shall be vented away from the container vertically upwards and 
unobstructed to the open air in such a manner as to prevent any 
impingement of escaping gas upon the container; loose-fitting rain caps 
shall be used. Suitable provision shall be made for draining condensate 
which may accumulate in the relief valve or its discharge pipe.
    (d) On containers of 125 gallons water capacity or less, the 
discharge from safety relief devices shall be located not less than 5 
feet horizontally away from any opening into the building below the 
level of such discharge.
    (e) On a container having a water capacity greater than 2,000 
gallons, the discharge from the safety relief valves shall be vented 
away from the container vertically upwards to a point at least 7 feet 
above the container, and unobstructed to the open air in such a manner 
as to prevent any impingement of escaping gas upon the container; loose-
fitting rain caps shall be used. Suitable provision shall be made so 
that any liquid or condensate that may accumulate inside of the safety 
relief valve or its discharge pipe will not render the valve 
inoperative. If a drain is used, a means shall be provided to protect 
the container, adjacent containers, piping, or equipment against 
impingement of flame resulting from ignition of product escaping from 
the drain.
    (iii) On all containers which are installed underground and which 
contain no liquid fuel until buried and covered, the rate of discharge 
of the spring-loaded relief valve installed thereon may be reduced to a 
minimum of 30 percent of

[[Page 316]]

the rate of discharge specified in paragraph (b)(10)(ii) of this 
section. Containers so protected shall not be uncovered after 
installation until the liquid fuel has been removed therefrom. 
Containers which may contain liquid fuel before being installed under 
ground and before being completely covered with earth are to be 
considered aboveground containers when determining the rate of discharge 
requirement of the relief valves.
    (iv) On underground containers of more than 2,000 gallons water 
capacity, the discharge from safety relief devices shall be piped 
vertically and directly upward to a point at least 7 feet above the 
ground.

Where there is a probability of the manhole or housing becoming flooded, 
the discharge from regulator vent lines shall be above the highest 
probable water level. All manholes or housings shall be provided with 
ventilated louvers or their equivalent, the area of such openings 
equaling or exceeding the combined discharge areas of the safety relief 
valves and other vent lines which discharge their content into the 
manhole housing.
    (v) Safety devices for vaporizers shall be provided as follows:
    (a) Vaporizers of less than 1 quart total capacity, heated by the 
ground or the surrounding air, need not be equipped with safety relief 
valves provided that adequate tests certified by any of the authorities 
referred to in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, demonstrate that the 
assembly is safe without safety relief valves.
    (b) No vaporizer shall be equipped with fusible plugs.
    (c) In industrial and gas manufacturing plants, safety relief valves 
on vaporizers within a building shall be piped to a point outside the 
building and be discharged upward.
    (5) Reinstallation of containers. Containers may be reinstalled if 
they do not show any evidence of harmful external corrosion or other 
damage. Where containers are reinstalled underground, the corrosion 
resistant coating shall be put in good condition (see paragraph 
(c)(7)(vi) of this section). Where containers are reinstalled above 
ground, the safety devices and gaging devices shall comply with 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section and paragraph (b)(19) of this section 
respectively for aboveground containers.
    (6) Capacity of containers. A storage container shall not exceed 
90,000 gallons water capacity.
    (7) Installation of storage containers. (i) Containers installed 
above ground, except as provided in paragraph (c)(7)(vii) of this 
section, shall be provided with substantial masonry or noncombustible 
structural supports on firm masonry foundation.
    (ii) Aboveground containers shall be supported as follows:
    (a) Horizontal containers shall be mounted on saddles in such a 
manner as to permit expansion and contraction. Structural metal supports 
may be employed when they are protected against fire in an approved 
manner. Suitable means of preventing corrosion shall be provided on that 
portion of the container in contact with the foundations or saddles.
    (b) Containers of 2,000 gallons water capacity or less may be 
installed with nonfireproofed ferrous metal supports if mounted on 
concrete pads or footings, and if the distance from the outside bottom 
of the container shell to the concrete pad, footing, or the ground does 
not exceed 24 inches.
    (iii) Any container may be installed with nonfireproofed ferrous 
metal supports if mounted on concrete pads or footings, and if the 
distance from the outside bottom of the container to the ground does not 
exceed 5 feet, provided the container is in an isolated location.
    (iv) Containers may be partially buried providing the following 
requirements are met:
    (a) The portion of the container below the surface and for a 
vertical distance not less than 3 inches above the surface of the ground 
is protected to resist corrosion, and the container is protected against 
settling and corrosion as required for fully buried containers.
    (b) Spacing requirements shall be as specified for underground tanks 
in paragraph (b)(6)(ii) of this section.
    (c) Relief valve capacity shall be as required for aboveground 
containers.
    (d) Container is located so as not to be subject to vehicular 
damage, or is

[[Page 317]]

adequately protected against such damage.
    (e) Filling densities shall be as required for above-ground 
containers.
    (v) Containers buried underground shall be placed so that the top of 
the container is not less than 6 inches below grade. Where an 
underground container might be subject to abrasive action or physical 
damage due to vehicular traffic or other causes, then it shall be:
    (a) Placed not less than 2 feet below grade, or
    (b) Otherwise protected against such physical damage.

It will not be necessary to cover the portion of the container to which 
manhole and other connections are affixed; however, where necessary, 
protection shall be provided against vehicular damage. When necessary to 
prevent floating, containers shall be securely anchored or weighted.
    (vi)(a) Containers shall be given a protective coating before being 
placed under ground. This coating shall be equivalent to hot-dip 
galvanizing or to two coatings of red lead followed by a heavy coating 
of coal tar or asphalt. In lowering the container into place, care shall 
be exercised to prevent damage to the coating. Any damage to the coating 
shall be repaired before backfilling.
    (b) Containers shall be set on a firm foundation (firm earth may be 
used) and surrounded with earth or sand firmly tamped in place.
    (vii) Containers with foundations attached (portable or semiportable 
containers with suitable steel ``runners'' or ``skids'' and popularly 
known in the industry as ``skid tanks'') shall be designed, installed, 
and used in accordance with these rules subject to the following 
provisions:
    (a) If they are to be used at a given general location for a 
temporary period not to exceed 6 months they need not have fire-
resisting foundations or saddles but shall have adequate ferrous metal 
supports.
    (b) They shall not be located with the outside bottom of the 
container shell more than 5 feet above the surface of the ground unless 
fire-resisting supports are provided.
    (c) The bottom of the skids shall not be less than 2 inches or more 
than 12 inches below the outside bottom of the container shell.
    (d) Flanges, nozzles, valves, fittings, and the like, having 
communication with the interior of the container, shall be protected 
against physical damage.
    (e) When not permanently located on fire-resisting foundations, 
piping connections shall be sufficiently flexible to minimize the 
possibility of breakage or leakage of connections if the container 
settles, moves, or is otherwise displaced.
    (f) Skids, or lugs for attachment of skids, shall be secured to the 
container in accordance with the code or rules under which the container 
is designed and built (with a minimum factor of safety of four) to 
withstand loading in any direction equal to four times the weight of the 
container and attachments when filled to the maximum permissible loaded 
weight.
    (viii) Field welding where necessary shall be made only on saddle 
plates or brackets which were applied by the manufacturer of the tank.
    (ix) For aboveground containers, secure anchorage or adequate pier 
height shall be provided against possible container flotation wherever 
sufficiently high floodwater might occur.
    (x) When permanently installed containers are interconnected, 
provision shall be made to compensate for expansion, contraction, 
vibration, and settling of containers, and interconnecting piping. Where 
flexible connections are used, they shall be of an approved type and 
shall be designed for a bursting pressure of not less than five times 
the vapor pressure of the product at 100 deg. F. The use of nonmetallic 
hose is prohibited for permanently interconnecting such containers.
    (xi) Container assemblies listed for interchangeable installation 
above ground or under ground shall conform to the requirements for 
aboveground installations with respect to safety relief capacity and 
filling density. For installation above ground all other requirements 
for aboveground installations shall apply. For installation under ground 
all other requirements for underground installations shall apply.
    (8) Protection of container accessories. (i) Valves, regulating, 
gaging, and

[[Page 318]]

other container accessory equipment shall be protected against tampering 
and physical damage. Such accessories shall also be so protected during 
the transit of containers intended for installation underground.
    (ii) On underground or combination aboveground-underground 
containers, the service valve handwheel, the terminal for connecting the 
hose, and the opening through which there can be a flow from safety 
relief valves shall be at least 4 inches above the container and this 
opening shall be located in the dome or housing. Underground systems 
shall be so installed that all the above openings, including the 
regulator vent, are located above the normal maximum water table.
    (iii) All connections to underground containers shall be located 
within a substantial dome, housing, or manhole and with access thereto 
protected by a substantial cover.
    (9) Drips for condensed gas. Where vaporized gas on the low-pressure 
side of the system may condense to a liquid at normal operating 
temperatures and pressures, suitable means shall be provided for 
revaporization of the condensate.
    (10) Damage from vehicles. When damage to LP-Gas systems from 
vehicular traffic is a possibility, precautions against such damage 
shall be taken.
    (11) Drains. No drains or blowoff lines shall be directed into or in 
proximity to sewer systems used for other purposes.
    (12) General provisions applicable to systems in industrial plants 
(of 2,000 gallons water capacity and more) and to bulk filling plants. 
(i) When standard watch service is provided, it shall be extended to the 
LP-Gas installation and personnel properly trained.
    (ii) If loading and unloading are normally done during other than 
daylight hours, adequate lights shall be provided to illuminate storage 
containers, control valves, and other equipment.
    (iii) Suitable roadways or means of access for extinguishing 
equipment such as wheeled extinguishers or fire department apparatus 
shall be provided.
    (iv) To minimize trespassing or tampering, the area which includes 
container appurtenances, pumping equipment, loading and unloading 
facilities, and cylinder-filling facilities shall be enclosed with at 
least a 6-foot-high industrial type fence unless otherwise adequately 
protected. There shall be at least two means of emergency access.
    (13) Container-charging plants. (i) The container-charging room 
shall be located not less than:
    (a) Ten feet from bulk storage containers.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (ii) Tank truck filling station outlets shall be located not less 
than:
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Ten feet from pumps and compressors if housed in one or more 
separate buildings.
    (iii) The pumps or compressors may be located in the container-
charging room or building, in a separate building, or outside of 
buildings. When housed in a separate building, such building (a small 
noncombustible weather cover is not to be construed as a building) shall 
be located not less than:
    (a) Ten feet from bulk storage tanks.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Twenty-five feet from sources of ignition.
    (iv) When a part of the container-charging building is to be used 
for a boiler room or where open flames or similar sources of ignition 
exist or are employed, the space to be so occupied shall be separated 
from container charging room by a partition wall or walls of fire-
resistant construction continuous from floor to roof or ceiling. Such 
separation walls shall be without openings and shall be joined to the 
floor, other walls, and ceiling or roof in a manner to effect a 
permanent gas-tight joint.
    (v) Electrical equipment and installations shall conform with 
paragraphs (b) (17) and (18) of this section.
    (14) Fire protection. (i) Each bulk plant shall be provided with at 
least one approved portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 
12-B, C.
    (ii) In industrial installations involving containers of 150,000 
gallons aggregate water capacity or more, provision shall be made for an 
adequate supply of water at the container site for fire protection in 
the container area, unless other adequate means for fire control

[[Page 319]]

are provided. Water hydrants shall be readily accessible and so spaced 
as to provide water protection for all containers. Sufficient lengths of 
firehose shall be provided at each hydrant location on a hose cart, or 
other means provided to facilitate easy movement of the hose in the 
container area. It is desirable to equip the outlet of each hose line 
with a combination fog nozzle. A shelter shall be provided to protect 
the hose and its conveyor from the weather.
    (15) [Reserved]
    (16) Lighting. Electrical equipment and installations shall conform 
to paragraphs (b) (17) and (18) of this section.
    (17) Vaporizers for internal combustion engines. The provisions of 
paragraph (e)(8) of this section shall apply.
    (18) Gas regulating and mixing equipment for internal combustion 
engines. The provisions of paragraph (e)(9) of this section shall apply.
    (e) Liquefied petroleum gas as a motor fuel--(1) Application. (i) 
This paragraph applies to internal combustion engines, fuel containers, 
and pertinent equipment for the use of liquefied petroleum gases as a 
motor fuel on easily movable, readily portable units including self-
propelled vehicles.
    (ii) Fuel containers and pertinent equipment for internal combustion 
engines using liquefied petroleum gas where installation is of the 
stationary type are covered by paragraph (d) of this section. This 
paragraph does not apply to containers for transportation of liquefied 
petroleum gases nor to marine fuel use. All requirements of paragraph 
(b) of this section apply to this paragraph, unless otherwise noted in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (2) General. (i) Fuel may be used from the cargo tank of a truck 
while in transit, but not from cargo tanks on trailers or semitrailers. 
The use of fuel from the cargo tanks to operate stationary engines is 
permitted providing wheels are securely blocked.
    (ii) Passenger-carrying vehicles shall not be fueled while 
passengers are on board.
    (iii) Industrial trucks (including lift trucks) equipped with 
permanently mounted fuel containers shall be charged outdoors. Charging 
equipment shall comply with the provisions of paragraph (h) of this 
section.
    (iv) LP-Gas fueled industrial trucks shall comply with the Standard 
for Type Designations, Areas of Use, Maintenance and Operation of 
Powered Industrial Trucks, NFPA 505-1969, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (v) Engines on vehicles shall be shut down while fueling if the 
fueling operation involves venting to the atmosphere.
    (3) Design pressure and classification of fuel containers. (i) 
Except as covered in paragraphs (e)(3) (ii) and (iii) of this section, 
containers shall be in accordance with Table H-32.
    (ii) Fuel containers for use in industrial trucks (including lift 
trucks) shall be either DOT containers authorized for LP-Gas service 
having a minimum service pressure of 240 p.s.i.g. or minimum Container 
Type 250. Under 1950 and later ASME codes, this means a 312.5-p.s.i.g. 
design pressure container.

                               Table H-32
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Minimum design pressure of
                                       container, lb. per sq. in. gage
                                   -------------------------------------
                   For gases with                   1949 edition of ASME
                  vapor press. Not                  Code (Par. U-200, U-
                    to exceed lb.      1949 and       201); 1950, 1952,
 Container type   per sq. in. gage      earlier       1956, 1959, 1962,
                   at 100 deg. F.     editions of      1965, and 1968
                   (37.8 deg. C.)      ASME Code        (Division 1)
                                    (Par. U-68, U-    editions of ASME
                                          69)        Code; All editions
                                                    of API-ASME Code \2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 200.........          215Z              200                   250
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Container type may be increased by increments of 25. The minimum
  design pressure of containers shall be 100% of the container type
  designation when constructed under 1949 or earlier editions of the
  ASME Code (Par. U-68 and U-69). The minimum design pressure of
  containers shall be 125% of the container type designation when
  constructed under: (1) the 1949 ASME Code (Par. U-200 and U-201), (2)
  1950, 1952, 1956, 1959, 1962, 1965, and 1968 (Division 1) editions of
  the ASME Code, and (3) all editions of the API-ASME Code.
\2\ Construction of containers under the API-ASME Code is not authorized
  after July 1, 1961.

    (iii) Containers manufactured and maintained under DOT 
specifications and regulations may be used as fuel containers. When so 
used they shall conform to all requirements of this paragraph.
    (iv) All container inlets and outlets except safety relief valves 
and gaging devices shall be labeled to designate whether they 
communicate with vapor

[[Page 320]]

or liquid space. Labels may be on valves.
    (4) Installation of fuel containers. (i) Containers shall be located 
in a place and in a manner to minimize the possibility of damage to the 
container. Containers located in the rear of trucks and buses, when 
protected by substantial bumpers, will be considered in conformance with 
this requirement. Fuel containers on passenger-carrying vehicles shall 
be installed as far from the engine as is practicable, and the passenger 
space and any space containing radio equipment shall be sealed from the 
container space to prevent direct seepage of gas to these spaces. The 
container compartment shall be vented to the outside. In case the fuel 
container is mounted near the engine or the exhaust system, the 
container shall be shielded against direct heat radiation.
    (ii) Containers shall be installed with as much clearance as 
practicable but never less than the minimum road clearance of the 
vehicle under maximum spring deflection. This minimum clearance shall be 
to the bottom of the container or to the lowest fitting on the container 
or housing, whichever is lower.
    (iii) Permanent and removable fuel containers shall be securely 
mounted to prevent jarring loose, slipping, or rotating, and the 
fastenings shall be designed and constructed to withstand static loading 
in any direction equal to twice the weight of the tank and attachments 
when filled with fuel using a safety factor of not less than four based 
on the ultimate strength of the material to be used. Field welding, when 
necessary, shall be made only on saddle plates, lugs or brackets, 
originally attached to the container by the tank manufacturer.
    (iv) Fuel containers on buses shall be permanently installed.
    (v) Containers from which vapor only is to be withdrawn shall be 
installed and equipped with suitable connections to minimize the 
accidental withdrawal of liquid.
    (5) Valves and accessories. (i) Container valves and accessories 
shall have a rated working pressure of at least 250 p.s.i.g., and shall 
be of a type suitable for liquefied petroleum gas service.
    (ii) The filling connection shall be fitted with an approved double 
back-pressure check valve, or a positive shutoff in conjunction with an 
internal back-pressure check valve. On a removable container the filler 
valve may be a hand operated shutoff valve with an internal excess flow 
valve. Main shutoff valves on the container on liquid and vapor lines 
must be readily accessible.
    (iii) With the exceptions of paragraph (e)(5)(iv)(c) of this 
section, filling connections equipped with approved automatic back-
pressure check valves, and safety relief valves, all connections to 
containers having openings for the flow of gas in excess of a No. 54 
drill size shall be equipped with approved automatic excess flow valves 
to prevent discharge of content in case connections are broken.
    (iv) Liquid-level gaging devices:
    (a) Variable liquid-level gages which require the venting of fuel to 
the atmosphere shall not be used on fuel containers of industrial trucks 
(including lift trucks).
    (b) On portable containers that may be filled in the vertical and/or 
horizontal position, the fixed liquid-level gage must indicate maximum 
permitted filling level for both vertical and horizontal filling with 
the container oriented to place the safety relief valve in communication 
with the vapor space.
    (c) In the case of containers used solely in farm tractor service, 
and charged at a point at least 50 feet from any important building, the 
fixed liquid-level gaging device may be so constructed that the outward 
flow of container content exceeds that passed by a No. 54 drill size 
opening, but in no case shall the flow exceed that passed by a No. 31 
drill-size opening. An excess flow valve is not required. Fittings 
equipped with such restricted drill size opening and container on which 
they are used shall be marked to indicate the size of the opening.
    (d) All valves and connections on containers shall be adequately 
protected to prevent damage due to accidental contact with stationary 
objects or from loose objects thrown up from the road, and all valves 
shall be safeguarded against damage due to collision, overturning or 
other accident.

[[Page 321]]

For farm tractors where parts of the vehicle provide such protection to 
valves and fittings, the foregoing requirements shall be considered 
fulfilled. However, on removable type containers the protection for the 
fittings shall be permanently attached to the container.
    (e) When removable fuel containers are used, means shall be provided 
in the fuel system to minimize the escape of fuel when the containers 
are exchanged. This may be accomplished by either of the following 
methods:
    (1) Using an approved automatic quick-closing coupling (a type 
closing in both directions when uncoupled) in the fuel line, or
    (2) Closing the valve at the fuel container and allowing the engine 
to run until the fuel in the line is consumed.
    (6) Piping--including pipe, tubing, and fittings. (i) Pipe from fuel 
container to first-stage regulator shall be not less than schedule 80 
wrought iron or steel (black or galvanized), brass or copper; or 
seamless copper, brass, or steel tubing. Steel tubing shall have a 
minimum wall thickness of 0.049 inch. Steel pipe or tubing shall be 
adequately protected against exterior corrosion. Copper tubing shall be 
types K or L or equivalent having a minimum wall thickness of 0.032 
inch. Approved flexible connections may be used between container and 
regulator or between regulator and gas-air mixer within the limits of 
approval. The use of aluminum pipe or tubing is prohibited. In the case 
of removable containers an approved flexible connection shall be used 
between the container and the fuel line.
    (ii) All piping shall be installed, braced, and supported so as to 
reduce to a minimum the possibility of vibration strains or wear.
    (7) Safety devices. (i) Spring-loaded internal type safety relief 
valves shall be used on all motor fuel containers.
    (ii) The discharge outlet from safety relief valves shall be located 
on the outside of enclosed spaces and as far as practicable from 
possible sources of ignition, and vented upward within 45 degrees of the 
vertical in such a manner as to prevent impingement of escaping gas upon 
containers, or parts of vehicles, or on vehicles in adjacent lines of 
traffic. A rain cap or other protector shall be used to keep water and 
dirt from collecting in the valve.
    (iii) When a discharge line from the container safety relief valve 
is used, the line shall be metallic, other than aluminum, and shall be 
sized, located, and maintained so as not to restrict the required flow 
of gas from the safety relief valve. Such discharge line shall be able 
to withstand the pressure resulting from the discharge of vapor when the 
safety relief valve is in the full open position. When flexibility is 
necessary, flexible metal hose or tubing shall be used.
    (iv) Portable containers equipped for volumetric filling may be 
filled in either the vertical or horizontal position only when oriented 
to place the safety relief valve in communication with the vapor space.
    (v) Paragraph (b)(10)(xii) of this section for hydrostatic relief 
valves shall apply.
    (8) Vaporizers. (i) Vaporizers and any part thereof and other 
devices that may be subjected to container pressure shall have a design 
pressure of at least 250 p.s.i.g.
    (ii) Each vaporizer shall have a valve or suitable plug which will 
permit substantially complete draining of the vaporizer. It shall be 
located at or near the lowest portion of the section occupied by the 
water or other heating medium.
    (iii) Vaporizers shall be securely fastened so as to minimize the 
possibility of becoming loosened.
    (iv) Each vaporizer shall be permanently marked at a visible point 
as follows:
    (a) With the design pressure of the fuel-containing portion in 
p.s.i.g.
    (b) With the water capacity of the fuel-containing portion of the 
vaporizer in pounds.
    (v) Devices to supply heat directly to a fuel container shall be 
equipped with an automatic device to cut off the supply of heat before 
the pressure inside the fuel container reaches 80 percent of the start 
to discharge pressure setting of the safety relief device on the fuel 
container.
    (vi) Engine exhaust gases may be used as a direct source of heat 
supply

[[Page 322]]

for the vaporization of fuel if the materials of construction of those 
parts of the vaporizer in contact with exhaust gases are resistant to 
the corrosive action of exhaust gases and the vaporizer system is 
designed to prevent excessive pressures.
    (vii) Vaporizers shall not be equipped with fusible plugs.
    (9) Gas regulating and mixing equipment. (i) Approved automatic 
pressure reducing equipment shall be installed in a secure manner 
between the fuel supply container and gas-air mixer for the purpose of 
reducing the pressure of the fuel delivered to the gas-air mixer.
    (ii) An approved automatic shutoff valve shall be provided in the 
fuel system at some point ahead of the inlet of the gas-air mixer, 
designed to prevent flow of fuel to the mixer when the ignition is off 
and the engine is not running. In the case of industrial trucks and 
engines operating in buildings other than those used exclusively to 
house engines, the automatic shutoff valve shall be designed to operate 
if the engine should stop. Atmospheric type regulators (zero governors) 
shall be considered adequate as an automatic shutoff valve only in cases 
of outdoor operation such as farm tractors, construction equipment, 
irrigation pump engines, and other outdoor stationary engine 
installations.
    (iii) The source of the air for combustion shall be completely 
isolated from the passenger compartment, ventilating system, or air-
conditioning system.
    (10) [Reserved]
    (11) Stationary engines in buildings. Stationary engines and gas 
turbines installed in buildings, including portable engines used instead 
of or to supplement stationary engines, shall comply with the Standard 
for the Institution and Use of Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas 
Turbines, NFPA 37-1970, and the appropriate provisions of paragraphs 
(b), (c), and (d) of this section.
    (12) Portable engines in buildings. (i) Portable engines may be used 
in buildings only for emergency use, except as provided by subparagraph 
(11) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Exhaust gases shall be discharged to outside the building or to 
an area where they will not constitute a hazard.
    (iii) Provision shall be made to supply sufficient air for 
combustion and cooling.
    (iv) An approved automatic shutoff valve shall be provided in the 
fuel system ahead of the engine, designed to prevent flow of fuel to the 
engine when the ignition is off or if the engine should stop.
    (v) The capacity of LP-Gas containers used with such engines shall 
comply with the applicable occupancy provision of paragraph (c)(5) of 
this section.
    (13) Industrial trucks inside buildings. (i) LP-Gas-fueled 
industrial trucks are permitted to be used in buildings and structures.
    (ii) No more than two LP-Gas containers shall be used on an 
industrial truck for motor fuel purposes.
    (iii)-(iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Industrial trucks shall not be parked and left unattended in 
areas of possible excessive heat or sources of ignition.
    (14) Garaging LP-Gas-fueled vehicles. (i) LP-Gas-fueled vehicles may 
be stored or serviced inside garages provided there are no leaks in the 
fuel system and the fuel tanks are not filled beyond the maximum filling 
capacity specified in paragraph (b)(12)(i) of this section.
    (ii) LP-Gas-fueled vehicles being repaired in garages shall have the 
container shutoff valve closed except when fuel is required for engine 
operation.
    (iii) Such vehicles shall not be parked near sources of heat, open 
flames, or similar sources of ignition or near open pits unless such 
pits are adequately ventilated.
    (f) Storage of containers awaiting use or resale--(1) Application. 
This paragraph shall apply to the storage of portable containers not in 
excess of 1,000 pounds water capacity, filled or partially filled, at 
user location but not connected for use, or in storage for resale by 
dealers or resellers. This paragraph shall not apply to containers 
stored at charging plants or at plants devoted primarily to the storage 
and distribution of LP-Gas or other petroleum products.
    (2) General. (i) Containers in storage shall be located so as to 
minimize exposure to excessive temperature rise,

[[Page 323]]

physical damage, or tampering by unauthorized persons.
    (ii) Containers when stored inside shall not be located near exits, 
stairways, or in areas normally used or intended for the safe exit of 
people.
    (iii) Container valves shall be protected while in storage as 
follows:
    (a) By setting into recess of container to prevent the possibility 
of their being struck if the container is dropped upon a flat surface, 
or
    (b) By ventilated cap or collar, fastened to container capable of 
withstanding blow from any direction equivalent to that of a 30-pound 
weight dropped 4 feet. Construction must be such that a blow will not be 
transmitted to a valve or other connection.
    (iv) The outlet valves of containers in storage shall be closed.
    (v) Empty containers which have been in LP-Gas service when stored 
inside, shall be considered as full containers for the purpose of 
determining the maximum quantity of LP-Gas permitted by this paragraph.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Storage within buildings not frequented by the public (such as 
industrial buildings). (i) The quantity of LP-Gas stored shall not 
exceed 300 pounds (approximately 2,550 cubic feet in vapor form) except 
as provided in subparagraph (5) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Containers carried as a part of service equipment on highway 
mobile vehicles are not to be considered in the total storage capacity 
in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph provided such vehicles are 
stored in private garages, and are limited to one container per vehicle 
with an LP-Gas capacity of not more than 100 pounds. All container 
valves shall be closed.
    (5) Storage within special buildings or rooms. (i) The quantity of 
LP-Gas stored in special buildings or rooms shall not exceed 10,000 
pounds.
    (ii) The walls, floors, and ceilings of container storage rooms that 
are within or adjacent to other parts of the building shall be 
constructed of material having at least a 2-hour fire resistance rating.
    (iii) A portion of the exterior walls or roof having an area not 
less than 10 percent of that of the combined area of the enclosing walls 
and roof shall be of explosion relieving construction.
    (iv) Each opening from such storage rooms to other parts of the 
building shall be protected by a 1\1/2\ hour (B) fire door listed by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for 
definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (v) Such rooms shall have no open flames for heating or lighting.
    (vi) Such rooms shall be adequately ventilated both top and bottom 
to the outside only. The openings from such vents shall be at least 5 
feet away from any other opening into any building.
    (vii) The floors of such rooms shall not be below ground level. Any 
space below the floor shall be of solid fill or properly ventilated to 
the open air.
    (viii) Such storage rooms shall not be located adjoining the line of 
property occupied by schools, churches, hospitals, athletic fields or 
other points of public gathering.
    (ix) Fixed electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance 
with paragraph (b)(18) of this section.
    (6) Storage outside of buildings. (i) Storage outside of buildings, 
for containers awaiting use or resale, shall be located in accordance 
with Table H-33 with respect to:
    (a) The nearest important building or group of buildings;
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Busy thoroughfares;

                               Table H-33
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Quantity of LP-Gas Stored                    Distance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
500 pounds or less..........................................           0
501 to 2,500 pounds.........................................       \1\ 0
2,501 to 6,000 pounds.......................................     10 feet
6,001 to 10,000 pounds......................................     20 feet
Over 10,000 pounds..........................................     25 feet
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Container or containers shall be at least 10 feet from any building
  on adjoining property, any sidewalk, or any of the exposures described
  in Sec.  1910.110(f)(6)(i) (c) or (d) of this paragraph.

    (ii) Containers shall be in a suitable enclosure or otherwise 
protected against tampering.
    (7) Fire protection. Storage locations other than supply depots 
separated and located apart from dealer, reseller, or user 
establishments shall be provided with at least one approved portable 
fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 8-B, C.
    (g) [Reserved]

[[Page 324]]

    (h) Liquefied petroleum gas service stations--(1) Application. This 
paragraph applies to storage containers, and dispensing devices, and 
pertinent equipment in service stations where LP-Gas is stored and is 
dispensed into fuel tanks of motor vehicles. See paragraph (e) of this 
section for requirements covering use of LP-Gas as a motor fuel. All 
requirements of paragraph (b) of this section apply to this paragraph 
unless otherwise noted.
    (2) Design pressure and classification of storage containers. 
Storage containers shall be designed and classified in accordance with 
Table H-34.

                               Table H-34
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Minimum design pressure of
                                       container, lb. per sq. in. gage
                                   -------------------------------------
                   For gases with                   1949 edition of ASME
                  vapor press. Not                  Code (Par. U-200, U-
                    to exceed lb.      1949 and       201); 1950, 1952,
 Container type   per sq. in. gage      earlier       1956, 1959, 1962,
                   at 100 deg. F.     editions of      1965, and 1968
                   (37.8 deg. C.)      ASME Code        (Division 1)
                                    (Par. U-68, U-    editions of ASME
                                          69)        Code; All editions
                                                    of API-ASME Code \2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 200.........           215              200                   250
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Container type may be increased by increments of 25. The minimum
  design pressure of containers shall be 100 percent of the container
  type designation when constructed under 1949 or earlier editions of
  the ASME Code (Par. U-68 and U-69). The minimum design pressure of
  containers shall be 125 percent of the container type designation when
  constructed under: (1) The 1949 ASME Code (Paragraphs U-200 and U-
  201), (2) 1950, 1952, 1956, 1959, 1962, 1965, and 1968 (Division 1)
  editions of the ASME Code, and (3) all editions of the API-ASME Code.
\2\ Construction of containers under the API-ASME Code is not authorized
  after July 1, 1961.

    (3) Container valves and accessories. (i) A filling connection on 
the container shall be fitted with one of the following:
    (a) A combination back-pressure check and excess flow valve.
    (b) One double or two single back-pressure valves.
    (c) A positive shutoff valve, in conjunction with either,
    (1) An internal back-pressure valve, or
    (2) On internal excess flow valve.

In lieu of an excess flow valve, filling connections may be fitted with 
a quick-closing internal valve, which shall remain closed except during 
operating periods. The mechanism for such valves may be provided with a 
secondary control which will cause it to close automatically in case of 
fire. When a fusible plug is used its melting point shall not exceed 
220 deg. F.
    (ii) A filling pipe inlet terminal not on the container shall be 
fitted with a positive shutoff valve in conjunction with either;
    (a) A black pressure check valve, or
    (b) An excess flow check valve.
    (iii) All openings in the container except those listed below shall 
be equipped with approved excess flow check valves:
    (a) Filling connections as provided in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph.
    (b) Safety relief connections as provided in paragraph (b)(7)(ii) of 
this section.
    (c) Liquid-level gaging devices as provided in paragraphs (b)(7)(iv) 
and (19)(iv) of this section.
    (d) Pressure gage connections as provided in paragraph (b)(7)(v) of 
this section.
    (iv) All container inlets and outlets except those listed below 
shall be labeled to designate whether they connect with vapor or liquid 
(labels may be on valves):
    (a) Safety relief valves.
    (b) Liquid-level gaging devices.
    (c) Pressure gages.
    (v) Each storage container shall be provided with a suitable 
pressure gage.
    (4) Safety-relief valves. (i) All safety-relief devices shall be 
installed as follows:
    (a) On the container and directly connected with the vapor space.
    (b) Safety-relief valves and discharge piping shall be protected 
against physical damage. The outlet shall be provided with loose-fitting 
rain caps. There shall be no return bends or restrictions in the 
discharge piping.
    (c) The discharge from two or more safety relief valves having the 
same pressure settings may be run into a common discharge header. The 
cross-sectional area of such header shall be at least equal to the sum 
of the cross-sectional areas of the individual discharges.
    (d) Discharge from any safety relief device shall not terminate in 
any building nor beneath any building.
    (ii) Aboveground containers shall be provided with safety relief 
valves as follows:

[[Page 325]]

    (a) The rate of discharge, which may be provided by one or more 
valves, shall be not less than that specified in paragraph (b)(10)(ii) 
of this section.
    (b) The discharge from safety relief valves shall be vented to the 
open air unobstructed and vertically upwards in such a manner as to 
prevent any impingement of escaping gas upon the container; loose-
fitting rain caps shall be used. On a container having a water capacity 
greater than 2,000 gallons, the discharge from the safety relief valves 
shall be vented away from the container vertically upwards to a point at 
least 7 feet above the container. Suitable provisions shall be made so 
that any liquid or condensate that may accumulate inside of the relief 
valve or its discharge pipe will not render the valve inoperative. If a 
drain is used, a means shall be provided to protect the container, 
adjacent containers, piping, or equipment against impingement of flame 
resulting from ignition of the product escaping from the drain.
    (iii) Underground containers shall be provided with safety relief 
valves as follows:
    (a) The discharge from safety-relief valves shall be piped 
vertically upward to a point at least 10 feet above the ground. The 
discharge lines or pipes shall be adequately supported and protected 
against physical damage.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) If no liquid is put into a container until after it is buried 
and covered, the rate of discharge of the relief valves may be reduced 
to not less than 30 percent of the rate shown in paragraph (b)(10)(ii) 
of this section. If liquid fuel is present during installation of 
containers, the rate of discharge shall be the same as for aboveground 
containers. Such containers shall not be uncovered until emptied of 
liquid fuel.
    (5) Capacity of liquid containers. Individual liquid storage 
containers shall not exceed 30,000 gallons water capacity.
    (6) Installation of storage containers. (i)(a) Each storage 
container used exclusively in service station operation shall comply 
with the following table which specifies minimum distances to a building 
and groups of buildings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Minimum distances
                                               -------------------------
                                                Aboveground    Between
    Water capacity per container (gallons)          and      aboveground
                                                underground   containers
                                                   (feet)       (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up to 2,000...................................           25            3
Over 2,000....................................           50            5
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: The above distances may be reduced to not less than 10 feet for
  service station buildings of other than wood frame construction.

    (b) Readily ignitible material including weeds and long dry grass, 
shall be removed within 10 feet of containers.
    (c) The minimum separation between LP-Gas containers and flammable 
liquid tanks shall be 20 feet and the minimum separation between a 
container and the centerline of the dike shall be 10 feet.
    (d) LP-Gas containers located near flammable liquid containers shall 
be protected against the flow or accumulation of flammable liquids by 
diking, diversion curbs, or grading.
    (e) LP-Gas containers shall not be located within diked areas for 
flammable liquid containers.
    (f) Field welding is permitted only on saddle plates or brackets 
which were applied by the container manufacturer.
    (g) When permanently installed containers are interconnected, 
provision shall be made to compensate for expansion, contraction, 
vibration, and settling of containers and interconnecting piping. Where 
flexible connections are used, they shall be of an approved type and 
shall be designed for a bursting pressure of not less than five times 
the vapor pressure of the product at 100 deg. F. The use of nonmetallic 
hose is prohibited for interconnecting such containers.
    (h) Where high water table or flood conditions may be encountered 
protection against container flotation shall be provided.
    (ii) Aboveground containers shall be installed in accordance with 
this subdivision.
    (a) Containers may be installed horizontally or vertically.
    (b) Containers shall be protected by crash rails or guards to 
prevent physical damage unless they are so protected by virtue of their 
location. Vehicles shall not be serviced within 10 feet of containers.

[[Page 326]]

    (c) Container foundations shall be of substantial masonry or other 
noncombustible material. Containers shall be mounted on saddles which 
shall permit expansion and contraction, and shall provide against the 
excessive concentration of stresses. Corrosion protection shall be 
provided for tank-mounting areas. Structural metal container supports 
shall be protected against fire. This protection is not required on 
prefabricated storage and pump assemblies, mounted on a common base, 
with container bottom not more than 24 inches above ground and whose 
water capacity is 2,000 gallons or less if the piping connected to the 
storage and pump assembly is sufficiently flexible to minimize the 
possibility of breakage or leakage in the event of failure of the 
container supports.
    (iii) Underground containers shall be installed in accordance with 
this subdivision.
    (a) Containers shall be given a protective coating before being 
placed under ground. This coating shall be equivalent to hot-dip 
galvanizing or to two coatings of red lead followed by a heavy coating 
of coal tar or asphalt. In lowering the container into place, care shall 
be exercised to minimize abrasion or other damage to the coating. Damage 
to the coating shall be repaired before back-filling.
    (b) Containers shall be set on a firm foundation (firm earth may be 
used) and surrounded with earth or sand firmly tamped in place. Backfill 
should be free of rocks or other abrasive materials.
    (c) A minimum of 2 feet of earth cover shall be provided. Where 
ground conditions make compliance with this requirement impractical, 
equivalent protection against physical damage shall be provided. The 
portion of the container to which manhole and other connections are 
attached need not be covered. If the location is subjected to vehicular 
traffic, containers shall be protected by a concrete slab or other cover 
adequate to prevent the weight of a loaded vehicle imposing concentrated 
direct loads on the container shell.
    (7) Protection of container fittings. Valves, regulators, gages, and 
other container fittings shall be protected against tampering and 
physical damage.
    (8) Transport truck unloading point. (i) During unloading, the 
transport truck shall not be parked on public thoroughfares and shall be 
at least 5 feet from storage containers, and shall be positioned so that 
shutoff valves are readily accessible.
    (ii) The filling pipe inlet terminal shall not be located within a 
building nor within 10 feet of any building or driveway. It shall be 
protected against physical damage.
    (9) Piping, valves, and fittings. (i) Piping may be underground, 
above ground, or a combination of both. It shall be well supported and 
protected against physical damage and corrosion.
    (ii) Piping laid beneath driveways shall be installed to prevent 
physical damage by vehicles.
    (iii) Piping shall be wrought iron or steel (black or galvanized), 
brass or copper pipe; or seamless copper, brass, or steel tubing and 
shall be suitable for a minimum pressure of 250 p.s.i.g. Pipe joints may 
be screwed, flanged, brazed, or welded. The use of aluminum alloy piping 
or tubing is prohibited.
    (iv) All shutoff valves (liquid or gas) shall be suitable for 
liquefied petroleum gas service and designed for not less than the 
maximum pressure to which they may be subjected. Valves which may be 
subjected to container pressure shall have a rated working pressure of 
at least 250 p.s.i.g.
    (v) All materials used for valve seats, packing, gaskets, 
diaphragms, etc., shall be resistant to the action of LP-Gas.
    (vi) Fittings shall be steel, malleable iron, or brass having a 
minimum working pressure of 250 p.s.i.g. Cast iron pipe fittings, such 
as ells, tees, and unions shall not be used.
    (vii) All piping shall be tested after assembly and proved free from 
leaks at not less than normal operating pressures.
    (viii) Provision shall be made for expansion, contraction, jarring, 
and vibration, and for settling. This may be accomplished by flexible 
connections.
    (10) Pumps and accessories. All pumps and accessory equipment shall 
be suitable for LP-Gas service, and designed

[[Page 327]]

for not less than the maximum pressure to which they may be subjected. 
Accessories shall have a minimum rated working pressure of 250 p.s.i.g. 
Positive displacement pumps shall be equipped with suitable pressure 
actuated bypass valves permitting flow from pump discharge to storage 
container or pump suction.
    (11) Dispensing devices. (i) Meters, vapor separators, valves, and 
fittings in the dispenser shall be suitable for LP-Gas service and shall 
be designed for a minimum working pressure of 250 p.s.i.g.
    (ii) Provisions shall be made for venting LP-Gas contained in a 
dispensing device to a safe location.
    (iii) Pumps used to transfer LP-Gas shall be equipped to allow 
control of the flow and to prevent leakage or accidental discharge. 
Means shall be provided outside the dispensing device to readily shut 
off the power in the event of fire or accident.
    (iv) A manual shutoff valve and an excess flow check valve shall be 
installed downstream of the pump and ahead of the dispenser inlet.
    (v)(a) Dispensing hose shall be resistant to the action of LP-Gas in 
the liquid phase and designed for a minimum bursting pressure of 1,250 
p.s.i.g.
    (b) An excess flow check valve or automatic shutoff valve shall be 
installed at the terminus of the liquid line at the point of attachment 
of the dispensing hose.
    (vi)(a) LP-Gas dispensing devices shall be located not less than 10 
feet from aboveground storage containers greater than 2,000 gallons 
water capacity. The dispensing devices shall not be less than 20 feet 
from any building (not including canopies), basement, cellar, pit, or 
line of adjoining property which may be built upon and not less than 10 
feet from sidewalks, streets, or thoroughfares. No drains or blowoff 
lines shall be directed into or in proximity to the sewer systems used 
for other purposes.
    (b) LP-Gas dispensing devices shall be installed on a concrete 
foundation or as part of a complete storage and dispensing assembly 
mounted on a common base, and shall be adequately protected from 
physical damage.
    (c) LP-Gas dispensing devices shall not be installed within a 
building except that they may be located under a weather shelter or 
canopy provided this area is not enclosed on more than two sides. If the 
enclosing sides are adjacent to each other, the area shall be properly 
ventilated.
    (vii) The dispensing of LP-Gas into the fuel container of a vehicle 
shall be performed by a competent attendant who shall remain at the LP-
Gas dispenser during the entire transfer operation.
    (12) Additional rules. There shall be no smoking on the driveway of 
service stations in the dispensing areas or transport truck unloading 
areas. Conspicuous signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted within 
sight of the customer being served. Letters on such signs shall be not 
less than 4 inches high. The motors of all vehicles being fueled shall 
be shut off during the fueling operations.
    (13) Electrical. Electrical equipment and installations shall 
conform to paragraphs (b) (17) and (18) of this section.
    (14) Fire protection. Each service station shall be provided with at 
least one approved portable fire extinguisher having at least an 8-B, C, 
rating.
    (i) Scope--(1) Application. (i) Paragraph (b) of this section 
applies to installations made in accordance with the requirements of 
paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (g), and (h) of this section, except as noted 
in each of those paragraphs.
    (ii) Paragraphs (c) through (h) of this section apply as provided in 
each of those paragraphs.
    (2) Inapplicability. This section does not apply to:
    (i) Marine and pipeline terminals, natural gas processing plants, 
refineries, or tank farms other than those at industrial sites.
    (ii) LP-Gas refrigerated storage systems;
    (iii) LP-Gas when used with oxygen. The requirements of 
Sec. 1910.253 shall apply to such use;
    (iv) LP-Gas when used in utility gas plants. The National Fire 
Protection Association Standard for the Storage and Handling of 
Liquefied Petroleum Gases at Utility Gas Plants, NFPA No. 59-1968, shall 
apply to such use;

[[Page 328]]

    (v) Low-pressure (not in excess of one-half pound per square inch or 
14 inches water column) LP-Gas piping systems, and the installation and 
operation of residential and commercial appliances including their inlet 
connections, supplied through such systems. For such systems, the 
National Fire Protection Association Standard for the Installation of 
Gas Appliances and Gas Piping, NFPA 54-1969 shall apply.
    (3) Retroactivity. Unless otherwise stated, it is not intended that 
the provisions of this section be retroactive.
    (i) Existing plants, appliances, equipment, buildings, structures, 
and installations for the storage, handling or use of LP-Gas, which were 
in compliance with the current provisions of the National Fire 
Protection Association Standard for the Storage and Handling of 
Liquefied Petroleum Gases NFPA No. 58, at the time of manufacture or 
installation may be continued in use, if such continued use does not 
constitute a recognized hazard that is causing or is likely to cause 
death or serious physical harm to employees.
    (ii) Stocks of equipment and appliances on hand in such locations as 
manufacturers' storage, distribution warehouses, and dealers' storage 
and showrooms, which were in compliance with the current provisions of 
the National Fire Protection Association Standard for the Storage and 
Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, NFPA No. 58, at the time of 
manufacture, may be placed in service, if such use does not constitute a 
recognized hazard that is causing or is likely to cause death or serious 
physical harm to employees.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49747, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 53 FR 12122, Apr. 12, 1988; 55 FR 25094, June 
20, 1990; 55 FR 32015, Aug. 6, 1990; 58 FR 35309, June 30, 1993; 61 FR 
9237, 9238, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.110 
was amended by removing paragraphs (b)(15)(vi) through (b)(15)(viii) and 
redesignating paragraph (b)(15)(ix) as (b)(15)(vi); removing paragraphs 
(c)(2)(ii) through (c)(2)(iv) and redesignating paragraph (c)(2)(i) as 
(c)(2); and removing and reserving paragraphs (e)(10) and (g), effective 
Aug. 17, 1998. For the convenience of the user, the superseded text is 
set forth as follows:

Sec. 1910.110  Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases.

                                * * * * *

    (b) * * *
    (15)* * *
    (vi) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(15)(vii) of this section, 
when the size (diameter) of the loading or unloading hoses and/or piping 
is reduced below the size of the tank car or transport truck loading or 
unloading connections, the adaptors to which lines are attached shall be 
equipped with either a backflow check valve, a properly sized excess 
flow valve, or shutoff valve with means of remote closing, to protect 
against uncontrolled discharge from the tank car or transport truck.
    (vii) The requirement of paragraph (b)(15)(vi) of this section shall 
not apply if the tank car or transport is equipped with a quick-closing 
internal valve that can be remotely closed.
    (viii) The tank car or transport truck loading or unloading point 
shall be located with due consideration to the following:
    (a) Proximity to railroads and highway traffic.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) With respect to buildings on installer's property.
    (d) Nature of occupancy.
    (e) Topography.
    (f) Type of construction of buildings.
    (g) Number of tank cars or transport trucks that may be safely 
loaded or unloaded at one time.
    (h) Frequency of loading or unloading.

                                * * * * *

    (c) * * *
    (2) * * *
    (ii) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of this section 
each container shall be marked with its water capacity in pounds or 
other identified unit of weight.
    (iii) If a container is filled and maintained only by the owner or 
his representative and if the water capacity of each container is 
identified by a code, compliance with paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this 
section is not required.
    (iv) Each container shall be marked with its tare weight in pounds 
or other identified unit of weight including all permanently attached 
fittings but not the cap.

                                * * * * *

    (e) * * *
    (10) Capacity of containers. No single fuel container used on 
passenger carrying vehicles shall exceed 200 gallons water capacity. No 
single fuel container on other vehicles

[[Page 329]]

normally operating on the highway shall exceed 300 gallons water 
capacity except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section.

                                * * * * *

    (g) LP-Gas system installations on commercial vehicles--(1) 
Application. This paragraph applies to LP-Gas-system installations on 
vehicles (whether self-propelled or of the trailer or semitrailer type) 
used for commercial, construction, to all exchangeable container systems 
with container capacities greater than 105 pounds water capacity 
(approximately 45 pounds LP-Gas capacity) and to systems using 
containers permanently mounted on vehicles. It does not apply to LP-Gas 
motor fuel systems covered by paragraph (e) of this section. Paragraph 
(b) of this section applies to this paragraph unless otherwise noted. 
When such a vehicle is permanently parked, and LP-Gas is supplied from a 
system not mounted on and secured to the unit, paragraphs (c) and (d) of 
this section shall apply.
    (2) Construction and marking of containers. Containers shall be 
constructed in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section, and 
marked in accordance with the applicable requirements of paragraph 
(b)(5) of this section, and shall also meet the following:
    (i) Containers designed for use as portable cylinders shall be 
constructed in accordance with DOT specifications, and in accordance 
with paragraph (b)(3)(v) of this section; where applicable.
    (ii) All other containers whether designed for permanent mounting, 
or for portable or semiportable use (such as skid tanks), shall be 
constructed as provided for by paragraphs (b)(3) (i) and (iv) of this 
section. Mounting, securing, and protection of such containers shall be 
as in paragraphs (g)(2) (iii) and (iv) of this section.
    (iii) Permanently installed containers shall meet the requirements 
of paragraph (g)(2)(iii)(a) of this section with regard to container 
valves and accessories, and paragraph (g)(2)(iii)(b) of this subdivision 
as to mounting.
    (a)(1) Nonrecessed container fittings and appurtenances shall be 
protected against damage by either:
    (i) Their location.
    (ii) The vehicle frame or bumper, or
    (iii) A protective housing. The protective housing, if used, shall 
comply with the requirements under which the tanks are fabricated with 
respect to design and construction and shall be designed to withstand 
static loadings in any direction equal to twice the weight of the tank 
and attachments when filled with the lading using a safety factor of not 
less than four, based on the ultimate strength of the material to be 
used. The housing shall be provided with a weather cover if necessary to 
insure proper operation of valves and safety devices.
    (2) Manually operated shutoff valves, except as covered in paragraph 
(e)(2)(i) of this section, or self-closing internal valves shall be 
closed except during transfer operations.
    (b)(1) Tank motor vehicles with frames not made integral with the 
tank, as by welding, shall be provided with turnbuckles or similar 
positive devices for drawing the tank down tight on the frame. In 
addition, suitable stops or anchors shall be attached to the frame and/
or the tank to prevent relative motion between them due to starting, 
stopping, and turning. The stops and anchors shall be so installed as to 
be readily accessible for inspection and maintenance.
    (2) Any tank motor vehicle designed and constructed so that the 
cargo tank constitutes in whole or in part the stress member used in 
lieu of a frame shall be supported by external cradles subtending at 
least 120 degrees of the shell circumference. The design calculations 
shall include beam stress, shear stress, torsion stress, bending moment, 
and acceleration stress for the cargo tank as a whole using a factor of 
safety of four, based on the ultimate tensile strength of the material. 
Maximum concentrated stresses which might be created at pads and cradles 
due to shear, bending, and torsion shall also be calculated in 
accordance with appendix G of the American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, Unfired Pressure Vessel Code, 1968. Fully loaded vehicles 
shall be assumed to be operating under highway conditions equal to two 
``g'' loading. The effects of fatigue shall be taken into consideration. 
Cargo tanks mounted on frames may be supported by longitudinal members 
attached to pads providing the above-stated factors are taken into 
account.
    (3) Where any tank support is attached to any part of a tank head, 
the stresses imposed upon the head shall be provided for as required in 
paragraph (g)(2)(iii)(2) of this section.
    (4) Tank supports, stops, anchors, and bumpers shall not be welded 
directly to the tank but shall be attached by means of pads of the same 
material as the tank. The pad thickness shall be not less than one-
fourth inch, or the thickness of the shell material if less, and no 
greater than the shell material. Each pad shall extend at least four 
times its thickness, in each direction, beyond the weld attaching the 
support, bumper, stop, or anchor. Each pad shall be preformed to an 
inside radius no greater than the outside radius of the tank at the 
place of attachment. Each pad corner shall be rounded to a radius at 
least one-fourth the width of the pad, and no greater than one-half the 
width of the pad. Weepholes and telltale holes, if used, shall be 
drilled or punched before the pads are attached to the tank. Each pad 
shall be attached to the tank by continuous fillet

[[Page 330]]

welding using filler material having properties conforming to the 
recommendations of the maker of the shell and head material.
    (iv) Portable or semiportable containers (skid tanks as covered by 
paragraph (d)(7)(vii) of this section) shall meet the applicable 
requirements of (a) to (f) of this paragraph inclusive with regard to 
container valves and accessories and paragraph (e)(4)(iii) of this 
section as to mounting. Containers designed for permanent installation 
as part of systems under paragraph (d) of this section shall not be 
used.
    (a) Nonrecessed container fittings and appurtenances shall be 
protected against damage by either:
    (1) Their location.
    (2) The vehicle frame or bumper, or
    (3) A protective housing. The protective housing, if used, shall 
comply with the requirements under which the tanks are fabricated with 
respect to design and construction and shall be designed to withstand 
static loadings in any direction equal to twice the weight of the tank 
and attachments when filled with the lading using a safety factor of not 
less than four, based on the ultimate strength of the material to be 
used. The housing shall be provided with a weather cover if necessary to 
insure proper operation of valves and safety devices.
    (b) Filling connections shall be provided with approved automatic 
back pressure check valves, excess flow check valves or quick closing 
internal valves to prevent excessive escape of gas in case the filling 
connection is broken, except that where the filling and discharge 
connect on a common opening in the container shell, and that opening is 
fitted with a quick-closing internal valve as specified in paragraph 
(g)(2)(iv)(c) of this section, the automatic valve shall not be 
required. In addition every inlet and outlet connection shall be 
equipped with a manually or automatically operated shutoff valve. Liquid 
discharge openings, except those for engine fuel lines, on tanks built 
after September 1, 1965, shall be fitted with a remotely controlled 
internal shutoff valve. Such valve shall conform to the following 
requirements:
    (1) The seat of the valve shall be inside the tank, or in the 
opening nozzle or flange, or in a companion flange bolted to the nozzle 
or flange.
    (2) All parts of the valve inside the tank, nozzle, or companion 
flange shall be made of material not subject to corrosion or other 
deterioration in the presence of the lading.
    (3) The arrangement of parts shall be such that damage to parts 
exterior to the tank will not prevent effective seating of the valve.
    (4) The valve may be operated normally by mechanical means, by 
hydraulic means, or by air, or gas pressure.
    (5) The valve shall be provided with remote means of automatic 
closure, both mechanical and thermal, in at least two places for tanks 
over 3,500 gallons water capacity. These remote control stations shall 
be located at each end of the tank and diagonally opposite each other. 
The thermal control mechanism shall have a fusible element with a 
melting point not over 220 deg. F. or less than 208 deg. F. At least one 
remote control station shall be provided for tanks of 3,500 gallons 
water capacity or less, and such actuating means may be mechanical.
    (c) All other connections to containers, except those used for 
gaging devices, thermometer wells, safety relief devices, and plugged 
openings, shall be provided with suitable automatic excess flow valves, 
or in lieu thereof may be fitted with quick-closing internal valves.

The control mechanism for the internal valve shall be provided with a 
secondary control, remote from the fill or discharge connections (for 
use in the event of accidents or fire during delivery operations), and 
such control mechanism shall have a fusible element with a melting point 
not over 220 deg. F. or less than 208 deg. F.
    (d) Manually operated shutoff valves, except as covered in 
paragraphs (e)(2)(i) of this section, or self-closing internal valves 
shall be closed except during transfer operations.
    (e) Excess flow valves shall close automatically at the rated flow 
of vapor or liquid as specified by the valve manufacturers. The flow 
rating of the piping beyond the excess flow valve shall be greater than 
that of the excess flow valve and such rating shall include valves, 
fittings, and hose, except, when branching or necessary restrictions are 
incorporated in such a piping system so that flow ratings are less than 
that of the excess flow valve at the tank, then additional excess flow 
valves shall be installed in the piping where such flow rate is reduced.
    (f) Container inlets and outlets, except those used for safety 
relief valves, liquid-level gaging devices, and pressure gages, shall be 
labeled to designate whether they communicate with vapor or liquid space 
when the container is filled to maximum permitted filling density. 
Labels may be on valves.
    (3) Capacity of a system. No single fuel container used on passenger 
carrying vehicles shall exceed 200 gallons water capacity.
    (4) Description of a system. A system consists of an assembly of 
equipment installed on a commercial vehicle.
    (5) Location of containers and systems. (i) Containers shall not be 
installed, transported, or stored (even temporarily) inside any vehicle 
covered by this paragraph except as provided by the applicable 
regulations of DOT.
    (ii) Containers, control valves, and regulating equipment comprising 
a complete system

[[Page 331]]

shall be suitably protected against damage and weather. Systems may be 
installed in a recess vaportight to the inside of the vehicle and 
accessible from and vented to the outside.
    (iii) Systems installed outside of mobile units shall be so located 
that discharge from safety relief devices shall be not less than 3 feet 
horizontally away from any opening into the unit below the level of such 
discharge. When the system is located in a recess vaportight to the 
inside, vent openings in such recess shall be not less than 3 feet 
horizontally away from any opening into the mobile unit below the level 
of these vents.
    (iv) There shall be no fuel connection between tractor and trailer 
or other vehicle units.
    (v) The container or container carrier shall be secured in place by 
fastenings designed and constructed with a minimum safety factor of four 
to withstand loading in any direction equal to twice the weight of the 
container when filled to normal capacity with LP-Gas.
    (6) Container valves and accessories. Container valves and 
accessories shall be provided, protected and mounted as follows:
    (i) Systems utilizing DOT cylinders in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(6) of this section.
    (ii) All other systems in accordance with paragraph (d)(3)(ii) 
through (vii) of this section.
    (iii) Portable, semiportable and permanently mounted containers 
shall be mounted and protected as provided under paragraph (g)(2)(ii) 
through (iv) of this section.
    (7) Safety-relief devices. (i) DOT containers shall be provided with 
safety-relief devices as required by the regulations of DOT.
    (ii) ASME containers and API-ASME containers shall be provided with 
safety-relief devices as required by paragraph (b)(10) of this section.
    (iii)(a) A final stage regulator of an LP-Gas system (excluding any 
appliance regulator) shall be equipped on the low-pressure side with a 
relief valve which is set to start to discharge within the limits 
specified in Table H-30.
    (b) The relief valve and space above the regulator and relief valve 
diaphragms shall be vented to the outside air and terminate at a 
position to minimize the possibility of vapors accumulating at sources 
of ignition.
    (iv) Whenever equipment such as a cargo heater or cooler on 
commercial vehicles is a type designed to be in operation while in 
transit, suitable means to stop the flow such as an excess flow valve or 
other device, shall be installed. This device will be actuated to stop 
the flow in the event of a break in the fuel supply line. All excess 
flow valves shall comply with paragraph (b)(7)(iii) of this section.
    (8) System design and line pressure. Systems may be of either vapor 
withdrawal or liquid withdrawal type and shall comply with the 
applicable requirements for the type of usage involved.
    (9) System enclosure and mounting. (i) Housing or enclosures shall 
be designed to provide proper ventilation.
    (ii) Hoods, domes, or removable portions of cabinets shall be 
provided with means to keep them firmly in place during transit.
    (iii) Provision shall be incorporated in the assembly to hold the 
containers firmly in position and prevent their movement during transit 
in accordance with paragraph (e)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (iv) Containers shall be mounted on a substantial support or base 
secured firmly to the vehicle chassis. Neither the container nor its 
support shall extend below the frame.
    (10) Piping--including pipe, tubing, and fittings. (i) Regulators 
shall be connected directly to the container valve outlet or mounted 
securely by means of a support bracket and connected to the container 
valve or valves with a listed high pressure flexible connector.
    (ii) Provision shall be made between the regulator outlet and the 
gas service lines by either a flexible connector or a tubing loop to 
provide for expansion, contraction, jarring, and vibration.
    (iii) Pipe, tubing, and fittings shall conform to paragraph (b)(8) 
of this section except that the use of aluminum alloy piping is 
prohibited. Steel tubing shall have a minimum wall thickness of 0.049 
inch. Steel piping or tubing shall be adequately protected against 
exterior corrosion.
    (iv) Approved gas tubing fittings shall be employed for making 
tubing connections.
    (v) The fuel line shall be firmly fastened in a protected location 
and where under the vehicle and outside and below any insulation or 
false bottom, fastenings shall be such as to prevent abrasion or damage 
to the gasline due to vibration. Where the fuel line passes through 
structural members or floors, a rubber grommet or equivalent shall be 
installed to prevent chafing.
    (vi) The fuel line shall be installed to enter the vehicle through 
the floor directly beneath or adjacent to the appliance which it serves. 
When a branch line is required the tee connection shall be in the main 
fuel line and located under the floor and outside the vehicle.
    (vii) All parts of the system assembly shall be so designed and 
secured as to preclude such parts working loose during transit.
    (11) Appliances. (i) LP-Gas appliances shall be approved for use on 
commercial vehicles.
    (ii) In the case of vehicles not intended for human occupancy and 
where the gas-fired heating appliance is used to protect the cargo, such 
heater may be of the unvented

[[Page 332]]

type but provision shall be made to dispose of the products of 
combustion to the outside.
    (iii) In the case of vehicles intended for human occupancy, all gas-
fired heating appliances, including water heaters, shall be designed or 
installed to provide for complete separation of the combustion system 
from the atmosphere of the living space. Such appliances shall be 
installed with the combustion air inlet assembly furnished as a 
component of the appliance and, also, with either:
    (a) The flue gas outlet assembly furnished as a component of the 
appliance, or
    (b) A listed roof jack if the appliance is listed for such use.

The combustion air inlet assembly, flue gas outlet assembly, and roof 
jack shall extend to the outside atmosphere.
    (iv) Provision shall be made to insure an adequate supply of outside 
air for combustion.
    (v) All gas-fired heating appliances and water heaters shall be 
equipped with an approved automatic device designed to shut off the flow 
of gas to the main burner and to the pilot in the event the pilot flame 
is extinguished.
    (vi) Gas-fired appliances installed in the cargo space shall be 
located so they are readily accessible.
    (vii) Appliances shall be constructed or protected to reduce to a 
minimum possible damage or impaired operation resulting from cargo 
shifting or handling.
    (viii) Appliances inside the vehicle shall be located so that a fire 
at an appliance will not block egress of persons therefrom.
    (12) General precautions. (i) DOT containers shall be marked, 
maintained, and requalified for use in accordance with the regulations 
of DOT.
    (ii) Requalification of containers for continued service is the 
responsibility of the owner; containers shall be stamped with the date 
of requalification. When DOT cylinders are requalified by retesting, 
such retest shall be made in accordance with DOT regulations.
    (iii) Containers shall not be charged with fuel unless they bear the 
proper markings of the code or specifications under which they were 
constructed, and in addition, with their water capacity. In the case of 
cylinders or portable containers filled by weight, the container shall 
be marked with its tareweight.
    (iv) DOT containers which have been involved in a fire shall not be 
recharged until they have been requalified for service according to DOT 
regulations.
    (v) American Petroleum Institute-American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers (API-ASME) containers or ASME containers which have been 
involved in a fire shall not be recharged until they have been retested 
in accordance with the requirements for their original hydrostatic test 
and found to be suitable for continued service.
    (vi) Containers shall not be charged without the consent of the 
owner.
    (vii) A permanent caution plate shall be provided on the appliance 
or adjacent to the container outside of any enclosure. It shall include 
the word ``Caution'' and following instructions, or instructions 
embodying substantially similar language.
    (a) Be sure all appliance valves are closed before opening container 
valve.
    (b) Connections at appliances, regulators, and containers must be 
checked periodically for leaks with soapy water or its equivalent.
    (c) Never use a match or flame to check for leaks.
    (d) Container valves must be closed when the equipment is not in 
use.
    (13) Charging of containers. Containers shall be charged as provided 
in paragraph (b)(12) of this section.
    (14) Fire extinguisher. Mobile cook-units shall be provided with at 
least one approved portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 
8-B.C.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 1910.111  Storage and handling of anhydrous ammonia.

    (a) General--(1) Scope. (i) This standard is intended to apply to 
the design, construction, location, installation, and operation of 
anhydrous ammonia systems including refrigerated ammonia storage 
systems.
    (ii) This standard does not apply to:
    (a) Ammonia manufacturing plants.
    (b) Refrigeration plants where ammonia is used solely as a 
refrigerant.
    (2) Definitions. As used in this section.
    (i) Appurtenances. All devices such as pumps, compressors, safety 
relief devices, liquid-level gaging devices, valves and pressure gages.
    (ii) Cylinder. A container of 1,000 pounds of water capacity or less 
constructed in accordance with Department of Transportation 
specifications.
    (iii) Code. The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, 
Unfired Pressure Vessels of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
(ASME)--1968.
    (iv) Container. Includes all vessels, tanks, cylinders, or spheres 
used for transportation, storage, or application of anhydrous ammonia.
    (v) DOT. U.S. Department of Transportation.

[[Page 333]]

    (vi) Design pressure is identical to the term Maximum Allowable 
Working Pressure used in the Code.
    (vii) Farm vehicle (implement of husbandry). A vehicle for use on a 
farm on which is mounted a container of not over 1,200 gallons water 
capacity.
    (viii) Filling density. the percent ratio of the weight of the gas 
in a container to the weight of water at 60 deg. F. that the container 
will hold.
    (ix) Gas. Anhydrous ammonia in either the gaseous or liquefied 
state.
    (x) Gas masks. Gas masks must be approved by the National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) under 42 CFR part 84 for use 
with anhydrous ammonia.
    (xi) Capacity. Total volume of the container in standard U.S. 
gallons.
    (xii) DOT specifications--Regulations of the Department of 
Transportation published in 49 CFR Chapter I.
    (b) Basic rules. This paragraph applies to all paragraphs of this 
section unless otherwise noted.
    (1) Approval of equipment and systems. Each appurtenance shall be 
approved in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) (i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) 
of this section.
    (i) It was installed before February 8, 1973, and was approved, 
tested, and installed in accordance with either the provisions of the 
American National Standard for the Storage and Handling of Anhydrous 
Ammonia, K61.1, or the Fertilizer Institute Standards for the Storage 
and Handling of Agricultural Anhydrous Ammonia, M-1, (both of which are 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6) in effect at the 
time of installation; or
    (ii) It is accepted, or certified, or listed, or labeled, or 
otherwise determined to be safe by a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory; or
    (iii) It is a type which no nationally recognized testing laboratory 
does, or will undertake to, accept, certify, list, label, or determine 
to be safe; and such equipment is inspected or tested by any Federal, 
State, municipal, or other local authority responsible for enforcing 
occupational safety provisions of a Federal, State, municipal or other 
local law, code, or regulation pertaining to the storage, handling, 
transport, and use of anhydrous ammonia, and found to be in compliance 
with either the provisions of the American National Standard for the 
Storage and Handling of Anhydrous Ammonia, K61.1, or the Fertilizer 
Institute Standards for the Storage and Handling of Agricultural 
Anhydrous Ammonia, M-1, in effect at the time of installation; or
    (iv) It is a custom-designed and custom-built unit, which no 
nationally recognized testing laboratory, or Federal, State, municipal 
or local authority responsible for the enforcement of a Federal, State, 
municipal, or local law, code or regulation pertaining to the storage, 
transportation and use of anhydrous ammonia is willing to undertake to 
accept, certify, list, label or determine to be safe, and the employer 
has on file a document attesting to its safe condition following the 
conduct of appropriate tests. The document shall be signed by a 
registered professional engineer or other person having special training 
or experience sufficient to permit him to form an opinion as to safety 
of the unit involved. The document shall set forth the test bases, test 
data and results, and also the qualifications of the certifying person.
    (v) For the purposes of this paragraph (b)(1), the word listed means 
that equipment is of a kind mentioned in a list which is published by a 
nationally recognized laboratory which makes periodic inspection of the 
production of such equipment, and states such equipment meets nationally 
recognized standards or has been tested and found safe for use in a 
specified manner. Labeled means there is attached to it a label, symbol, 
or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory 
which, makes periodic inspections of the production of such equipment, 
and whose labeling indicates compliance with nationally recognized 
standards or tests to determine safe use in a specified manner. 
Certified means it has been tested and found by a nationally recognized 
testing laboratory to meet nationally recognized standards or to be safe 
for use in a specified manner, or is of a kind whose production is 
periodically inspected by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, 
and it bears a label, tag, or other record of certification.

[[Page 334]]

    (vi) For the purposes of this paragraph (b)(1), refer to Sec. 1910.7 
for definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (2) Requirements for construction, original test and requalification 
of nonrefrigerated containers. (i) Containers used with systems covered 
in paragraphs (c), (f), (g), and (h) of this section shall be 
constructed and tested in accordance with the Code except that 
construction under Table UW12 at a basic joint efficiency of under 80 
percent is not authorized.
    (ii) Containers built according to the Code do not have to comply 
with Paragraphs UG125 to UG128 inclusive, and Paragraphs UG132 and UG133 
of the Code.
    (iii) Containers exceeding 36 inches in diameter or 250 gallons 
water capacity shall be constructed to comply with one or more of the 
following:
    (a) Containers shall be stress relieved after fabrication in 
accordance with the Code, or
    (b) Cold-form heads when used, shall be stress relieved, or
    (c) Hot-formed heads shall be used.
    (iv) Welding to the shell, head, or any other part of the container 
subject to internal pressure shall be done in compliance with the Code. 
Other welding is permitted only on saddle plates, lugs, or brackets 
attached to the container by the container manufacturer.
    (v) Containers used with systems covered in paragraph (e) of this 
section shall be constructed and tested in accordance with the DOT 
specifications.
    (vi) The provisions of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall 
not be construed as prohibiting the continued use or reinstallation of 
containers constructed and maintained in accordance with the 1949, 1950, 
1952, 1956, 1959, and 1962 editions of the Code or any revisions thereof 
in effect at the time of fabrication.
    (3) Marking nonrefrigerated containers. (i) System nameplates, when 
required, shall be permanently attached to the system so as to be 
readily accessible for inspection and shall include markings as 
prescribed in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Each container or system covered in paragraphs (c), (f), (g), 
and (h) of this section shall be marked as specified in the following:
    (a) With a notation ``Anhydrous Ammonia.''
    (b) With a marking identifying compliance with the rules of the Code 
under which the container is constructed.

Under ground: Container and system nameplate.
Above ground: Container.

    (c) With a notation whether the system is designed for underground 
or aboveground installation or both.
    (d) With the name and address of the supplier of the system or the 
trade name of the system and with the date of fabrication.

Under ground and above ground: System nameplate.

    (e) With the water capacity of the container in pounds at 60 deg. F. 
or gallons, U.S. Standard.

Under ground: Container and system nameplate.
Above ground: Container.

    (f) With the design pressure in pounds per square inch.

Under ground: Container and system nameplate.
Above ground: Container.

    (g) With the wall thickness of the shell and heads.

Under ground: Container and system nameplate.
Above ground: Container.

    (h) With marking indicating the maximum level to which the container 
may be filled with liquid anhydrous ammonia at temperatures between 
20 deg. F. and 130 deg. F. except on containers provided with fixed 
level indicators, such as fixed length dip tubes, or containers that are 
filled with weight. Markings shall be in increments of not more than 
20 deg. F.

Above ground and under ground: System nameplate or on liquid-level 
gaging device.

    (i) With the total outside surface area of the container in square 
feet.

Under ground: System nameplate.
Above ground: No requirement.

    (j) Marking specified on the container shall be on the container 
itself

[[Page 335]]

or on a nameplate permanently attached to it.
    (4) Marking refrigerated containers. Each refrigerated container 
shall be marked with nameplate on the outer covering in an accessible 
place as specified in the following:
    (i) With the notation, ``Anhydrous Ammonia.''
    (ii) With the name and address of the builder and the date of 
fabrication.
    (iii) With the water capacity of the container in gallons, U.S. 
Standard.
    (iv) With the design pressure.
    (v) With the minimum temperature in degrees Fahrenheit for which the 
container was designed.
    (vi) The maximum allowable water level to which the container may be 
filled for test purposes.
    (vii) With the density of the product in pounds per cubic foot for 
which the container was designed.
    (viii) With the maximum level to which the container may be filled 
with liquid anhydrous ammonia.
    (5) Location of containers. (i) Consideration shall be given to the 
physiological effects of ammonia as well as to adjacent fire hazards in 
selecting the location for a storage container. Containers shall be 
located outside of buildings or in buildings or sections thereof 
especially provided for this purpose.
    (ii) Permanent storage containers shall be located at least 50 feet 
from a dug well or other sources of potable water supply, unless the 
container is a part of a water-treatment installation.
    (iii)-(iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Storage areas shall be kept free of readily ignitible materials 
such as waste, weeds, and long dry grass.
    (6) Container appurtenances. (i) All appurtenances shall be designed 
for not less than the maximum working pressure of that portion of the 
system on which they are installed. All appurtenances shall be 
fabricated from materials proved suitable for anhydrous ammonia service.
    (ii) All connections to containers except safety relief devices, 
gaging devices, or those fitted with No. 54 drill-size orifice shall 
have shutoff valves located as close to the container as practicable.
    (iii) Excess flow valves where required by these standards shall 
close automatically at the rated flows of vapor or liquid as specified 
by the manufacturer. The connections and line including valves and 
fittings being protected by an excess flow valve shall have a greater 
capacity than the rated flow of the excess flow valve so that the valve 
will close in case of failure of the line or fittings.
    (iv) Liquid-level gaging devices that require bleeding of the 
product to the atmosphere and which are so constructed that outward flow 
will not exceed that passed by a No. 54 drill-size opening need not be 
equipped with excess flow valves.
    (v) Openings from the container or through fittings attached 
directly on the container to which pressure gage connections are made 
need not be equipped with excess flow valves if such openings are not 
larger than No. 54 drill size.
    (vi) Excess flow and back pressure check valves where required by 
the standards in this section shall be located inside of the container 
or at a point outside as close as practicable to where the line enters 
the container. In the latter case installation shall be made in such 
manner that any undue strain beyond the excess flow or back pressure 
check valve will not cause breakage between the container and the valve.
    (vii) Excess flow valves shall be designed with a bypass, not to 
exceed a No. 60 drill-size opening to allow equalization of pressures.
    (viii) All excess flow valves shall be plainly and permanently 
marked with the name or trademark of the manufacturer, the catalog 
number, and the rated capacity.
    (7) Piping, tubing, and fittings. (i) All piping, tubing, and 
fittings shall be made of material suitable for anhydrous ammonia 
service.
    (ii) All piping, tubing, and fittings shall be designed for a 
pressure not less than the maximum pressure to which they may be 
subjected in service.
    (iii) All refrigerated piping shall conform to the Refrigeration 
Piping Code, American National Standards Institute, B31.5-1966 with 
addenda B31.1a-1968, which is incorporated by reference

[[Page 336]]

as specified in Sec. 1910.6, as it applies to ammonia.
    (iv) Piping used on non-refrigerated systems shall be at least 
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) A-53-69 Grade B 
Electric Resistance Welded and Electric Flash Welded Pipe, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, or equal. Such 
pipe shall be at least schedule 40 when joints are welded, or welded and 
flanged. Such pipe shall be at least schedule 80 when joints are 
threaded. Threaded connections shall not be back-welded. Brass, copper, 
or galvanized steel pipe shall not be used.
    (v) Tubing made of brass, copper, or other material subject to 
attack by ammonia shall not be used.
    (vi) Cast iron fittings shall not be used but this shall not 
prohibit the use of fittings made specifically for ammonia service of 
malleable, nodular, or high strength gray iron meeting American Society 
for Testing and Materials (ASTM) A47-68, ASTM 395-68, or ASTM A126-66 
Class B or C all of which are incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (vii) Joint compounds shall be resistant to ammonia.
    (8) Hose specifications. (i) Hose used in ammonia service shall 
conform to the joint Agricultural Ammonia Institute--Rubber 
Manufacturers Association Specifications for Anhydrous Ammonia Hose.
    (ii) Hose subject to container pressure shall be designed for a 
minimum working pressure of 350 p.s.i.g. and a minimum burst pressure of 
1,750 p.s.i.g. Hose assemblies, when made up, shall be capable of 
withstanding a test pressure of 500 p.s.i.g.
    (iii) Hose and hose connections located on the low-pressure side of 
flow control of pressure-reducing valves shall be designed for a 
bursting pressure of not less than 5 times the pressure setting of the 
safety relief devices protecting that portion of the system but not less 
than 125 p.s.i.g. All connections shall be so designed and constructed 
that there will be no leakage when connected.
    (iv) Where hose is to be used for transferring liquid from one 
container to another, ``wet'' hose is recommended. Such hose shall be 
equipped with approved shutoff valves at the discharge end. Provision 
shall be made to prevent excessive pressure in the hose.
    (v) On all hose one-half inch outside diameter and larger, used for 
the transfer of anhydrous ammonia liquid or vapor, there shall be 
etched, cast, or impressed at 5-foot intervals the following 
information.

``Anhydrous Ammonia'' xxx p.s.i.g. (maximum working pressure), 
manufacturer's name or trademark, year of manufacture.


In lieu of this requirement the same information may be contained on a 
nameplate permanently attached to the hose.

                               Table H-36
 [Minimum required rate of discharge in cubic feet per minute of air at
   120 percent of the maximum permitted start to discharge pressure of
                          safety relief valves]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Flow rate
                   Surface area (sq. ft.)                       CFM air
------------------------------------------------------------------------
20..........................................................         258
25..........................................................         310
30..........................................................         360
35..........................................................         408
40..........................................................         455
45..........................................................         501
50..........................................................         547
55..........................................................         591
60..........................................................         635
65..........................................................         678
70..........................................................         720
75..........................................................         762
80..........................................................         804
85..........................................................         845
90..........................................................         885
95..........................................................         925
100.........................................................         965
105.........................................................       1,010
110.........................................................       1,050
115.........................................................       1,090
120.........................................................       1,120
125.........................................................       1,160
130.........................................................       1,200
135.........................................................       1,240
140.........................................................       1,280
145.........................................................       1,310
150.........................................................       1,350
155.........................................................       1,390
160.........................................................       1,420
165.........................................................       1,460
170.........................................................       1,500
175.........................................................       1,530
180.........................................................       1,570
185.........................................................       1,600
190.........................................................       1,640
195.........................................................       1,670
200.........................................................       1,710
210.........................................................       1,780
220.........................................................       1,850
230.........................................................       1,920
240.........................................................       1,980
250.........................................................       2,050
260.........................................................       2,120
270.........................................................       2,180

[[Page 337]]

280.........................................................       2,250
290.........................................................       2,320
300.........................................................       2,380
310.........................................................       2,450
320.........................................................       2,510
330.........................................................       2,570
340.........................................................       2,640
350.........................................................       2,700
360.........................................................       2,760
370.........................................................       2,830
380.........................................................       2,890
390.........................................................       2,950
400.........................................................       3,010
450.........................................................       3,320
500.........................................................       3,620
550.........................................................       3,910
600.........................................................       4,200
650.........................................................       4,480
700.........................................................       4,760
750.........................................................       5,040
800.........................................................       5,300
850.........................................................       5,590
900.........................................................       5,850
950.........................................................       6,120
1,000.......................................................       6,380
1,050.......................................................       6,640
1,100.......................................................       6,900
1,150.......................................................       7,160
1,200.......................................................       7,410
1,250.......................................................       7,660
1,300.......................................................       7,910
1,350.......................................................       8,160
1,400.......................................................       8,410
1,450.......................................................       8,650
1,500.......................................................       8,900
1,550.......................................................       9,140
1,600.......................................................       9,380
1,650.......................................................       9,620
1,700.......................................................       9,860
1,750.......................................................      10,090
1,800.......................................................      10,330
1,850.......................................................      10,560
1,900.......................................................      10,800
1,950.......................................................      11,030
2,000.......................................................      11,260
2,050.......................................................      11,490
2,100.......................................................      11,720
2,150.......................................................      11,950
2,200.......................................................      12,180
2,250.......................................................      12,400
2,300.......................................................      12,630
2,350.......................................................      12,850
2,400.......................................................      13,080
2,450.......................................................      13,300
2,500.......................................................      13,520
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Surface Area=total outside surface area of container in square feet. 
When the surface area is not stamped on the nameplate or when the 
marking is not legible the area can be calculated by using one of the 
following formulas:
    (1) Cylindrical container with hemispherical heads:

Area=overall length in feet times outside diameter in feet times 3.1416.

    (2) Cylindrical container with other than hemispherical heads:

Area=(overall length in feet plus 0.3 outside diameter in feet) times 
outside diameter in feet times 3.1416.

    (3) Spherical container:

Area=outside diameter in feet squared times 3.1416.

    Flow Rate--CFM Air=cubic feet per minute of air required at standard 
conditions, 60 deg. F. and atmospheric pressure (14.7 p.s.i.a.).
    The rate of discharge may be interpolated for intermediate values of 
surface area. For containers with total outside surface area greater 
than 2,500 square feet, the required flow rate can be calculated using 
the formula: Flow Rate CFM Air=22.11 A <SUP>0</SUP> 82</SUP>, where 
A=outside surface area of the container in square feet.

    (9) Safety relief devices. (i) Every container used in systems 
covered by paragraphs (c), (f), (g), and (h) of this section shall be 
provided with one or more safety relief valves of the spring-loaded or 
equivalent type. The discharge from safety-relief valves shall be vented 
away from the container upward and unobstructed to the atmosphere. All 
relief-valve discharge openings shall have suitable rain caps that will 
allow free discharge of the vapor and prevent entrance of water. 
Provision shall be made for draining condensate which may accumulate. 
The rate of the discharge shall be in accordance with the provisions of 
Table H-36.
    (ii) Container safety-relief valves shall be set to start-to-
discharge as follows, with relation to the design pressure of the 
container:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Minimum     Maximum
                   Containers                      (percent)   (percent)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASME-U-68, U-69.................................         110         125
ASME-U-200, U-201...............................          95         100
ASME 1959, 1956, 1952, or 1962..................          95         100
API-ASME........................................          95         100
U.S. Coast Guard................................          95         100
------------------------------------------------------------------------


As required by DOT Regulations.
    (iii) Safety relief devices used in systems covered by paragraphs 
(c), (f), (g), and (h) of this section shall be constructed to discharge 
at not less than the rates required in paragraph (b)(9)(i) of this 
section before the pressure is in excess of 120 percent (not including 
the 10 percent tolerance referred to in paragraph (b)(9)(ii) of this 
section) of the maximum permitted start-to-discharge pressure setting of 
the device.

[[Page 338]]

    (iv) Safety-relief valves shall be so arranged that the possibility 
of tampering will be minimized. If the pressure setting adjustment is 
external, the relief valves shall be provided with means for sealing the 
adjustment.
    (v) Shutoff valves shall not be installed between the safety-relief 
valves and the container; except, that a shutoff valve may be used where 
the arrangement of this valve is such as always to afford full required 
capacity flow through the relief valves.
    (vi) Safety-relief valves shall have direct communication with the 
vapor space of the container.
    (vii) Each container safety-relief valve used with systems covered 
by paragraphs (c), (f), (g), and (h) of this section shall be plainly 
and permanently marked with the symbol ``NH<INF>3</INF>'' or ``AA''; 
with the pressure in pounds-per-square-inch gage at which the valve is 
set to start-to-discharge; with the actual rate of discharge of the 
valve at its full open position in cubic feet per minute of air at 
60 deg. F. and atmospheric pressure; and with the manufacturer's name 
and catalog number. Example: ``NH<INF>3</INF> 250-4050 Air'' indicates 
that the valve is suitable for use on an anhydrous ammonia container, is 
set to start-to-discharge at a pressure of 250 p.s.i.g., and that its 
rate of discharge at full open position (subdivisions (ii) and (iii) of 
this subparagraph) is 4,050 cubic feet per minute of air.
    (viii) The flow capacity of the relief valve shall not be restricted 
by any connection to it on either the upstream or downstream side.
    (ix) A hydrostatic relief valve shall be installed between each pair 
of valves in the liquid ammonia piping or hose where liquid may be 
trapped so as to relieve into the atmosphere at a safe location.
    (10) General.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Stationary storage installations must have at least two 
suitable gas masks in readily-accessible locations. Full-face masks with 
ammonia canisters that have been approved by NIOSH under 42 CFR part 84 
are suitable for emergency action involving most anhydrous ammonia 
leaks, particularly leaks that occur outdoors. For respiratory 
protection in concentrated ammonia atmospheres, a self-contained 
breathing apparatus is required.
    (iii) Stationary storage installations shall have an easily 
accessible shower or a 50-gallon drum of water.
    (iv) Each vehicle transporting ammonia in bulk except farm 
applicator vehicles shall carry a container of at least 5 gallons of 
water and shall be equipped with a full face mask.
    (11) Charging of containers. (i) The filling densities for 
containers that are not refrigerated shall not exceed the following:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Percent by  Percent by
                Type of container                   weight      volume
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aboveground-Uninsulated.........................          56          82
Aboveground-Uninsulated.........................  ..........        87.5
Aboveground-Insulated...........................          57        83.5
Underground-Uninsulated.........................          58          85
DOT--In accord with DOT regulations.............
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Aboveground uninsulated containers may be charged 87.5 percent 
by volume provided the temperature of the anhydrous ammonia being 
charged is determined to be not lower than 30 deg. F. or provided the 
charging of the container is stopped at the first indication of frost or 
ice formation on its outside surface and is not resumed until such frost 
or ice has disappeared.
    (12) Transfer of liquids. (i) Anhydrous ammonia shall always be at a 
temperature suitable for the material of construction and the design of 
the receiving container.
    (ii) The employer shall require the continuous presence of an 
attendant in the vicinity of the operation during such time as ammonia 
is being transferred.
    (iii) Containers shall be charged or used only upon authorization of 
the owner.
    (iv) Containers shall be gaged and charged only in the open 
atmosphere or in buildings or areas thereof provided for that purpose.
    (v) Pumps used for transferring ammonia shall be those manufactured 
for that purpose.
    (a) Pumps shall be designed for at least 250 p.s.i.g. working 
pressure.
    (b) Positive displacement pumps shall have, installed off the 
discharged port, a constant differential relief valve discharging into 
the suction port

[[Page 339]]

of the pump through a line of sufficient size to carry the full capacity 
of the pump at relief valve setting, which setting and installation 
shall be according to the pump manufacturer's recommendations.
    (c) On the discharge side of the pump, before the relief valve line, 
there shall be installed a pressure gage graduated from 0 to 400 p.s.i.
    (d) Plant piping shall contain shutoff valves located as close as 
practical to pump connections.
    (vi) Compressors used for transferring or refrigerating ammonia 
shall be recommended for ammonia service by the manufacturer.
    (a) Compressors shall be designed for at least 250 p.s.i.g. working 
pressure.
    (b) Plant piping shall contain shutoff valves located as close as 
practical to compressor connections.
    (c) A relief valve large enough to discharge the full capacity of 
the compressor shall be connected to the discharge before any shutoff 
valve.
    (d) Compressors shall have pressure gages at suction and discharge 
graduated to at least one and one-half times the maximum pressure that 
can be developed.
    (e) Adequate means, such as drainable liquid trap, shall be provided 
on the compressor suction to minimize the entry of liquid into the 
compressor.
    (vii) Loading and unloading systems shall be protected by suitable 
devices to prevent emptying of the storage container or the container 
being loaded or unloaded in the event of severance of the hose. Backflow 
check valves or properly sized excess flow valves shall be installed 
where necessary to provide such protection. In the event that such 
valves are not practical, remotely operated shutoff valves may be 
installed.
    (13) Tank car unloading points and operations. (i) Provisions for 
unloading tank cars shall conform to the applicable recommendations 
contained in the DOT regulations.
    (ii) The employer shall insure that unloading operations are 
performed by reliable persons properly instructed and given the 
authority to monitor careful compliance with all applicable procedures.
    (iii) Caution signs shall be so placed on the track or car as to 
give necessary warning to persons approaching the car from open end or 
ends of siding and shall be left up until after the car is unloaded and 
disconnected from discharge connections. Signs shall be of metal or 
other suitable material, at least 12 by 15 inches in size and bear the 
words ``STOP--Tank Car Connected'' or ``STOP--Men at Work'' the word, 
``STOP,'' being in letters at least 4 inches high and the other words in 
letters at least 2 inches high.
    (iv) The track of a tank car siding shall be substantially level.
    (v) Brakes shall be set and wheels blocked on all cars being 
unloaded.
    (14) Liquid-level gaging device. (i) Each container except those 
filled by weight shall be equipped with an approved liquid-level gaging 
device. A thermometer well shall be provided in all containers not 
utilizing a fixed liquid-level gaging device.
    (ii) All gaging devices shall be arranged so that the maximum liquid 
level to which the container is filled is readily determined.
    (iii) Gaging devices that require bleeding of the product to the 
atmosphere such as the rotary tube, fixed tube, and slip tube devices 
shall be designed so that the maximum opening of the bleed valve is not 
larger than No. 54 drill size unless provided with an excess flow valve. 
(This requirement does not apply to farm vehicles used for the 
application of ammonia as covered in paragraph (h) of this section.)
    (iv) Gaging devices shall have a design pressure equal to or greater 
than the design pressure of the container on which they are installed.
    (v) Fixed tube liquid-level gages shall be designed and installed to 
indicate that level at which the container is filled to 85 percent of 
its water capacity in gallons.
    (vi) Gage glasses of the columnar type shall be restricted to 
stationary storage installations. They shall be equipped with shutoff 
valves having metallic handwheels, with excess-flow valves, and with 
extra heavy glass adequately protected with a metal housing applied by 
the gage manufacturer. They shall be shielded against the direct rays of 
the sun.
    (15) [Reserved]

[[Page 340]]

    (16) Electrical equipment and wiring. (i) Electrical equipment and 
wiring for use in ammonia installations shall be general purpose or 
weather resistant as appropriate.
    (ii) Electrical systems shall be installed and maintained in 
accordance with subpart S of this part.
    (c) Systems utilizing stationary, nonrefrigerated storage 
containers. This paragraph applies to stationary, nonrefrigerated 
storage installations utilizing containers other than those covered in 
paragraph (e) of this section. Paragraph (b) of this section applies to 
this paragraph unless otherwise noted.
    (1) Design pressure and construction of containers. The minimum 
design pressure for nonrefrigerated containers shall be 250 p.s.i.g.
    (2) Container valves and accessories, filling and discharge 
connections. (i) Each filling connection shall be provided with 
combination back-pressure check valve and excess-flow valve; one double 
or two single back-pressure check valves; or a positive shutoff valve in 
conjunction with either an internal back-pressure check valve or an 
internal excess flow valve.
    (ii) All liquid and vapor connections to containers except filling 
pipes, safety relief connections, and liquid-level gaging and pressure 
gage connections provided with orifices not larger than No. 54 drill 
size as required in paragraphs (b)(6) (iv) and (v) of this section shall 
be equipped with excess-flow valves.
    (iii) Each storage container shall be provided with a pressure gage 
graduated from 0 to 400 p.s.i. Gages shall be designated for use in 
ammonia service.
    (iv) All containers shall be equipped with vapor return valves.
    (3) Safety-relief devices. (i) Every container shall be provided 
with one or more safety-relief valves of the spring-loaded or equivalent 
type in accordance with paragraph (b)(9) of this section.
    (ii) The rate of discharge of spring-loaded safety relief valves 
installed on underground containers may be reduced to a minimum of 30 
percent of the rate of discharge specified in Table H-36. Containers so 
protected shall not be uncovered after installation until the liquid 
ammonia has been removed. Containers which may contain liquid ammonia 
before being installed underground and before being completely covered 
with earth are to be considered aboveground containers when determining 
the rate of discharge requirements of the safety-relief valves.
    (iii) On underground installations where there is a probability of 
the manhole or housing becoming flooded, the discharge from vent lines 
shall be located above the high water level. All manholes or housings 
shall be provided with ventilated louvers or their equivalent, the area 
of such openings equalling or exceeding combined discharge areas of 
safety-relief valves and vent lines which discharge their content into 
the manhole housing.
    (iv) Vent pipes, when used, shall not be restricted or of smaller 
diameter than the relief-valve outlet connection.
    (v) If desired, vent pipes from two or more safety-relief devices 
located on the same unit, or similar lines from two or more different 
units may be run into a common discharge header, provided the capacity 
of such header is at least equal to the sum of the capacities of the 
individual discharge lines.
    (4) Reinstallation of containers. (i) Containers once installed 
under ground shall not later be reinstalled above ground or under 
ground, unless they successfully withstand hydrostatic pressure retests 
at the pressure specified for the original hydrostatic test as required 
by the code under which constructed and show no evidence of serious 
corrosion.
    (ii) Where containers are reinstalled above ground, safety devices 
or gaging devices shall comply with paragraph (b)(9) of this section and 
this paragraph respectively for aboveground containers.
    (5) Installation of storage containers. (i) Containers installed 
above ground, except as provided in paragraph (c)(5)(v) of this section 
shall be provided with substantial concrete or masonry supports, or 
structural steel supports on firm concrete or masonry foundations. All 
foundations shall extend below the frost line.
    (ii) Horizontal aboveground containers shall be so mounted on 
foundations

[[Page 341]]

as to permit expansion and contraction. Every container shall be 
supported to prevent the concentration of excessive loads on the 
supporting portion of the shell. That portion of the container in 
contact with foundations or saddles shall be protected against 
corrosion.
    (iii) Containers installed under ground shall be so placed that the 
top of the container is below the frost line and in no case less than 2 
feet below the surface of the ground. Should ground conditions make 
compliance with these requirements impracticable, installation shall be 
made otherwise to prevent physical damage. It will not be necessary to 
cover the portion of the container to which manhole and other 
connections are affixed. When necessary to prevent floating, containers 
shall be securely anchored or weighted.
    (iv) Underground containers shall be set on a firm foundation (firm 
earth may be used) and surrounded with earth or sand well tamped in 
place. The container, prior to being placed under ground, shall be given 
a corrosion resisting protective coating. The container thus coated 
shall be so lowered into place as to prevent abrasion or other damage to 
the coating.
    (v) Containers with foundations attached (portable or semiportable 
tank containers with suitable steel ``runners'' or ``skids'' and 
commonly known in the industry as ``skid tanks'') shall be designed and 
constructed in accordance with paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (vi) Secure anchorage or adequate pier height shall be provided 
against container flotation wherever sufficiently high flood water might 
occur.
    (vii) The distance between underground containers of over 2,000 
gallons capacity shall be at least 5 feet.
    (6) Protection of appurtenances. (i) Valves, regulating, gaging, and 
other appurtenances shall be protected against tampering and physical 
damage. Such appurtenances shall also be protected during transit of 
containers.
    (ii) All connections to underground containers shall be located 
within a dome, housing, or manhole and with access thereto by means of a 
substantial cover.
    (7) Damage from vehicles. Precaution shall be taken against damage 
to ammonia systems from vehicles.
    (d) Refrigerated storage systems. This paragraph applies to systems 
utilizing containers with the storage of anhydrous ammonia under 
refrigerated conditions. All applicable rules of paragraph (b) of this 
section apply to this paragraph unless otherwise noted.
    (1) Design of containers. (i) The design temperature shall be the 
minimum temperature to which the container will be refrigerated.
    (ii) Containers with a design pressure exceeding 15 p.s.i.g. shall 
be constructed in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section, and 
the materials shall be selected from those listed in API Standard 620, 
Recommended Rules for Design and Construction of Large, Welded, Low-
Pressure Storage Tanks, Fourth Edition, 1970, Tables 2.02, R2.2, 
R2.2(A), R2.2.1, or R2.3 which are incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iii) Containers with a design pressure of 15 p.s.i.g. and less 
shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of 
API Standard 620 including its appendix R.
    (iv) When austenitic steels or nonferrous materials are used, the 
Code shall be used as a guide in the selection of materials for use at 
the design temperature.
    (v) The filling density for refrigerated storage containers shall be 
such that the container will not be liquid full at a liquid temperature 
corresponding to the vapor pressure at the start-to-discharge pressure 
setting of the safety-relief valve.
    (2) Installation of refrigerated storage containers. (i) Containers 
shall be supported on suitable noncombustible foundations designed to 
accommodate the type of container being used.
    (ii) Adequate protection against flotation or other water damage 
shall be provided wherever high flood water might occur.
    (iii) Containers for product storage at less than 32 deg. F. shall 
be supported in such a way, or heat shall be supplied, to prevent the 
effects of freezing and consequent frost heaving.
    (3) Shutoff valves. When operating conditions make it advisable, a 
check

[[Page 342]]

valve shall be installed on the fill connection and a remotely operated 
shutoff valve on other connections located below the maximum liquid 
level.
    (4) Safety relief devices. (i) Safety relief valves shall be set to 
start-to-discharge at a pressure not in excess of the design pressure of 
the container and shall have a total relieving capacity sufficient to 
prevent a maximum pressure in the container of more than 120 percent of 
the design pressure. Relief valves for refrigerated storage containers 
shall be self-contained spring-loaded, weight-loaded, or self-contained 
pilot-operated type.
    (ii) The total relieving capacity shall be the larger of:
    (a) Possible refrigeration system upset such as (1) cooling water 
failure, (2) power failure, (3) instrument air or instrument failure, 
(4) mechanical failure of any equipment, (5) excessive pumping rates.
    (b) Fire exposure determined in accordance with Compressed Gas 
Association (CGA) S-1, Part 3, Safety Relief Device Standards for 
Compressed Gas Storage Containers, 1959, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, except that ``A'' shall be the 
total exposed surface area in square feet up to 25 foot above grade or 
to the equator of the storage container if it is a sphere, whichever is 
greater. If the relieving capacity required for fire exposure is greater 
than that required by (a) of this subdivision, the additional capacity 
may be provided by weak roof to shell seams in containers operating at 
essentially atmospheric pressure and having an inherently weak roof-to-
shell seam. The weak roof-to-shell seam is not to be considered as 
providing any of the capacity required in (a) of this subdivision.
    (iii) If vent lines are installed to conduct the vapors from the 
relief valve, the back pressure under full relieving conditions shall 
not exceed 50 percent of the start-to-discharge pressure for pressure 
balanced valves or 10 percent of the start-to-discharge pressure for 
conventional valves. The vent lines shall be installed to prevent 
accumulation of liquid in the lines.
    (iv) The valve or valve installation shall provide weather 
protection.
    (v) Atmospheric storage shall be provided with vacuum breakers. 
Ammonia gas, nitrogen, methane, or other inert gases can be used to 
provide a pad.
    (5) Protection of container appurtenances. Appurtenances shall be 
protected against tampering and physical damage.
    (6) Reinstallation of refrigerated storage containers. Containers of 
such size as to require field fabrication shall, when moved and 
reinstalled, be reconstructed and reinspected in complete accordance 
with the requirements under which they were constructed. The containers 
shall be subjected to a pressure retest and if rerating is necessary, 
rerating shall be in accordance with applicable requirements.
    (7) Damage from vehicles. Precaution shall be taken against damage 
from vehicles.
    (8) Refrigeration load and equipment. (i) The total refrigeration 
load shall be computed as the sum of the following:
    (a) Load imposed by heat flow into the container caused by the 
temperature differential between design ambient temperature and storage 
temperature.
    (b) Load imposed by heat flow into the container caused by maximum 
sun radiation.
    (c) Maximum load imposed by filling the container with ammonia 
warmer than the design storage temperature.
    (ii) More than one storage container may be handled by the same 
refrigeration system.
    (9) Compressors. (i) A minimum of two compressors shall be provided 
either of which shall be of sufficient size to handle the loads listed 
in paragraphs (d)(8)(i) (a) and (b) of this section. Where more than two 
compressors are provided minimum standby equipment equal to the largest 
normally operating equipment shall be installed. Filling compressors may 
be used as standby equipment for holding compressors.
    (ii) Compressors shall be sized to operate with a suction pressure 
at least 10 percent below the minimum setting of the safety valve(s) on 
the storage container and shall withstand a suction pressure at least 
equal to 120 percent of the design pressure of the container.

[[Page 343]]

    (10) Compressor drives. (i) Each compressor shall have its 
individual driving unit.
    (ii) An emergency source of power of sufficient capacity to handle 
the loads listed in paragraphs (d)(8)(i) (a) and (b) of this section 
shall be provided unless facilities are available to safely dispose of 
vented vapors while the refrigeration system is not operating.
    (11) Automatic control equipment. (i) The refrigeration system shall 
be arranged with suitable controls to govern the compressor operation in 
accordance with the load as evidenced by the pressure in the 
container(s).
    (ii) An emergency alarm system shall be installed to function in the 
event the pressure in the container(s) rises to the maximum allowable 
operating pressure.
    (iii) An emergency alarm and shut- off shall be located in the 
condenser system to respond to excess discharge pressure caused by 
failure of the cooling medium.
    (iv) All automatic controls shall be installed in a manner to 
preclude operation of alternate compressors unless the controls will 
function with the alternate compressors.
    (12) Separators for compressors. (i) An entrainment separator of 
suitable size and design pressure shall be installed in the compressor 
suction line of lubricated compression. The separator shall be equipped 
with a drain and gaging device.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (13) Condensers. The condenser system may be cooled by air or water 
or both. The condenser shall be designed for at least 250 p.s.i.g. 
Provision shall be made for purging noncondensibles either manually or 
automatically.
    (14) Receiver and liquid drain. A receiver shall be provided with a 
liquid-level control to discharge the liquid ammonia to storage. The 
receiver shall be designed for at least 250 p.s.i.g. and be equipped 
with the necessary connections, safety valves, and gaging device.
    (15) Insulation. Refrigerated containers and pipelines which are 
insulated shall be covered with a material of suitable quality and 
thickness for the temperatures encountered. Insulation shall be suitably 
supported and protected against the weather. Weatherproofing shall be of 
a type which will not support flame propagation.
    (e) Systems utilizing portable DOT containers--(1) Conformance. 
Cylinders shall comply with DOT specifications and shall be maintained, 
filled, packaged, marked, labeled, and shipped to comply with 49 CFR 
chapter I and Marking Portable Compressed Gas Containers to Identify the 
Material Contained, ANSI Z48.1-1954 (R1970), which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Storage. Cylinders shall be stored in an area free from 
ignitable debris and in such manner as to prevent external corrosion. 
Storage may be indoors or outdoors.
    (3) Heat protection. Cylinders filled in accordance with DOT 
regulations will become liquid full at 145 deg. F. Cylinders shall be 
protected from heat sources such as radiant flame and steampipes. Heat 
shall not be applied directly to cylinders to raise the pressure.
    (4) Protection. Cylinders shall be stored in such manner as to 
protect them from moving vehicles or external damage.
    (5) Valve cap. Any cylinder which is designed to have a valve 
protection cap shall have the cap securely in place when the cylinder is 
not in service.
    (f) Tank motor vehicles for the transportation of ammonia. (1) This 
paragraph applies to containers and pertinent equipment mounted on tank 
motor vehicles including semitrailers and full trailers used for the 
transportation of ammonia. This paragraph does not apply to farm 
vehicles. For requirements covering farm vehicles, refer to paragraphs 
(g) and (h) of this section.

Paragraph (b) of this section applies to this paragraph unless otherwise 
noted. Containers and pertinent equipment for tank motor vehicles for 
the transportation of anhydrous ammonia, in addition to complying with 
the requirements of this section, shall also comply with the 
requirements of DOT.
    (2) Design pressure and construction of containers. (i) The minimum 
design pressure for containers shall be that specified in the 
regulations of the DOT.
    (ii) The shell or head thickness of any container shall not be less 
than three-sixteenth inch.

[[Page 344]]

    (iii) All container openings, except safety relief valves, liquid-
level gaging devices, and pressure gages, shall be labeled to designate 
whether they communicate with liquid or vapor space.
    (3) Container appurtenances. (i) All appurtenances shall be 
protected against physical damage.
    (ii) All connections to containers, except filling connections, 
safety relief devices, and liquid-level and pressure gage connections, 
shall be provided with suitable automatic excess flow valves, or in lieu 
thereof, may be fitted with quick-closing internal valves, which shall 
remain closed except during delivery operations. The control mechanism 
for such valves may be provided with a secondary control remote from the 
delivery connections and such control mechanism shall be provided with a 
fusible section (melting point 208 deg. F. to 220 deg. F.) which will 
permit the internal valve to close automatically in case of fire.
    (iii) Filling connections shall be provided with automatic back-
pressure check valves, excess-flow valves, or quick-closing internal 
valves, to prevent back-flow in case the filling connection is broken. 
Where the filling and discharge connect to a common opening in the 
container shell and that opening is fitted with a quick-closing internal 
valve as specified in paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this section, the 
automatic valve shall not be required.
    (iv) All containers shall be equipped for spray loading (filling in 
the vapor space) or with an approved vapor return valve of adequate 
capacity.
    (4) Piping and fittings. (i) All piping, tubing, and fittings shall 
be securely mounted and protected against damage. Means shall be 
provided to protect hoses while the vehicle is in motion.
    (ii) Fittings shall comply with paragraph (b)(6) of this section. 
Pipe shall be Schedule 80.
    (5) Safety relief devices. (i) The discharge from safety relief 
valves shall be vented away from the container upward and unobstructed 
to the open air in such a manner as to prevent any impingement of 
escaping gas upon the container; loose-fitting rain caps shall be used. 
Size of discharge lines from safety valves shall not be smaller than the 
nominal size of the safety-relief valve outlet connection. Suitable 
provision shall be made for draining condensate which may accumulate in 
the discharge pipe.
    (ii) Any portion of liquid ammonia piping which at any time may be 
closed at both ends shall be provided with a hydrostatic relief valve.
    (6) Transfer of liquids. (i) The content of tank motor vehicle 
containers shall be determined by weight, by a suitable liquid-level 
gaging device, or other approved methods. If the content of a container 
is to be determined by liquid-level measurement, the container shall 
have a thermometer well so that the internal liquid temperature can be 
easily determined. This volume when converted to weight shall not exceed 
the filling density specified by the DOT.
    (ii) Any pump, except a constant speed centrifugal pump, shall be 
equipped with a suitable pressure actuated bypass valve permitting flow 
from discharge to suction when the discharge pressure rises above a 
predetermined point. Pump discharge shall also be equipped with a 
spring-loaded safety relief valve set at a pressure not more than 135 
percent of the setting of the bypass valve or more than 400 p.s.i.g., 
whichever is larger.
    (iii) Compressors shall be equipped with manually operated shutoff 
valves on both suction and discharge connections. Pressure gages of 
bourdon-tube type shall be installed on the suction and discharge of the 
compressor before the shutoff valves. The compressor shall not be 
operated if either pressure gage is removed or is inoperative. A spring-
loaded, safety-relief valve capable of discharging to atmosphere the 
full flow of gas from the compressor at a pressure not exceeding 300 
p.s.i.g. shall be connected between the compressor discharge and the 
discharge shutoff valve.
    (iv) Valve functions shall be clearly and legibly identified by 
metal tags or nameplates permanently affixed to each valve.
    (7) Full trailers and semitrailers. (i) All full trailers shall be 
firmly and securely attached to the vehicle drawing them by means of 
suitable drawbars supplemented by a safety chain (or chains) or safety 
cables.

[[Page 345]]

    (ii) Every full trailer or semitrailer shall have a reliable system 
of brakes, and adequate provision shall be made to operate the brakes 
from the driver's seat.
    (iii) Every full trailer shall be equipped with self-energizing 
brakes.
    (iv) Full trailers shall be so designed that the towed vehicle will 
follow substantially in the path of the towing vehicle and will not whip 
or swerve dangerously from side to side.
    (v) Where a fifth wheel is employed, it shall be ruggedly designed, 
securely fastened to both units, and equipped with a positive locking 
mechanism which will prevent separation of the two units except by 
manual release.
    (8) Protection against collision. Each tank motor vehicle shall be 
provided with properly attached bumpers or chassis extension arranged to 
protect the tank, piping, valves, and fittings from physical damage in 
case of collision.
    (9) Chock blocks. At least two chock blocks shall be provided. These 
blocks shall be placed to prevent rolling of the vehicle whenever it is 
parked during loading and unloading operations.
    (10) Portable tank containers (skid tanks). Where portable tank 
containers are used for farm storage they shall comply with paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section. When portable tank containers are used in lieu 
of cargo tanks and are permanently mounted on tank motor vehicles for 
the transportation of ammonia, they shall comply with the requirements 
of this paragraph.
    (g) Systems mounted on farm vehicles other than for the application 
of ammonia--(1) Application. This paragraph applies to containers of 
1,200 gallons capacity or less and pertinent equipment mounted on farm 
vehicles (implements of husbandry) and used other than for the 
application of ammonia to the soil. Paragraph (b) of this section 
applies to this paragraph unless otherwise noted.
    (2) Design pressure and classification of containers. (i) The 
minimum design pressure for containers shall be 250 p.s.i.g.
    (ii) The shell or head thickness of any container shall be not less 
than three-sixteenths of an inch.
    (3) Mounting containers. (i) A suitable ``stop'' or ``stops'' shall 
be mounted on the vehicle or on the container in such a way that the 
container shall not be dislodged from its mounting due to the vehicle 
coming to a sudden stop. Back slippage shall also be prevented by proper 
methods.
    (ii) A suitable ``hold down'' device shall be provided which will 
anchor the container to the vehicle at one or more places on each side 
of the container.
    (iii) When containers are mounted on four-wheel trailers, care shall 
be taken to insure that the weight is distributed evenly over both 
axles.
    (iv) When the cradle and the tank are not welded together suitable 
material shall be used between them to eliminate metal-to-metal 
friction.
    (4) Container appurtenances. (i) All containers shall be equipped 
with a fixed liquid-level gage.
    (ii) All containers with a capacity exceeding 250 gallons shall be 
equipped with a pressure gage having a dial graduated from 0-400 p.s.i.
    (iii) The filling connection shall be fitted with combination back-
pressure check valve and excess-flow valve; one double or two single 
back-pressure check valves; or a positive shutoff valve in conjunction 
with either an internal back-pressure check valve or an internal excess 
flow valve.
    (iv) All containers with a capacity exceeding 250 gallons shall be 
equipped for spray loading or with an approved vapor return valve.
    (v) All vapor and liquid connections except safety-relief valves and 
those specifically exempted by paragraph (b)(6)(v) of this section shall 
be equipped with approved excess-flow valves or may be fitted with 
quick-closing internal valves which, except during operating periods, 
shall remain closed.
    (vi) Fittings shall be adequately protected from damage by a metal 
box or cylinder with open top securely fastened to the container or by 
rigid guards, well braced, welded to the container on both sides of the 
fittings or by a metal dome. If a metal dome is used, the relief valve 
shall be properly vented through the dome.
    (vii) If a liquid withdrawal line is installed in the bottom of a 
container, the connections thereto, including

[[Page 346]]

hose, shall not be lower than the lowest horizontal edge of the vehicle 
axle.
    (viii) Provision shall be made to secure both ends of the hose while 
in transit.
    (5) Marking the container. There shall appear on each side and on 
the rear end of the container in letters at least 4 inches high, the 
words, ``Caution--Ammonia'' or the container shall be marked in 
accordance with DOT regulations.
    (6) Farm vehicles. (i) Farm vehicles shall conform with State 
regulations.
    (ii) All trailers shall be securely attached to the vehicle drawing 
them by means of drawbars supplemented by suitable safety chains.
    (iii) A trailer shall be constructed so that it will follow 
substantially in the path of the towing vehicle and will not whip or 
swerve dangerously from side to side.
    (iv) All vehicles shall carry a can containing 5 gallons or more of 
water.
    (h) Systems mounted on farm vehicles for the application of ammonia. 
(1) This paragraph applies to systems utilizing containers of 250 
gallons capacity or less which are mounted on farm vehicles (implement 
of husbandry) and used for the application of ammonia to the soil. 
Paragraph (b) of this section applies to this paragraph unless otherwise 
noted. Where larger containers are used, they shall comply with 
paragraph (g) of this section.
    (2) Design pressure and classification of containers. (i) The 
minimum design pressure for containers shall be 250 p.s.i.g.
    (ii) The shell or head thickness of any container shall not be less 
than three-sixteenths inch.
    (3) Mounting of containers. All containers and flow-control devices 
shall be securely mounted.
    (4) Container valves and accessories. (i) Each container shall have 
a fixed liquid-level gage.
    (ii) The filling connection shall be fitted with a combination back-
pressure check valve and an excess-flow valve; one double or two single 
back-pressure check valves: or a positive shutoff valve in conjunction 
with an internal back-pressure check valve or an internal excess-flow 
valve.
    (iii) The applicator tank may be filled by venting to open air 
provided the bleeder valve orifice does not exceed seven-sixteenths inch 
in diameter.
    (iv) Regulation equipment may be connected directly to the tank 
coupling or flange, in which case a flexible connection shall be used 
between such regulating equipment and the remainder of the liquid 
withdrawal system. Regulating equipment not so installed shall be 
flexibly connected to the container shutoff valve.
    (v) No excess flow valve is required in the liquid withdrawal line 
provided the controlling orifice between the contents of the container 
and the outlet of the shutoff valve does not exceed seven-sixteenths 
inch in diameter.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49748, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 53 FR 12122, Apr. 12, 1988; 61 FR 9238, Mar. 
7, 1996; 63 FR 1269, Jan. 8, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998, in 
Sec. 1910.111, paragraphs (f)(7) and (f)(8) were removed, effective Aug. 
17, 1998.


<R05>
  Secs. 1910.112--1910.113  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.119  Process safety management of highly hazardous chemicals.

    Purpose. This section contains requirements for preventing or 
minimizing the consequences of catastrophic releases of toxic, reactive, 
flammable, or explosive chemicals. These releases may result in toxic, 
fire or explosion hazards.
    (a) Application. (1) This section applies to the following:
    (i) A process which involves a chemical at or above the specified 
threshold quantities listed in appendix A to this section;
    (ii) A process which involves a flammable liquid or gas (as defined 
in 1910.1200(c) of this part) on site in one location, in a quantity of 
10,000 pounds (4535.9 kg) or more except for:
    (A) Hydrocarbon fuels used solely for workplace consumption as a 
fuel (e.g., propane used for comfort heating, gasoline for vehicle 
refueling), if such fuels are not a part of a process containing another 
highly hazardous chemical covered by this standard;
    (B) Flammable liquids stored in atmospheric tanks or transferred 
which are kept below their normal boiling

[[Page 347]]

point without benefit of chilling or refrigeration.
    (2) This section does not apply to:
    (i) Retail facilities;
    (ii) Oil or gas well drilling or servicing operations; or,
    (iii) Normally unoccupied remote facilities.
    (b) Definitions. Atmospheric tank means a storage tank which has 
been designed to operate at pressures from atmospheric through 0.5 
p.s.i.g. (pounds per square inch gauge, 3.45 Kpa).
    Boiling point means the boiling point of a liquid at a pressure of 
14.7 pounds per square inch absolute (p.s.i.a.) (760 mm.). For the 
purposes of this section, where an accurate boiling point is unavailable 
for the material in question, or for mixtures which do not have a 
constant boiling point, the 10 percent point of a distillation performed 
in accordance with the Standard Method of Test for Distillation of 
Petroleum Products, ASTM D-86-62, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6, may be used as the boiling point of the 
liquid.
    Catastrophic release means a major uncontrolled emission, fire, or 
explosion, involving one or more highly hazardous chemicals, that 
presents serious danger to employees in the workplace.
    Facility means the buildings, containers or equipment which contain 
a process.
    Highly hazardous chemical means a substance possessing toxic, 
reactive, flammable, or explosive properties and specified by paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section.
    Hot work means work involving electric or gas welding, cutting, 
brazing, or similar flame or spark-producing operations.
    Normally unoccupied remote facility means a facility which is 
operated, maintained or serviced by employees who visit the facility 
only periodically to check its operation and to perform necessary 
operating or maintenance tasks. No employees are permanently stationed 
at the facility.
    Facilities meeting this definition are not contiguous with, and must 
be geographically remote from all other buildings, processes or persons.
    Process means any activity involving a highly hazardous chemical 
including any use, storage, manufacturing, handling, or the on-site 
movement of such chemicals, or combination of these activities. For 
purposes of this definition, any group of vessels which are 
interconnected and separate vessels which are located such that a highly 
hazardous chemical could be involved in a potential release shall be 
considered a single process.
    Replacement in kind means a replacement which satisfies the design 
specification.
    Trade secret means any confidential formula, pattern, process, 
device, information or compilation of information that is used in an 
employer's business, and that gives the employer an opportunity to 
obtain an advantage over competitors who do not know or use it. Appendix 
D contained in Sec. 1910.1200 sets out the criteria to be used in 
evaluating trade secrets.
    (c) Employee participation. (1) Employers shall develop a written 
plan of action regarding the implementation of the employee 
participation required by this paragraph.
    (2) Employers shall consult with employees and their representatives 
on the conduct and development of process hazards analyses and on the 
development of the other elements of process safety management in this 
standard.
    (3) Employers shall provide to employees and their representatives 
access to process hazard analyses and to all other information required 
to be developed under this standard.
    (d) Process safety information. In accordance with the schedule set 
forth in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, the employer shall complete a 
compilation of written process safety information before conducting any 
process hazard analysis required by the standard. The compilation of 
written process safety information is to enable the employer and the 
employees involved in operating the process to identify and understand 
the hazards posed by those processes involving highly hazardous 
chemicals. This process safety information shall include information 
pertaining to the hazards of the highly hazardous chemicals used or 
produced by the process, information pertaining to the

[[Page 348]]

technology of the process, and information pertaining to the equipment 
in the process.
    (1) Information pertaining to the hazards of the highly hazardous 
chemicals in the process. This information shall consist of at least the 
following:
    (i) Toxicity information;
    (ii) Permissible exposure limits;
    (iii) Physical data;
    (iv) Reactivity data:
    (v) Corrosivity data;
    (vi) Thermal and chemical stability data; and
    (vii) Hazardous effects of inadvertent mixing of different materials 
that could foreseeably occur.

    Note: Material Safety Data Sheets meeting the requirements of 29 CFR 
1910.1200(g) may be used to comply with this requirement to the extent 
they contain the information required by this subparagraph.

    (2) Information pertaining to the technology of the process. (i) 
Information concerning the technology of the process shall include at 
least the following:
    (A) A block flow diagram or simplified process flow diagram (see 
appendix B to this section);
    (B) Process chemistry;
    (C) Maximum intended inventory;
    (D) Safe upper and lower limits for such items as temperatures, 
pressures, flows or compositions; and,
    (E) An evaluation of the consequences of deviations, including those 
affecting the safety and health of employees.
    (ii) Where the original technical information no longer exists, such 
information may be developed in conjunction with the process hazard 
analysis in sufficient detail to support the analysis.
    (3) Information pertaining to the equipment in the process. (i) 
Information pertaining to the equipment in the process shall include:
    (A) Materials of construction;
    (B) Piping and instrument diagrams (P&ID's);
    (C) Electrical classification;
    (D) Relief system design and design basis;
    (E) Ventilation system design;
    (F) Design codes and standards employed;
    (G) Material and energy balances for processes built after May 26, 
1992; and,
    (H) Safety systems (e.g. interlocks, detection or suppression 
systems).
    (ii) The employer shall document that equipment complies with 
recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices.
    (iii) For existing equipment designed and constructed in accordance 
with codes, standards, or practices that are no longer in general use, 
the employer shall determine and document that the equipment is 
designed, maintained, inspected, tested, and operating in a safe manner.
    (e) Process hazard analysis. (1) The employer shall perform an 
initial process hazard analysis (hazard evaluation) on processes covered 
by this standard. The process hazard analysis shall be appropriate to 
the complexity of the process and shall identify, evaluate, and control 
the hazards involved in the process. Employers shall determine and 
document the priority order for conducting process hazard analyses based 
on a rationale which includes such considerations as extent of the 
process hazards, number of potentially affected employees, age of the 
process, and operating history of the process. The process hazard 
analysis shall be conducted as soon as possible, but not later than the 
following schedule:
    (i) No less than 25 percent of the initial process hazards analyses 
shall be completed by May 26, 1994;
    (ii) No less than 50 percent of the initial process hazards analyses 
shall be completed by May 26, 1995;
    (iii) No less than 75 percent of the initial process hazards 
analyses shall be completed by May 26, 1996;
    (iv) All initial process hazards analyses shall be completed by May 
26, 1997.
    (v) Process hazards analyses completed after May 26, 1987 which meet 
the requirements of this paragraph are acceptable as initial process 
hazards analyses. These process hazard analyses shall be updated and 
revalidated, based on their completion date, in accordance with 
paragraph (e)(6) of this section.
    (2) The employer shall use one or more of the following 
methodologies that are appropriate to determine and evaluate the hazards 
of the process being analyzed.
    (i) What-If;

[[Page 349]]

    (ii) Checklist;
    (iii) What-If/Checklist;
    (iv) Hazard and Operability Study (HAZOP):
    (v) Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA);
    (vi) Fault Tree Analysis; or
    (vii) An appropriate equivalent methodology.
    (3) The process hazard analysis shall address:
    (i) The hazards of the process;
    (ii) The identification of any previous incident which had a likely 
potential for catastrophic consequences in the workplace;
    (iii) Engineering and administrative controls applicable to the 
hazards and their interrelationships such as appropriate application of 
detection methodologies to provide early warning of releases. 
(Acceptable detection methods might include process monitoring and 
control instrumentation with alarms, and detection hardware such as 
hydrocarbon sensors.);
    (iv) Consequences of failure of engineering and administrative 
controls;
    (v) Facility siting;
    (vi) Human factors; and
    (vii) A qualitative evaluation of a range of the possible safety and 
health effects of failure of controls on employees in the workplace.
    (4) The process hazard analysis shall be performed by a team with 
expertise in engineering and process operations, and the team shall 
include at least one employee who has experience and knowledge specific 
to the process being evaluated. Also, one member of the team must be 
knowledgeable in the specific process hazard analysis methodology being 
used.
    (5) The employer shall establish a system to promptly address the 
team's findings and recommendations; assure that the recommendations are 
resolved in a timely manner and that the resolution is documented; 
document what actions are to be taken; complete actions as soon as 
possible; develop a written schedule of when these actions are to be 
completed; communicate the actions to operating, maintenance and other 
employees whose work assignments are in the process and who may be 
affected by the recommendations or actions.
    (6) At least every five (5) years after the completion of the 
initial process hazard analysis, the process hazard analysis shall be 
updated and revalidated by a team meeting the requirements in paragraph 
(e)(4) of this section, to assure that the process hazard analysis is 
consistent with the current process.
    (7) Employers shall retain process hazards analyses and updates or 
revalidations for each process covered by this section, as well as the 
documented resolution of recommendations described in paragraph (e)(5) 
of this section for the life of the process.
    (f) Operating procedures (1) The employer shall develop and 
implement written operating procedures that provide clear instructions 
for safely conducting activities involved in each covered process 
consistent with the process safety information and shall address at 
least the following elements.
    (i) Steps for each operating phase:
    (A) Initial startup;
    (B) Normal operations;
    (C) Temporary operations;
    (D) Emergency shutdown including the conditions under which 
emergency shutdown is required, and the assignment of shutdown 
responsibility to qualified operators to ensure that emergency shutdown 
is executed in a safe and timely manner.
    (E) Emergency Operations;
    (F) Normal shutdown; and,
    (G) Startup following a turnaround, or after an emergency shutdown.
    (ii) Operating limits:
    (A) Consequences of deviation; and
    (B) Steps required to correct or avoid deviation.
    (iii) Safety and health considerations:
    (A) Properties of, and hazards presented by, the chemicals used in 
the process;
    (B) Precautions necessary to prevent exposure, including engineering 
controls, administrative controls, and personal protective equipment;
    (C) Control measures to be taken if physical contact or airborne 
exposure occurs;
    (D) Quality control for raw materials and control of hazardous 
chemical inventory levels; and,
    (E) Any special or unique hazards.
    (iv) Safety systems and their functions.

[[Page 350]]

    (2) Operating procedures shall be readily accessible to employees 
who work in or maintain a process.
    (3) The operating procedures shall be reviewed as often as necessary 
to assure that they reflect current operating practice, including 
changes that result from changes in process chemicals, technology, and 
equipment, and changes to facilities. The employer shall certify 
annually that these operating procedures are current and accurate.
    (4) The employer shall develop and implement safe work practices to 
provide for the control of hazards during operations such as lockout/
tagout; confined space entry; opening process equipment or piping; and 
control over entrance into a facility by maintenance, contractor, 
laboratory, or other support personnel. These safe work practices shall 
apply to employees and contractor employees.
    (g) Training--(1) Initial training. (i) Each employee presently 
involved in operating a process, and each employee before being involved 
in operating a newly assigned process, shall be trained in an overview 
of the process and in the operating procedures as specified in paragraph 
(f) of this section. The training shall include emphasis on the specific 
safety and health hazards, emergency operations including shutdown, and 
safe work practices applicable to the employee's job tasks.
    (ii) In lieu of initial training for those employees already 
involved in operating a process on May 26, 1992, an employer may certify 
in writing that the employee has the required knowledge, skills, and 
abilities to safely carry out the duties and responsibilities as 
specified in the operating procedures.
    (2) Refresher training. Refresher training shall be provided at 
least every three years, and more often if necessary, to each employee 
involved in operating a process to assure that the employee understands 
and adheres to the current operating procedures of the process. The 
employer, in consultation with the employees involved in operating the 
process, shall determine the appropriate frequency of refresher 
training.
    (3) Training documentation. The employer shall ascertain that each 
employee involved in operating a process has received and understood the 
training required by this paragraph. The employer shall prepare a record 
which contains the identity of the employee, the date of training, and 
the means used to verify that the employee understood the training.
    (h) Contractors--(1) Application. This paragraph applies to 
contractors performing maintenance or repair, turnaround, major 
renovation, or specialty work on or adjacent to a covered process. It 
does not apply to contractors providing incidental services which do not 
influence process safety, such as janitorial work, food and drink 
services, laundry, delivery or other supply services.
    (2) Employer responsibilities. (i) The employer, when selecting a 
contractor, shall obtain and evaluate information regarding the contract 
employer's safety performance and programs.
    (ii) The employer shall inform contract employers of the known 
potential fire, explosion, or toxic release hazards related to the 
contractor's work and the process.
    (iii) The employer shall explain to contract employers the 
applicable provisions of the emergency action plan required by paragraph 
(n) of this section.
    (iv) The employer shall develop and implement safe work practices 
consistent with paragraph (f)(4) of this section, to control the 
entrance, presence and exit of contract employers and contract employees 
in covered process areas.
    (v) The employer shall periodically evaluate the performance of 
contract employers in fulfilling their obligations as specified in 
paragraph (h)(3) of this section.
    (vi) The employer shall maintain a contract employee injury and 
illness log related to the contractor's work in process areas.
    (3) Contract employer responsibilities. (i) The contract employer 
shall assure that each contract employee is trained in the work 
practices necessary to safely perform his/her job.

[[Page 351]]

    (ii) The contract employer shall assure that each contract employee 
is instructed in the known potential fire, explosion, or toxic release 
hazards related to his/her job and the process, and the applicable 
provisions of the emergency action plan.
    (iii) The contract employer shall document that each contract 
employee has received and understood the training required by this 
paragraph. The contract employer shall prepare a record which contains 
the identity of the contract employee, the date of training, and the 
means used to verify that the employee understood the training.
    (iv) The contract employer shall assure that each contract employee 
follows the safety rules of the facility including the safe work 
practices required by paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
    (v) The contract employer shall advise the employer of any unique 
hazards presented by the contract employer's work, or of any hazards 
found by the contract employer's work.
    (i) Pre-startup safety review. (1) The employer shall perform a pre-
startup safety review for new facilities and for modified facilities 
when the modification is significant enough to require a change in the 
process safety information.
    (2) The pre-startup safety review shall confirm that prior to the 
introduction of highly hazardous chemicals to a process:
    (i) Construction and equipment is in accordance with design 
specifications;
    (ii) Safety, operating, maintenance, and emergency procedures are in 
place and are adequate;
    (iii) For new facilities, a process hazard analysis has been 
performed and recommendations have been resolved or implemented before 
startup; and modified facilities meet the requirements contained in 
management of change, paragraph (l).
    (iv) Training of each employee involved in operating a process has 
been completed.
    (j) Mechanical integrity--(1) Application. Paragraphs (j)(2) through 
(j)(6) of this section apply to the following process equipment:
    (i) Pressure vessels and storage tanks;
    (ii) Piping systems (including piping components such as valves);
    (iii) Relief and vent systems and devices;
    (iv) Emergency shutdown systems;
    (v) Controls (including monitoring devices and sensors, alarms, and 
interlocks) and,
    (vi) Pumps.
    (2) Written procedures. The employer shall establish and implement 
written procedures to maintain the on-going integrity of process 
equipment.
    (3) Training for process maintenance activities. The employer shall 
train each employee involved in maintaining the on-going integrity of 
process equipment in an overview of that process and its hazards and in 
the procedures applicable to the employee's job tasks to assure that the 
employee can perform the job tasks in a safe manner.
    (4) Inspection and testing. (i) Inspections and tests shall be 
performed on process equipment.
    (ii) Inspection and testing procedures shall follow recognized and 
generally accepted good engineering practices.
    (iii) The frequency of inspections and tests of process equipment 
shall be consistent with applicable manufacturers' recommendations and 
good engineering practices, and more frequently if determined to be 
necessary by prior operating experience.
    (iv) The employer shall document each inspection and test that has 
been performed on process equipment. The documentation shall identify 
the date of the inspection or test, the name of the person who performed 
the inspection or test, the serial number or other identifier of the 
equipment on which the inspection or test was performed, a description 
of the inspection or test performed, and the results of the inspection 
or test.
    (5) Equipment deficiencies. The employer shall correct deficiencies 
in equipment that are outside acceptable limits (defined by the process 
safety information in paragraph (d) of this section) before further use 
or in a safe and timely manner when necessary means are taken to assure 
safe operation.
    (6) Quality assurance. (i) In the construction of new plants and 
equipment,

[[Page 352]]

the employer shall assure that equipment as it is fabricated is suitable 
for the process application for which they will be used.
    (ii) Appropriate checks and inspections shall be performed to assure 
that equipment is installed properly and consistent with design 
specifications and the manufacturer's instructions.
    (iii) The employer shall assure that maintenance materials, spare 
parts and equipment are suitable for the process application for which 
they will be used.
    (k) Hot work permit. (1) The employer shall issue a hot work permit 
for hot work operations conducted on or near a covered process.
    (2) The permit shall document that the fire prevention and 
protection requirements in 29 CFR 1910.252(a) have been implemented 
prior to beginning the hot work operations; it shall indicate the 
date(s) authorized for hot work; and identify the object on which hot 
work is to be performed. The permit shall be kept on file until 
completion of the hot work operations.
    (l) Management of change. (1) The employer shall establish and 
implement written procedures to manage changes (except for 
``replacements in kind'') to process chemicals, technology, equipment, 
and procedures; and, changes to facilities that affect a covered 
process.
    (2) The procedures shall assure that the following considerations 
are addressed prior to any change:
    (i) The technical basis for the proposed change;
    (ii) Impact of change on safety and health;
    (iii) Modifications to operating procedures;
    (iv) Necessary time period for the change; and,
    (v) Authorization requirements for the proposed change.
    (3) Employees involved in operating a process and maintenance and 
contract employees whose job tasks will be affected by a change in the 
process shall be informed of, and trained in, the change prior to start-
up of the process or affected part of the process.
    (4) If a change covered by this paragraph results in a change in the 
process safety information required by paragraph (d) of this section, 
such information shall be updated accordingly.
    (5) If a change covered by this paragraph results in a change in the 
operating procedures or practices required by paragraph (f) of this 
section, such procedures or practices shall be updated accordingly.
    (m) Incident investigation. (1) The employer shall investigate each 
incident which resulted in, or could reasonably have resulted in a 
catastrophic release of highly hazardous chemical in the workplace.
    (2) An incident investigation shall be initiated as promptly as 
possible, but not later than 48 hours following the incident.
    (3) An incident investigation team shall be established and consist 
of at least one person knowledgeable in the process involved, including 
a contract employee if the incident involved work of the contractor, and 
other persons with appropriate knowledge and experience to thoroughly 
investigate and analyze the incident.
    (4) A report shall be prepared at the conclusion of the 
investigation which includes at a minimum:
    (i) Date of incident;
    (ii) Date investigation began;
    (iii) A description of the incident;
    (iv) The factors that contributed to the incident; and,
    (v) Any recommendations resulting from the investigation.I11(5) The 
employer shall establish a system to promptly address and resolve the 
incident report findings and recommendations. Resolutions and corrective 
actions shall be documented.
    (6) The report shall be reviewed with all affected personnel whose 
job tasks are relevant to the incident findings including contract 
employees where applicable.
    (7) Incident investigation reports shall be retained for five years.
    (n) Emergency planning and response. The employer shall establish 
and implement an emergency action plan for the entire plant in 
accordance with the provisions of 29 CFR 1910.38(a). In addition, the 
emergency action plan shall include procedures for handling small 
releases. Employers covered under this standard may also be subject to 
the hazardous waste and emergency response provisions contained in 29 
CFR 1910.120 (a), (p) and (q).

[[Page 353]]

    (o) Compliance Audits. (1) Employers shall certify that they have 
evaluated compliance with the provisions of this section at least every 
three years to verify that the procedures and practices developed under 
the standard are adequate and are being followed.
    (2) The compliance audit shall be conducted by at least one person 
knowledgeable in the process.
    (3) A report of the findings of the audit shall be developed.
    (4) The employer shall promptly determine and document an 
appropriate response to each of the findings of the compliance audit, 
and document that deficiencies have been corrected.
    (5) Employers shall retain the two (2) most recent compliance audit 
reports.
    (p) Trade secrets. (1) Employers shall make all information 
necessary to comply with the section available to those persons 
responsible for compiling the process safety information (required by 
paragraph (d) of this section), those assisting in the development of 
the process hazard analysis (required by paragraph (e) of this section), 
those responsible for developing the operating procedures (required by 
paragraph (f) of this section), and those involved in incident 
investigations (required by paragraph (m) of this section), emergency 
planning and response (paragraph (n) of this section) and compliance 
audits (paragraph (o) of this section) without regard to possible trade 
secret status of such information.
    (2) Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the employer from 
requiring the persons to whom the information is made available under 
paragraph (p)(1) of this section to enter into confidentiality 
agreements not to disclose the information as set forth in 29 CFR 
1910.1200.
    (3) Subject to the rules and procedures set forth in 29 CFR 
1910.1200(i)(1) through 1910.1200(i)(12), employees and their designated 
representatives shall have access to trade secret information contained 
within the process hazard analysis and other documents required to be 
developed by this standard.

Appendix A to Sec. 1910.119--List of Highly Hazardous Chemicals, Toxics 
                        and Reactives (Mandatory)

    This appendix contains a listing of toxic and reactive highly 
hazardous chemicals which present a potential for a catastrophic event 
at or above the threshold quantity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   CHEMICAL name                         CAS*      TQ**
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acetaldehyde.......................................      75-07-0    2500
Acrolein (2-Propenal)..............................     107-02-8     150
Acrylyl Chloride...................................     814-68-6     250
Allyl Chloride.....................................     107-05-1    1000
Allylamine.........................................     107-11-9    1000
Alkylaluminums.....................................       Varies    5000
Ammonia, Anhydrous.................................    7664-41-7   10000
Ammonia solutions (>44% ammonia by weight).........    7664-41-7   15000
Ammonium Perchlorate...............................    7790-98-9    7500
Ammonium Permanganate..............................    7787-36-2    7500
Arsine (also called Arsenic Hydride)...............    7784-42-1     100
Bis(Chloromethyl) Ether............................     542-88-1     100
Boron Trichloride..................................   10294-34-5    2500
Boron Trifluoride..................................    7637-07-2     250
Bromine............................................    7726-95-6    1500
Bromine Chloride...................................   13863-41-7    1500
Bromine Pentafluoride..............................    7789-30-2    2500
Bromine Trifluoride................................    7787-71-5   15000
3-Bromopropyne (also called Propargyl Bromide).....     106-96-7     100
Butyl Hydroperoxide (Tertiary).....................      75-91-2    5000
Butyl Perbenzoate (Tertiary).......................     614-45-9    7500
Carbonyl Chloride (see Phosgene)...................      75-44-5     100
Carbonyl Fluoride..................................     353-50-4    2500
Cellulose Nitrate (concentration >12.6% nitrogen...    9004-70-0    2500
Chlorine...........................................    7782-50-5    1500
Chlorine Dioxide...................................   10049-04-4    1000
Chlorine Pentrafluoride............................   13637-63-3    1000
Chlorine Trifluoride...............................    7790-91-2    1000
Chlorodiethylaluminum (also called Diethylaluminum
 Chloride).........................................      96-10-6    5000
1-Chloro-2,4-Dinitrobenzene........................      97-00-7    5000
Chloromethyl Methyl Ether..........................     107-30-2     500
Chloropicrin.......................................      76-06-2     500
Chloropicrin and Methyl Bromide mixture............         None    1500
Chloropicrin and Methyl Chloride mixture...........         None    1500
Cumene Hydroperoxide...............................      80-15-9    5000
Cyanogen...........................................     460-19-5    2500
Cyanogen Chloride..................................     506-77-4     500
Cyanuric Fluoride..................................     675-14-9     100
Diacetyl Peroxide (Concentration >70%).............     110-22-5    5000
Diazomethane.......................................     334-88-3     500
Dibenzoyl Peroxide.................................      94-36-0    7500
Diborane...........................................   19287-45-7     100
Dibutyl Peroxide (Tertiary)........................     110-05-4    5000
Dichloro Acetylene.................................    7572-29-4     250
Dichlorosilane.....................................    4109-96-0    2500
Diethylzinc........................................     557-20-0   10000
Diisopropyl Peroxydicarbonate......................     105-64-6    7500
Dilaluroyl Peroxide................................     105-74-8    7500
Dimethyldichlorosilane.............................      75-78-5    1000
Dimethylhydrazine, 1,1-............................      57-14-7    1000
Dimethylamine, Anhydrous...........................     124-40-3    2500
2,4-Dinitroaniline.................................      97-02-9    5000
Ethyl Methyl Ketone Peroxide (also Methyl Ethyl
 Ketone Peroxide; concentration >60%)..............    1338-23-4    5000

[[Page 354]]

Ethyl Nitrite......................................     109-95-5    5000
Ethylamine.........................................      75-04-7    7500
Ethylene Fluorohydrin..............................     371-62-0     100
Ethylene Oxide.....................................      75-21-8    5000
Ethyleneimine......................................     151-56-4    1000
Fluorine...........................................    7782-41-4    1000
Formaldehyde (Formalin)............................      50-00-0    1000
Furan..............................................     110-00-9     500
Hexafluoroacetone..................................     684-16-2    5000
Hydrochloric Acid, Anhydrous.......................    7647-01-0    5000
Hydrofluoric Acid, Anhydrous.......................    7664-39-3    1000
Hydrogen Bromide...................................   10035-10-6    5000
Hydrogen Chloride..................................    7647-01-0    5000
Hydrogen Cyanide, Anhydrous........................      74-90-8    1000
Hydrogen Fluoride..................................    7664-39-3    1000
Hydrogen Peroxide (52% by weight or greater).......    7722-84-1    7500
Hydrogen Selenide..................................    7783-07-5     150
Hydrogen Sulfide...................................    7783-06-4    1500
Hydroxylamine......................................    7803-49-8    2500
Iron, Pentacarbonyl................................   13463-40-6     250
Isopropylamine.....................................      75-31-0    5000
Ketene.............................................     463-51-4     100
Methacrylaldehyde..................................      78-85-3    1000
Methacryloyl Chloride..............................     920-46-7     150
Methacryloyloxyethyl Isocyanate....................   30674-80-7     100
Methyl Acrylonitrile...............................     126-98-7     250
Methylamine, Anhydrous.............................      74-89-5    1000
Methyl Bromide.....................................      74-83-9    2500
Methyl Chloride....................................      74-87-3   15000
Methyl Chloroformate...............................      79-22-1     500
Methyl Ethyl Ketone Peroxide (concentration >60%)..    1338-23-4    5000
Methyl Fluoroacetate...............................     453-18-9     100
Methyl Fluorosulfate...............................     421-20-5     100
Methyl Hydrazine...................................      60-34-4     100
Methyl Iodide......................................      74-88-4    7500
Methyl Isocyanate..................................     624-83-9     250
Methyl Mercaptan...................................      74-93-1    5000
Methyl Vinyl Ketone................................      79-84-4     100
Methyltrichlorosilane..............................      75-79-6     500
Nickel Carbonly (Nickel Tetracarbonyl).............   13463-39-3     150
Nitric Acid (94.5% by weight or greater)...........    7697-37-2     500
Nitric Oxide.......................................   10102-43-9     250
Nitroaniline (para Nitroaniline....................     100-01-6    5000
Nitromethane.......................................      75-52-5    2500
Nitrogen Dioxide...................................   10102-44-0     250
Nitrogen Oxides (NO; NO<INF>2; N204; N203)..............   10102-44-0     250
Nitrogen Tetroxide (also called Nitrogen Peroxide).   10544-72-6     250
Nitrogen Trifluoride...............................    7783-54-2    5000
Nitrogen Trioxide..................................   10544-73-7     250
Oleum (65% to 80% by weight; also called Fuming
 Sulfuric Acid)....................................    8014-94-7    1000
Osmium Tetroxide...................................   20816-12-0     100
Oxygen Difluoride (Fluorine Monoxide)..............    7783-41-7     100
Ozone..............................................   10028-15-6     100
Pentaborane........................................   19624-22-7     100
Peracetic Acid (concentration >60% Acetic Acid;
 also called Peroxyacetic Acid)....................      79-21-0    1000
Perchloric Acid (concentration >60% by weight).....    7601-90-3    5000
Perchloromethyl Mercaptan..........................     594-42-3     150
Perchloryl Fluoride................................    7616-94-6    5000
Peroxyacetic Acid (concentration >60% Acetic Acid;
 also called Peracetic Acid).......................      79-21-0    1000
Phosgene (also called Carbonyl Chloride)...........      75-44-5     100
Phosphine (Hydrogen Phosphide).....................    7803-51-2     100
Phosphorus Oxychloride (also called Phosphoryl
 Chloride).........................................   10025-87-3    1000
Phosphorus Trichloride.............................    7719-12-2    1000
Phosphoryl Chloride (also called Phosphorus
 Oxychloride)......................................   10025-87-3    1000
Propargyl Bromide..................................     106-96-7     100
Propyl Nitrate.....................................      627-3-4    2500
Sarin..............................................     107-44-8     100
Selenium Hexafluoride..............................    7783-79-1    1000
Stibine (Antimony Hydride).........................    7803-52-3     500
Sulfur Dioxide (liquid)............................    7446-09-5    1000
Sulfur Pentafluoride...............................    5714-22-7     250
Sulfur Tetrafluoride...............................    7783-60-0     250
Sulfur Trioxide (also called Sulfuric Anhydride)...    7446-11-9    1000
Sulfuric Anhydride (also called Sulfur Trioxide)...    7446-11-9    1000
Tellurium Hexafluoride.............................    7783-80-4     250
Tetrafluoroethylene................................     116-14-3    5000
Tetrafluorohydrazine...............................   10036-47-2    5000
Tetramethyl Lead...................................      75-74-1    1000
Thionyl Chloride...................................    7719-09-7     250
Trichloro (chloromethyl) Silane....................    1558-25-4     100
Trichloro (dichlorophenyl) Silane..................   27137-85-5    2500
Trichlorosilane....................................   10025-78-2    5000
Trifluorochloroethylene............................      79-38-9   10000
Trimethyoxysilane..................................    2487-90-3    1500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Chemical Abstract Service Number.
**Threshold Quantity in Pounds (Amount necessary to be covered by this
  standard).


[[Page 355]]

 Appendix B to Sec. 1910.119--Block Flow Diagram and Simplified Process 
                       Flow Diagram (Nonmandatory)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.026


[[Page 356]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.027

 Appendix C to Sec. 1910.119--Compliance Guidelines and Recommendations 
              for Process Safety Management (Nonmandatory)

    This appendix serves as a nonmandatory guideline to assist employers 
and employees in complying with the requirements of this section, as 
well as provides other helpful recommendations and information. Examples 
presented in this appendix are not the only means of achieving the 
performance goals in the standard. This appendix neither adds nor 
detracts from the requirements of the standard.
    1. Introduction to Process Safety Management. The major objective of 
process safety management of highly hazardous chemicals is to prevent 
unwanted releases of hazardous chemicals especially into locations which 
could expose employees and others to serious hazards. An effective 
process safety management program requires a systematic approach to 
evaluating the whole process. Using this approach the process design, 
process technology, operational and maintenance activities and 
procedures, nonroutine activities and procedures, emergency preparedness 
plans and procedures, training programs, and other elements which impact 
the process are all considered in the evaluation. The various lines of 
defense that have been incorporated into the design and operation of the 
process to prevent or mitigate the release of hazardous chemicals need 
to be evaluated and strengthened to assure their effectiveness at each 
level. Process safety management is the proactive identification, 
evaluation and mitigation or prevention of chemical releases that could 
occur as a result of failures in process, procedures or equipment.

[[Page 357]]

    The process safety management standard targets highly hazardous 
chemicals that have the potential to cause a catastrophic incident. This 
standard as a whole is to aid employers in their efforts to prevent or 
mitigate episodic chemical releases that could lead to a catastrophe in 
the workplace and possibly to the surrounding community. To control 
these types of hazards, employers need to develop the necessary 
expertise, experiences, judgement and proactive initiative within their 
workforce to properly implement and maintain an effective process safety 
management program as envisioned in the OSHA standard. This OSHA 
standard is required by the Clean Air Act Amendments as is the 
Environmental Protection Agency's Risk Management Plan. Employers, who 
merge the two sets of requirements into their process safety management 
program, will better assure full compliance with each as well as 
enhancing their relationship with the local community.
    While OSHA believes process safety management will have a positive 
effect on the safety of employees in workplaces and also offers other 
potential benefits to employers (increased productivity), smaller 
businesses which may have limited resources available to them at this 
time, might consider alternative avenues of decreasing the risks 
associated with highly hazardous chemicals at their workplaces. One 
method which might be considered is the reduction in the inventory of 
the highly hazardous chemical. This reduction in inventory will result 
in a reduction of the risk or potential for a catastrophic incident. 
Also, employers including small employers may be able to establish more 
efficient inventory control by reducing the quantities of highly 
hazardous chemicals on site below the established threshold quantities. 
This reduction can be accomplished by ordering smaller shipments and 
maintaining the minimum inventory necessary for efficient and safe 
operation. When reduced inventory is not feasible, then the employer 
might consider dispersing inventory to several locations on site. 
Dispersing storage into locations where a release in one location will 
not cause a release in another location is a practical method to also 
reduce the risk or portential for catastrophic incidents.
    2. Employee Involvement in Process Safety Management. Section 304 of 
the Clean Air Act Amendments states that employers are to consult with 
their employees and their representatives regarding the employers 
efforts in the development and implementation of the process safety 
management program elements and hazard assessments. Section 304 also 
requires employers to train and educate their employees and to inform 
affected employees of the findings from incident investigations required 
by the process safety management program. Many employers, under their 
safety and health programs, have already established means and methods 
to keep employees and their representatives informed about relevant 
safety and health issues and employers may be able to adapt these 
practices and procedures to meet their obligations under this standard. 
Employers who have not implemented an occupational safety and health 
program may wish to form a safety and health committee of employees and 
management representatives to help the employer meet the obligations 
specified by this standard. These committees can become a significant 
ally in helping the employer to implement and maintain an effective 
process safety managment program for all employees.
    3. Process Safety Information. Complete and accurate written 
information concerning process chemicals, process technology, and 
process equipment is essential to an effective process safety management 
program and to a process hazards analysis. The compiled information will 
be a necessary resource to a variety of users including the team that 
will perform the process hazards analysis as required under paragraph 
(e); those developing the training programs and the operating 
procedures; contractors whose employees will be working with the 
process; those conducting the pre-startup reviews; local emergency 
preparedness planners; and insurance and enforcement officials.
    The information to be compiled about the chemicals, including 
process intermediates, needs to be comprehensive enough for an accurate 
assessment of the fire and explosion characteristics, reactivity 
hazards, the safety and health hazards to workers, and the corrosion and 
erosion effects on the process equipment and monitoring tools. Current 
material safety data sheet (MSDS) information can be used to help meet 
this requirement which must be supplemented with process chemistry 
information including runaway reaction and over pressure hazards if 
applicable.
    Process technology information will be a part of the process safety 
information package and it is expected that it will include diagrams of 
the type shown in appendix B of this section as well as employer 
established criteria for maximum inventory levels for process chemicals; 
limits beyond which would be considered upset conditions; and a 
qualitative estimate of the consequences or results of deviation that 
could occur if operating beyond the established process limits. 
Employers are encouraged to use diagrams which will help users 
understand the process.
    A block flow diagram is used to show the major process equipment and 
interconnecting process flow lines and show flow rates, stream 
composition, temperatures, and pressures when necessary for clarity. The 
block flow diagram is a simplified diagram.

[[Page 358]]

    Process flow diagrams are more complex and will show all main flow 
streams including valves to enhance the understanding of the process, as 
well as pressures and temperatures on all feed and product lines within 
all major vessels, in and out of headers and heat exchangers, and points 
of pressure and temperature control. Also, materials of construction 
information, pump capacities and pressure heads, compressor horsepower 
and vessel design pressures and temperatures are shown when necessary 
for clarity. In addition, major components of control loops are usually 
shown along with key utilities on process flow diagrams.
    Piping and instrument diagrams (P&IDs) may be the more appropriate 
type of diagrams to show some of the above details and to display the 
information for the piping designer and engineering staff. The P&IDs are 
to be used to describe the relationships between equipment and 
instrumentation as well as other relevant information that will enhance 
clarity. Computer software programs which do P&IDs or other diagrams 
useful to the information package, may be used to help meet this 
requirement.
    The information pertaining to process equipment design must be 
documented. In other words, what were the codes and standards relied on 
to establish good engineering practice. These codes and standards are 
published by such organizations as the American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, American Petroleum Institute, American National Standards 
Institute, National Fire Protection Association, American Society for 
Testing and Materials, National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Inspectors, National Association of Corrosion Engineers, American 
Society of Exchange Manufacturers Association, and model building code 
groups.
    In addition, various engineering societies issue technical reports 
which impact process design. For example, the American Institute of 
Chemical Engineers has published technical reports on topics such as two 
phase flow for venting devices. This type of technically recognized 
report would constitute good engineering practice.
    For existing equipment designed and constructed many years ago in 
accordance with the codes and standards available at that time and no 
longer in general use today, the employer must document which codes and 
standards were used and that the design and construction along with the 
testing, inspection and operation are still suitable for the intended 
use. Where the process technology requires a design which departs from 
the applicable codes and standards, the employer must document that the 
design and construction is suitable for the intended purpose.
    4. Process Hazard Analysis. A process hazard analysis (PHA), 
sometimes called a process hazard evaluation, is one of the most 
important elements of the process safety management program. A PHA is an 
organized and systematic effort to identify and analyze the significance 
of potential hazards associated with the processing or handling of 
highly hazardous chemicals. A PHA provides information which will assist 
employers and employees in making decisions for improving safety and 
reducing the consequences of unwanted or unplanned releases of hazardous 
chemicals. A PHA is directed toward analyzing potential causes and 
consequences of fires, explosions, releases of toxic or flammable 
chemicals and major spills of hazardous chemicals. The PHA focuses on 
equipment, instrumentation, utilities, human actions (routine and 
nonroutine), and external factors that might impact the process. These 
considerations assist in determining the hazards and potential failure 
points or failure modes in a process.
    The selection of a PHA methodology or technique will be influenced 
by many factors including the amount of existing knowledge about the 
process. Is it a process that has been operated for a long period of 
time with little or no innovation and extensive experience has been 
generated with its use? Or, is it a new process or one which has been 
changed frequently by the inclusion of innovative features? Also, the 
size and complexity of the process will influence the decision as to the 
appropriate PHA methodology to use. All PHA methodologies are subject to 
certain limitations. For example, the checklist methodology works well 
when the process is very stable and no changes are made, but it is not 
as effective when the process has undergone extensive change. The 
checklist may miss the most recent changes and consequently the changes 
would not be evaluated. Another limitation to be considered concerns the 
assumptions made by the team or analyst. The PHA is dependent on good 
judgement and the assumptions made during the study need to be 
documented and understood by the team and reviewer and kept for a future 
PHA.
    The team conducting the PHA need to understand the methodology that 
is going to be used. A PHA team can vary in size from two people to a 
number of people with varied operational and technical backgrounds. Some 
team members may only be a part of the team for a limited time. The team 
leader needs to be fully knowledgeable in the proper implementation of 
the PHA methodology that is to be used and should be impartial in the 
evaluation. The other full or part time team members need to provide the 
team with expertise in areas such as process technology, process design, 
operating procedures

[[Page 359]]

and practices, including how the work is actually performed, alarms, 
emergency procedures, instrumentation, maintenance procedures, both 
routine and nonroutine tasks, including how the tasks are authorized, 
procurement of parts and supplies, safety and health, and any other 
relevant subject as the need dictates. At least one team member must be 
familiar with the process.
    The ideal team will have an intimate knowledge of the standards, 
codes, specifications and regulations applicable to the process being 
studied. The selected team members need to be compatible and the team 
leader needs to be able to manage the team, and the PHA study. The team 
needs to be able to work together while benefiting from the expertise of 
others on the team or outside the team, to resolve issues, and to forge 
a consensus on the findings of the study and recommendations.
    The application of a PHA to a process may involve the use of 
different methodologies for various parts of the process. For example, a 
process involving a series of unit operation of varying sizes, 
complexities, and ages may use different methodologies and team members 
for each operation. Then the conclusions can be integrated into one 
final study and evaluation. A more specific example is the use of a 
checklist PHA for a standard boiler or heat exchanger and the use of a 
Hazard and Operability PHA for the overall process. Also, for batch type 
processes like custom batch operations, a generic PHA of a 
representative batch may be used where there are only small changes of 
monomer or other ingredient ratios and the chemistry is documented for 
the full range and ratio of batch ingredients. Another process that 
might consider using a generic type of PHA is a gas plant. Often these 
plants are simply moved from site to site and therefore, a generic PHA 
may be used for these movable plants. Also, when an employer has several 
similar size gas plants and no sour gas is being processed at the site, 
then a generic PHA is feasible as long as the variations of the 
individual sites are accounted for in the PHA. Finally, when an employer 
has a large continuous process which has several control rooms for 
different portions of the process such as for a distillation tower and a 
blending operation, the employer may wish to do each segment separately 
and then integrate the final results.
    Additionally, small businesses which are covered by this rule, will 
often have processes that have less storage volume, less capacity, and 
less complicated than processes at a large facility. Therefore, OSHA 
would anticipate that the less complex methodologies would be used to 
meet the process hazard analysis criteria in the standard. These process 
hazard analyses can be done in less time and with a few people being 
involved. A less complex process generally means that less data, P&IDs, 
and process information is needed to perform a process hazard analysis.
    Many small businesses have processes that are not unique, such as 
cold storage lockers or water treatment facilities. Where employer 
associations have a number of members with such facilities, a generic 
PHA, evolved from a checklist or what-if questions, could be developed 
and used by each employer effectively to reflect his/her particular 
process; this would simplify compliance for them.
    When the employer has a number of processes which require a PHA, the 
employer must set up a priority system of which PHAs to conduct first. A 
preliminary or gross hazard analysis may be useful in prioritizing the 
processes that the employer has determined are subject to coverage by 
the process safety management standard. Consideration should first be 
given to those processes with the potential of adversely affecting the 
largest number of employees. This prioritizing should consider the 
potential severity of a chemical release, the number of potentially 
affected employees, the operating history of the process such as the 
frequency of chemical releases, the age of the process and any other 
relevant factors. These factors would suggest a ranking order and would 
suggest either using a weighing factor system or a systematic ranking 
method. The use of a preliminary hazard analysis would assist an 
employer in determining which process should be of the highest priority 
and thereby the employer would obtain the greatest improvement in safety 
at the facility.
    Detailed guidance on the content and application of process hazard 
analysis methodologies is available from the American Institute of 
Chemical Engineers' Center for Chemical Process Safety (see appendix D).
    5. Operating Procedures and Practices. Operating procedures describe 
tasks to be performed, data to be recorded, operating conditions to be 
maintained, samples to be collected, and safety and health precautions 
to be taken. The procedures need to be technically accurate, 
understandable to employees, and revised periodically to ensure that 
they reflect current operations. The process safety information package 
is to be used as a resource to better assure that the operating 
procedures and practices are consistent with the known hazards of the 
chemicals in the process and that the operating parameters are accurate. 
Operating procedures should be reviewed by engineering staff and 
operating personnel to ensure that they are accurate and provide 
practical instructions on how to actually carry out job duties safely.
    Operating procedures will include specific instructions or details 
on what steps are to be taken or followed in carrying out the stated 
procedures. These operating instructions for each procedure should 
include the

[[Page 360]]

applicable safety precautions and should contain appropriate information 
on safety implications. For example, the operating procedures addressing 
operating parameters will contain operating instructions about pressure 
limits, temperature ranges, flow rates, what to do when an upset 
condition occurs, what alarms and instruments are pertinent if an upset 
condition occurs, and other subjects. Another example of using operating 
instructions to properly implement operating procedures is in starting 
up or shutting down the process. In these cases, different parameters 
will be required from those of normal operation. These operating 
instructions need to clearly indicate the distinctions between startup 
and normal operations such as the appropriate allowances for heating up 
a unit to reach the normal operating parameters. Also the operating 
instructions need to describe the proper method for increasing the 
temperature of the unit until the normal operating temperature 
parameters are achieved.
    Computerized process control systems add complexity to operating 
instructions. These operating instructions need to describe the logic of 
the software as well as the relationship between the equipment and the 
control system; otherwise, it may not be apparent to the operator.
    Operating procedures and instructions are important for training 
operating personnel. The operating procedures are often viewed as the 
standard operating practices (SOPs) for operations. Control room 
personnel and operating staff, in general, need to have a full 
understanding of operating procedures. If workers are not fluent in 
English then procedures and instructions need to be prepared in a second 
language understood by the workers. In addition, operating procedures 
need to be changed when there is a change in the process as a result of 
the management of change procedures. The consequences of operating 
procedure changes need to be fully evaluated and the information 
conveyed to the personnel. For example, mechanical changes to the 
process made by the maintenance department (like changing a valve from 
steel to brass or other subtle changes) need to be evaluated to 
determine if operating procedures and practices also need to be changed. 
All management of change actions must be coordinated and integrated with 
current operating procedures and operating personnel must be oriented to 
the changes in procedures before the change is made. When the process is 
shut down in order to make a change, then the operating procedures must 
be updated before startup of the process.
    Training in how to handle upset conditions must be accomplished as 
well as what operating personnel are to do in emergencies such as when a 
pump seal fails or a pipeline ruptures. Communication between operating 
personnel and workers performing work within the process area, such as 
nonroutine tasks, also must be maintained. The hazards of the tasks are 
to be conveyed to operating personnel in accordance with established 
procedures and to those performing the actual tasks. When the work is 
completed, operating personnel should be informed to provide closure on 
the job.
    6. Employee Training. All employees, including maintenance and 
contractor employees, involved with highly hazardous chemicals need to 
fully understand the safety and health hazards of the chemicals and 
processes they work with for the protection of themselves, their fellow 
employees and the citizens of nearby communities. Training conducted in 
compliance with Sec. 1910.1200, the Hazard Communication standard, will 
help employees to be more knowledgeable about the chemicals they work 
with as well as familiarize them with reading and understanding MSDS. 
However, additional training in subjects such as operating procedures 
and safety work practices, emergency evacuation and response, safety 
procedures, routine and nonroutine work authorization activities, and 
other areas pertinent to process safety and health will need to be 
covered by an employer's training program.
    In establishing their training programs, employers must clearly 
define the employees to be trained and what subjects are to be covered 
in their training. Employers in setting up their training program will 
need to clearly establish the goals and objectives they wish to achieve 
with the training that they provide to their employees. The learning 
goals or objectives should be written in clear measurable terms before 
the training begins. These goals and objectives need to be tailored to 
each of the specific training modules or segments. Employers should 
describe the important actions and conditions under which the employee 
will demonstrate competence or knowledge as well as what is acceptable 
performance.
    Hands-on-training where employees are able to use their senses 
beyond listening, will enhance learning. For example, operating 
personnel, who will work in a control room or at control panels, would 
benefit by being trained at a simulated control panel or panels. Upset 
conditions of various types could be displayed on the simulator, and 
then the employee could go through the proper operating procedures to 
bring the simulator panel back to the normal operating parameters. A 
training environment could be created to help the trainee feel the full 
reality of the situation but, of course, under controlled conditions. 
This realistic type of training can be very effective in teaching 
employees correct procedures while allowing them to also see the 
consequences of what might happen if they do not follow established 
operating procedures. Other training techniques using videos or on-the-

[[Page 361]]

job training can also be very effective for teaching other job tasks, 
duties, or other important information. An effective training program 
will allow the employee to fully participate in the training process and 
to practice their skill or knowledge.
    Employers need to periodically evaluate their training programs to 
see if the necessary skills, knowledge, and routines are being properly 
understood and implemented by their trained employees. The means or 
methods for evaluating the training should be developed along with the 
training program goals and objectives. Training program evaluation will 
help employers to determine the amount of training their employees 
understood, and whether the desired results were obtained. If, after the 
evaluation, it appears that the trained employees are not at the level 
of knowledge and skill that was expected, the employer will need to 
revise the training program, provide retraining, or provide more 
frequent refresher training sessions until the deficiency is resolved. 
Those who conducted the training and those who received the training 
should also be consulted as to how best to improve the training process. 
If there is a language barrier, the language known to the trainees 
should be used to reinforce the training messages and information.
    Careful consideration must be given to assure that employees 
including maintenance and contract employees receive current and updated 
training . For example, if changes are made to a process, impacted 
employees must be trained in the changes and understand the effects of 
the changes on their job tasks (e.g., any new operating procedures 
pertinent to their tasks). Additionally, as already discussed the 
evaluation of the employee's absorption of training will certainly 
influence the need for training.
    7. Contractors. Employers who use contractors to perform work in and 
around processes that involve highly hazardous chemicals, will need to 
establish a screening process so that they hire and use contractors who 
accomplish the desired job tasks without compromising the safety and 
health of employees at a facility. For contractors, whose safety 
performance on the job is not known to the hiring employer, the employer 
will need to obtain information on injury and illness rates and 
experience and should obtain contractor references. Additionally, the 
employer must assure that the contractor has the appropriate job skills, 
knowledge and certifications (such as for pressure vessel welders). 
Contractor work methods and experiences should be evaluated. For 
example, does the contractor conducting demolition work swing loads over 
operating processes or does the contractor avoid such hazards?
    Maintaining a site injury and illness log for contractors is another 
method employers must use to track and maintain current knowledge of 
work activities involving contract employees working on or adjacent to 
covered processes. Injury and illness logs of both the employer's 
employees and contract employees allow an employer to have full 
knowledge of process injury and illness experience. This log will also 
contain information which will be of use to those auditing process 
safety management compliance and those involved in incident 
investigations.
    Contract employees must perform their work safely. Considering that 
contractors often perform very specialized and potentially hazardous 
tasks such as confined space entry activities and nonroutine repair 
activities it is quite important that their activities be controlled 
while they are working on or near a covered process. A permit system or 
work authorization system for these activities would also be helpful to 
all affected employers. The use of a work authorization system keeps an 
employer informed of contract employee activities, and as a benefit the 
employer will have better coordination and more management control over 
the work being performed in the process area. A well run and well 
maintained process where employee safety is fully recognized will 
benefit all of those who work in the facility whether they be contract 
employees or employees of the owner.
    8. Pre-Startup Safety. For new processes, the employer will find a 
PHA helpful in improving the design and construction of the process from 
a reliability and quality point of view. The safe operation of the new 
process will be enhanced by making use of the PHA recommendations before 
final installations are completed. P&IDs are to be completed along with 
having the operating procedures in place and the operating staff trained 
to run the process before startup. The initial startup procedures and 
normal operating procedures need to be fully evaluated as part of the 
pre-startup review to assure a safe transfer into the normal operating 
mode for meeting the process parameters.
    For existing processes that have been shutdown for turnaround, or 
modification, etc., the employer must assure that any changes other than 
``replacement in kind'' made to the process during shutdown go through 
the management of change procedures. P&IDs will need to be updated as 
necessary, as well as operating procedures and instructions. If the 
changes made to the process during shutdown are significant and impact 
the training program, then operating personnel as well as employees 
engaged in routine and nonroutine work in the process area may need some 
refresher or additional training in light of the changes. Any incident 
investigation recommendations, compliance audits or PHA recommendations 
need to be reviewed as well to see what impacts they may have on the 
process before beginning the startup.

[[Page 362]]

    9. Mechanical Integrity. Employers will need to review their 
maintenance programs and schedules to see if there are areas where 
``breakdown'' maintenance is used rather than an on-going mechanical 
integrity program. Equipment used to process, store, or handle highly 
hazardous chemicals needs to be designed, constructed, installed and 
maintained to minimize the risk of releases of such chemicals. This 
requires that a mechanical integrity program be in place to assure the 
continued integrity of process equipment. Elements of a mechanical 
integrity program include the identification and categorization of 
equipment and instrumentation, inspections and tests, testing and 
inspection frequencies, development of maintenance procedures, training 
of maintenance personnel, the establishment of criteria for acceptable 
test results, documentation of test and inspection results, and 
documentation of manufacturer recommendations as to meantime to failure 
for equipment and instrumentation.
    The first line of defense an employer has available is to operate 
and maintain the process as designed, and to keep the chemicals 
contained. This line of defense is backed up by the next line of defense 
which is the controlled release of chemicals through venting to 
scrubbers or flares, or to surge or overflow tanks which are designed to 
receive such chemicals, etc. These lines of defense are the primary 
lines of defense or means to prevent unwanted releases. The secondary 
lines of defense would include fixed fire protection systems like 
sprinklers, water spray, or deluge systems, monitor guns, etc., dikes, 
designed drainage systems, and other systems which would control or 
mitigate hazardous chemicals once an unwanted release occurs. These 
primary and secondary lines of defense are what the mechanical integrity 
program needs to protect and strengthen these primary and secondary 
lines of defenses where appropriate.
    The first step of an effective mechanical integrity program is to 
compile and categorize a list of process equipment and instrumentation 
for inclusion in the program. This list would include pressure vessels, 
storage tanks, process piping, relief and vent systems, fire protection 
system components, emergency shutdown systems and alarms and interlocks 
and pumps. For the categorization of instrumentation and the listed 
equipment the employer would prioritize which pieces of equipment 
require closer scrutiny than others. Meantime to failure of various 
instrumentation and equipment parts would be known from the 
manufacturers data or the employer's experience with the parts, which 
would then influence the inspection and testing frequency and associated 
procedures. Also, applicable codes and standards such as the National 
Board Inspection Code, or those from the American Society for Testing 
and Material, American Petroleum Institute, National Fire Protection 
Association, American National Standards Institute, American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, and other groups, provide information to help 
establish an effective testing and inspection frequency, as well as 
appropriate methodologies.
    The applicable codes and standards provide criteria for external 
inspections for such items as foundation and supports, anchor bolts, 
concrete or steel supports, guy wires, nozzles and sprinklers, pipe 
hangers, grounding connections, protective coatings and insulation, and 
external metal surfaces of piping and vessels, etc. These codes and 
standards also provide information on methodologies for internal 
inspection, and a frequency formula based on the corrosion rate of the 
materials of construction. Also, erosion both internal and external 
needs to be considered along with corrosion effects for piping and 
valves. Where the corrosion rate is not known, a maximum inspection 
frequency is recommended, and methods of developing the corrosion rate 
are available in the codes. Internal inspections need to cover items 
such as vessel shell, bottom and head; metallic linings; nonmetallic 
linings; thickness measurements for vessels and piping; inspection for 
erosion, corrosion, cracking and bulges; internal equipment like trays, 
baffles, sensors and screens for erosion, corrosion or cracking and 
other deficiencies. Some of these inspections may be performed by state 
of local government inspectors under state and local statutes. However, 
each employer needs to develop procedures to ensure that tests and 
inspections are conducted properly and that consistency is maintained 
even where different employees may be involved. Appropriate training is 
to be provided to maintenance personnel to ensure that they understand 
the preventive maintenance program procedures, safe practices, and the 
proper use amd application of special equipment or unique tools that may 
be required. This training is part of the overall training program 
called for in the standard.
    A quality assurance system is needed to help ensure that the proper 
materials of construction are used, that fabrication and inspection 
procedures are proper, and that installation procedures recognize field 
installation concerns. The quality assurance program is an essential 
part of the mechanical integrity program and will help to maintain the 
primary and secondary lines of defense that have been designed into the 
process to prevent unwanted chemical releases or those which control or 
mitigate a release. ``As built'' drawings, together with certifications 
of coded vessels and other equipment, and materials of construction need 
to be verified and retained in the quality assurance documentation. 
Equipment installation jobs need

[[Page 363]]

to be properly inspected in the field for use of proper materials and 
procedures and to assure that qualified craftsmen are used to do the 
job. The use of appropriate gaskets, packing, bolts, valves, lubricants 
and welding rods need to be verified in the field. Also procedures for 
installation of safety devices need to be verified, such as the torque 
on the bolts on ruptured disc installations, uniform torque on flange 
bolts, proper installation of pump seals, etc. If the quality of parts 
is a problem, it may be appropriate to conduct audits of the equipment 
supplier's facilities to better assure proper purchases of required 
equipment which is suitable for its intended service. Any changes in 
equipment that may become necessary will need to go through the 
management of change procedures.
    10. Nonroutine Work Authorizations. Nonroutine work which is 
conducted in process areas needs to be controlled by the employer in a 
consistent manner. The hazards identified involving the work that is to 
be accomplished must be communicated to those doing the work, but also 
to those operating personnel whose work could affect the safety of the 
process. A work authorization notice or permit must have a procedure 
that describes the steps the maintenance supervisor, contractor 
representative or other person needs to follow to obtain the necessary 
clearance to get the job started. The work authorization procedures need 
to reference and coordinate, as applicable, lockout/tagout procedures, 
line breaking procedures, confined space entry procedures and hot work 
authorizations. This procedure also needs to provide clear steps to 
follow once the job is completed in order to provide closure for those 
that need to know the job is now completed and equipment can be returned 
to normal.
    11. Managing Change. To properly manage changes to process 
chemicals, technology, equipment and facilities, one must define what is 
meant by change. In this process safety management standard, change 
includes all modifications to equipment, procedures, raw materials and 
processing conditions other than ``replacement in kind''. These changes 
need to be properly managed by identifying and reviewing them prior to 
implementation of the change. For example, the operating procedures 
contain the operating parameters (pressure limits, temperature ranges, 
flow rates, etc.) and the importance of operating within these limits. 
While the operator must have the flexibility to maintain safe operation 
within the established parameters, any operation outside of these 
parameters requires review and approval by a written management of 
change procedure.
    Management of change covers such as changes in process technology 
and changes to equipment and instrumentation. Changes in process 
technology can result from changes in production rates, raw materials, 
experimentation, equipment unavailability, new equipment, new product 
development, change in catalyst and changes in operating conditions to 
improve yield or quality. Equipment changes include among others change 
in materials of construction, equipment specifications, piping pre-
arrangements, experimental equipment, computer program revisions and 
changes in alarms and interlocks. Employers need to establish means and 
methods to detect both technical changes and mechanical changes.
    Temporary changes have caused a number of catastrophes over the 
years, and employers need to establish ways to detect temporary changes 
as well as those that are permanent. It is important that a time limit 
for temporary changes be established and monitored since, without 
control, these changes may tend to become permanent. Temporary changes 
are subject to the management of change provisions. In addition, the 
management of change procedures are used to insure that the equipment 
and procedures are returned to their original or designed conditions at 
the end of the temporary change. Proper documentation and review of 
these changes is invaluable in assuring that the safety and health 
considerations are being incorporated into the operating procedures and 
the process.
    Employers may wish to develop a form or clearance sheet to 
facilitate the processing of changes through the management of change 
procedures. A typical change form may include a description and the 
purpose of the change, the technical basis for the change, safety and 
health considerations, documentation of changes for the operating 
procedures, maintenance procedures, inspection and testing, P&IDs, 
electrical classification, training and communications, pre-startup 
inspection, duration if a temporary change, approvals and authorization. 
Where the impact of the change is minor and well understood, a check 
list reviewed by an authorized person with proper communication to 
others who are affected may be sufficient. However, for a more complex 
or significant design change, a hazard evaluation procedure with 
approvals by operations, maintenance, and safety departments may be 
appropriate. Changes in documents such as P&IDs, raw materials, 
operating procedures, mechanical integrity programs, electrical 
classifications, etc., need to be noted so that these revisions can be 
made permanent when the drawings and procedure manuals are updated. 
Copies of process changes need to be kept in an accessible location to 
ensure that design changes are available to operating personnel as well 
as to PHA team members when a PHA is being done or one is being updated.

[[Page 364]]

    12. Investigation of Incidents. Incident investigation is the 
process of identifying the underlying causes of incidents and 
implementing steps to prevent similar events from occurring. The intent 
of an incident investigation is for employers to learn from past 
experiences and thus avoid repeating past mistakes. The incidents for 
whicn OSHA expects employers to become aware and to investigate are the 
types of events which result in or could reasonably have resulted in a 
catastrophic release. Some of the events are sometimes referred to as 
``near misses,'' meaning that a serious consequence did not occur, but 
could have.
    Employers need to develop in-house capability to investigate 
incidents that occur in their facilities. A team needs to be assembled 
by the employer and trained in the techniques of investigation including 
how to conduct interviews of witnesses, needed documentation and report 
writing. A multi-disciplinary team is better able to gather the facts of 
the event and to analyze them and develop plausible scenarios as to what 
happened, and why. Team members should be selected on the basis of their 
training, knowledge and ability to contribute to a team effort to fully 
investigate the incident. Employees in the process area where the 
incident occurred should be consulted, interviewed or made a member of 
the team. Their knowledge of the events form a significant set of facts 
about the incident which occurred. The report, its findings and 
recommendations are to be shared with those who can benefit from the 
information. The cooperation of employees is essential to an effective 
incident investigation. The focus of the investigation should be to 
obtain facts, and not to place blame. The team and the investigation 
process should clearly deal with all involved individuals in a fair, 
open and consistent manner.
    13. Emergency Preparedness. Each employer must address what actions 
employees are to take when there is an unwanted release of highly 
hazardous chemicals. Emergency preparedness or the employer's tertiary 
(third) lines of defense are those that will be relied on along with the 
secondary lines of defense when the primary lines of defense which are 
used to prevent an unwanted release fail to stop the release. Employers 
will need to decide if they want employees to handle and stop small or 
minor incidental releases. Whether they wish to mobilize the available 
resources at the plant and have them brought to bear on a more 
significant release. Or whether employers want their employees to 
evacuate the danger area and promptly escape to a preplanned safe zone 
area, and allow the local community emergency response organizations to 
handle the release. Or whether the employer wants to use some 
combination of these actions. Employers will need to select how many 
different emergency preparedness or tertiary lines of defense they plan 
to have and then develop the necessary plans and procedures, and 
appropriately train employees in their emergency duties and 
responsibilities and then implement these lines of defense.
    Employers at a minimum must have an emergency action plan which will 
facilitate the prompt evacuation of employees due to an unwanted release 
of a highly hazardous chemical. This means that the employer will have a 
plan that will be activated by an alarm system to alert employees when 
to evacuate and, that employees who are physically impaired, will have 
the necessary support and assistance to get them to the safe zone as 
well. The intent of these requirements is to alert and move employees to 
a safe zone quickly. Delaying alarms or confusing alarms are to be 
avoided. The use of process control centers or similar process buildings 
in the process area as safe areas is discouraged. Recent catastrophes 
have shown that a large life loss has occurred in these structures 
because of where they have been sited and because they are not 
necessarily designed to withstand over-pressures from shockwaves 
resulting from explosions in the process area.
    Unwanted incidental releases of highly hazardous chemicals in the 
process area must be addressed by the employer as to what actions 
employees are to take. If the employer wants employees to evacuate the 
area, then the emergency action plan will be activated. For outdoor 
processes where wind direction is important for selecting the safe route 
to a refuge area, the employer should place a wind direction indicator 
such as a wind sock or pennant at the highest point that can be seen 
throughout the process area. Employees can move in the direction of 
cross wind to upwind to gain safe access to the refuge area by knowing 
the wind direction.
    If the employer wants specific employees in the release area to 
control or stop the minor emergency or incidental release, these actions 
must be planned for in advance and procedures developed and implemented. 
Preplanning for handling incidental releases for minor emergencies in 
the process area needs to be done, appropriate equipment for the hazards 
must be provided, and training conducted for those employees who will 
perform the emergency work before they respond to handle an actual 
release. The employer's training program, including the Hazard 
Communication standard training is to address the training needs for 
employees who are expected to handle incidental or minor releases.
    Preplanning for releases that are more serious than incidental 
releases is another important line of defense to be used by the 
employer. When a serious release of a highly hazardous chemical occurs, 
the employer

[[Page 365]]

through preplanning will have determined in advance what actions 
employees are to take. The evacuation of the immediate release area and 
other areas as necessary would be accomplished under the emergency 
action plan. If the employer wishes to use plant personnel such as a 
fire brigade, spill control team, a hazardous materials team, or use 
employees to render aid to those in the immediate release area and 
control or mitigate the incident, these actions are covered by 
Sec. 1910.120, the Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response 
(HAZWOPER) standard. If outside assistance is necessary, such as through 
mutual aid agreements between employers or local government emergency 
response organizations, these emergency responders are also covered by 
HAZWOPER. The safety and health protections required for emergency 
responders are the responsibility of their employers and of the on-scene 
incident commander.
    Responders may be working under very hazardous conditions and 
therefore the objective is to have them competently led by an on-scene 
incident commander and the commander's staff, properly equipped to do 
their assigned work safely, and fully trained to carry out their duties 
safely before they respond to an emergency. Drills, training exercises, 
or simulations with the local community emergency response planners and 
responder organizations is one means to obtain better preparedness. This 
close cooperation and coordination between plant and local community 
emergency preparedness managers will also aid the employer in complying 
with the Environmental Protection Agency's Risk Management Plan 
criteria.
    One effective way for medium to large facilities to enhance 
coordination and communication during emergencies for on plant 
operations and with local community organizations is for employers to 
establish and equip an emergency control center. The emergency control 
center would be sited in a safe zone area so that it could be occupied 
throughout the duration of an emergency. The center would serve as the 
major ccommunication link between the on-scene incident commander and 
plant or corporate management as well as with the local community 
officials. The communication equipment in the emergency control center 
should include a network to receive and transmit information by 
telephone, radio or other means. It is important to have a backup 
communication network in case of power failure or one communication 
means fails. The center should also be equipped with the plant layout 
and community maps, utility drawings including fire water, emergency 
lighting, appropriate reference materials such as a government agency 
notification list, company personnel phone list, SARA Title III reports 
and material safety data sheets, emergency plans and procedures manual, 
a listing with the location of emergency response equipment, mutual aid 
information, and access to meteorological or weather condition data and 
any dispersion modeling data.
    14. Compliance Audits. Employers need to select a trained individual 
or assemble a trained team of people to audit the process safety 
management system and program. A small process or plant may need only 
one knowledgeable person to conduct an audit. The audit is to include an 
evaluation of the design and effectiveness of the process safety 
management system and a field inspection of the safety and health 
conditions and practices to verify that the employer's systems are 
effectively implemented. The audit should be conducted or lead by a 
person knowledgeable in audit techniques and who is impartial towards 
the facility or area being audited. The essential elements of an audit 
program include planning, staffing, conduting the audit, evaluation and 
corrective action, follow-up and documentation.
    Planning in advance is essential to the success of the auditing 
process. Each employer needs to establish the format, staffing, 
scheduling and verification methods prior to conducting the audit. The 
format should be designed to provide the lead auditor with a procedure 
or checklist which details the requirements of each section of the 
standard. The names of the audit team members should be listed as part 
of the format as well. The checklist, if properly designed, could serve 
as the verification sheet which provides the auditor with the necessary 
information to expedite the review and assure that no requirements of 
the standard are omitted. This verification sheet format could also 
identify those elements that will require evaluation or a response to 
correct deficiencies. This sheet could also be used for developing the 
follow-up and documentation requirements.
    The selection of effective audit team members is critical to the 
success of the program. Team members should be chosen for their 
experience, knowledge, and training and should be familiar with the 
processes and with auditing techniques, practices and procedures. The 
size of the team will vary depending on the size and complexity of the 
process under consideration. For a large, complex, highly instrumented 
plant, it may be desirable to have team members with expertise in 
process engineering and design, process chemistry, instrumentation and 
computer controls, electrical hazards and classifications, safety and 
health disciplines, maintenance, emergency preparedness, warehousing or 
shipping, and process safety auditing. The team may use part-time 
members to provide for the depth of expertise required as well as for 
what is actually done or followed, compared to what is written.
    An effective audit includes a review of the relevant documentation 
and process safety

[[Page 366]]

information, inspection of the physical facilities, and interviews with 
all levels of plant personnel. Utilizing the audit procedure and 
checklist developed in the preplanning stage, the audit team can 
systematically analyze compliance with the provisions of the standard 
and any other corporate policies that are relevant. For example, the 
audit team will review all aspects of the training program as part of 
the overall audit. The team will review the written training program for 
adequacy of content, frequency of training, effectiveness of training in 
terms of its goals and objectives as well as to how it fits into meeting 
the standard's requirements, documentation, etc. Through interviews, the 
team can determine the employee's knowledge and awareness of the safety 
procedures, duties, rules, emergency response assignments, etc. During 
the inspection, the team can observe actual practices such as safety and 
health policies, procedures, and work authorization practices. This 
approach enables the team to identify deficiencies and determine where 
corrective actions or improvements are necessary.
    An audit is a technique used to gather sufficient facts and 
information, including statistical information, to verify compliance 
with standards. Auditors should select as part of their preplanning a 
sample size sufficient to give a degree of confidence that the audit 
reflects the level of compliance with the standard. The audit team, 
through this systematic analysis, should document areas which require 
corrective action as well as those areas where the process safety 
management system is effective and working in an effective manner. This 
provides a record of the audit procedures and findings, and serves as a 
baseline of operation data for future audits. It will assist future 
auditors in determining changes or trends from previous audits.
    Corrective action is one of the most important parts of the audit. 
It includes not only addressing the identified deficiencies, but also 
planning, followup, and documentation. The corrective action process 
normally begins with a management review of the audit findings. The 
purpose of this review is to determine what actions are appropriate, and 
to establish priorities, timetables, resource allocations and 
requirements and responsibilities. In some cases, corrective action may 
involve a simple change in procedure or minor maintenance effort to 
remedy the concern. Management of change procedures need to be used, as 
appropriate, even for what may seem to be a minor change. Many of the 
deficiencies can be acted on promptly, while some may require 
engineering studies or indepth review of actual procedures and 
practices. There may be instances where no action is necessary and this 
is a valid response to an audit finding. All actions taken, including an 
explanation where no action is taken on a finding, needs to be 
documented as to what was done and why.
    It is important to assure that each deficiency identified is 
addressed, the corrective action to be taken noted, and the audit person 
or team responsible be properly documented by the employer. To control 
the corrective action process, the employer should consider the use of a 
tracking system. This tracking system might include periodic status 
reports shared with affected levels of management, specific reports such 
as completion of an engineering study, and a final implementation report 
to provide closure for audit findings that have been through management 
of change, if appropriate, and then shared with affected employees and 
management. This type of tracking system provides the employer with the 
status of the corrective action. It also provides the documentation 
required to verify that appropriate corrective actions were taken on 
deficiencies identified in the audit.

      Appendix D to Sec. 1910.119--Sources of Further Information 
                             (Nonmandatory)

    1. Center for Chemical Process Safety, American Institute of 
Chemical Engineers, 345 East 47th Street, New York, NY 10017, (212) 705-
7319.
    2. ``Guidelines for Hazard Evaluation Procedures,'' American 
Institute of Chemical Engineers; 345 East 47th Street, New York, NY 
10017.
    3. ``Guidelines for Technical Management of Chemical Process 
Safety,'' Center for Chemical Process Safety of the American Institute 
of Chemical Engineers; 345 East 47th Street, New York, NY 10017.
    4. ``Evaluating Process Safety in the Chemical Industry,'' Chemical 
Manufacturers Association; 2501 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20037.
    5. ``Safe Warehousing of Chemicals,'' Chemical Manufacturers 
Association; 2501 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20037.
    6. ``Management of Process Hazards,'' American Petroleum Institute 
(API Recommended Practice 750); 1220 L Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20005.
    7. ``Improving Owner and Contractor Safety Performance,'' American 
Petroleum Institute (API Recommended Practice 2220); API, 1220 L Street 
N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005.
    8. Chemical Manufacturers Association (CMA's Manager Guide), First 
Edition, September 1991; CMA, 2501 M Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20037.
    9. ``Improving Construction Safety Performance,'' Report A-3, The 
Business Roundtable; The Business Roundtable, 200 Park Avenue, New York, 
NY 10166. (Report includes

[[Page 367]]

criteria to evaluate contractor safety performance and criteria to 
enhance contractor safety performance).
    10. ``Recommended Guidelines for Contractor Safety and Health,'' 
Texas Chemical Council; Texas Chemical Council, 1402 Nueces Street, 
Austin, TX 78701-1534.
    11. ``Loss Prevention in the Process Industries,'' Volumes I and II; 
Frank P. Lees, Butterworth; London 1983.
    12. ``Safety and Health Program Management Guidelines,'' 1989; U.S. 
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
    13. ``Safety and Health Guide for the Chemical Industry,'' 1986, 
(OSHA 3091); U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration; 200 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20210.
    14. ``Review of Emergency Systems,'' June 1988; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, 
Washington, DC 20460.
    15. ``Technical Guidance for Hazards Analysis, Emergency Planning 
for Extremely Hazardous Substances,'' December 1987; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), Federal Emergency Management Administration 
(FEMA) and U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Washington, DC 
20460.
    16. ``Accident Investigation * * * A New Approach,'' 1983, National 
Safety Council; 444 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611-3991.
    17. ``Fire & Explosion Index Hazard Classification Guide,'' 6th 
Edition, May 1987, Dow Chemical Company; Midland, Michigan 48674.
    18. ``Chemical Exposure Index,'' May 1988, Dow Chemical Company; 
Midland, Michigan 48674.
[57 FR 6403, Feb. 24, 1992; 57 FR 7847, Mar. 4, 1992, as amended at 61 
FR 9238, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.120  Hazardous waste operations and emergency response.

    (a) Scope, application, and definitions--(1) Scope. This section 
covers the following operations, unless the employer can demonstrate 
that the operation does not involve employee exposure or the reasonable 
possibility for employee exposure to safety or health hazards:
    (i) Clean-up operations required by a governmental body, whether 
Federal, state, local or other involving hazardous substances that are 
conducted at uncontrolled hazardous waste sites (including, but not 
limited to, the EPA's National Priority Site List (NPL), state priority 
site lists, sites recommended for the EPA NPL, and initial 
investigations of government identified sites which are conducted before 
the presence or absence of hazardous substances has been ascertained);
    (ii) Corrective actions involving clean-up operations at sites 
covered by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.);
    (iii) Voluntary clean-up operations at sites recognized by Federal, 
state, local or other governmental bodies as uncontrolled hazardous 
waste sites;
    (iv) Operations involving hazardous wastes that are conducted at 
treatment, storage, and disposal (TSD) facilities regulated by 40 CFR 
parts 264 and 265 pursuant to RCRA; or by agencies under agreement with 
U.S.E.P.A. to implement RCRA regulations; and
    (v) Emergency response operations for releases of, or substantial 
threats of releases of, hazardous substances without regard to the 
location of the hazard.
    (2) Application. (i) All requirements of part 1910 and part 1926 of 
title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations apply pursuant to their 
terms to hazardous waste and emergency response operations whether 
covered by this section or not. If there is a conflict or overlap, the 
provision more protective of employee safety and health shall apply 
without regard to 29 CFR 1910.5(c)(1).
    (ii) Hazardous substance clean-up operations within the scope of 
paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (a)(1)(iii) of this section must comply 
with all paragraphs of this section except paragraphs (p) and (q).
    (iii) Operations within the scope of paragraph (a)(1)(iv) of this 
section must comply only with the requirements of paragraph (p) of this 
section.

    Notes and Exceptions: (A) All provisions of paragraph (p) of this 
section cover any treatment, storage or disposal (TSD) operation 
regulated by 40 CFR parts 264 and 265 or by state law authorized under 
RCRA, and required to have a permit or interim status from EPA pursuant 
to 40 CFR 270.1 or from a state agency pursuant to RCRA.
    (B) Employers who are not required to have a permit or interim 
status because they are conditionally exempt small quantity generators 
under 40 CFR 261.5 or are generators who qualify under 40 CFR 262.34 for 
exemptions from regulation under 40 CFR parts 264, 265 and 270 
(``excepted employers'') are not covered by paragraphs (p)(1) through 
(p)(7) of this section. Excepted employers who are required by the EPA 
or state agency

[[Page 368]]

to have their employees engage in emergency response or who direct their 
employees to engage in emergency response are covered by paragraph 
(p)(8) of this section, and cannot be exempted by (p)(8)(i) of this 
section. Excepted employers who are not required to have employees 
engage in emergency response, who direct their employees to evacuate in 
the case of such emergencies and who meet the requirements of paragraph 
(p)(8)(i) of this section are exempt from the balance of paragraph 
(p)(8) of this section.
    (C) If an area is used primarily for treatment, storage or disposal, 
any emergency response operations in that area shall comply with 
paragraph (p)(8) of this section. In other areas not used primarily for 
treatment, storage, or disposal, any emergency response operations shall 
comply with paragraph (q) of this section. Compliance with the 
requirements of paragraph (q) of this section shall be deemed to be in 
compliance with the requirements of paragraph (p)(8) of this section.

    (iv) Emergency response operations for releases of, or substantial 
threats of releases of, hazardous substances which are not covered by 
paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (a)(1)(iv) of this section must only comply 
with the requirements of paragraph (q) of this section.
    (3) Definitions--Buddy system means a system of organizing employees 
into work groups in such a manner that each employee of the work group 
is designated to be observed by at least one other employee in the work 
group. The purpose of the buddy system is to provide rapid assistance to 
employees in the event of an emergency.
    Clean-up operation means an operation where hazardous substances are 
removed, contained, incinerated, neutralized, stabilized, cleared-up, or 
in any other manner processed or handled with the ultimate goal of 
making the site safer for people or the environment.
    Decontamination means the removal of hazardous substances from 
employees and their equipment to the extent necessary to preclude the 
occurrence of foreseeable adverse health affects.
    Emergency response orresponding to emergencies means a response 
effort by employees from outside the immediate release area or by other 
designated responders (i.e., mutual-aid groups, local fire departments, 
etc.) to an occurrence which results, or is likely to result, in an 
uncontrolled release of a hazardous substance. Responses to incidental 
releases of hazardous substances where the substance can be absorbed, 
neutralized, or otherwise controlled at the time of release by employees 
in the immediate release area, or by maintenance personnel are not 
considered to be emergency responses within the scope of this standard. 
Responses to releases of hazardous substances where there is no 
potential safety or health hazard (i.e., fire, explosion, or chemical 
exposure) are not considered to be emergency responses.
    Facility means (A) any building, structure, installation, equipment, 
pipe or pipeline (including any pipe into a sewer or publicly owned 
treatment works), well, pit, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, storage 
container, motor vehicle, rolling stock, or aircraft, or (B) any site or 
area where a hazardous substance has been deposited, stored, disposed 
of, or placed, or otherwise come to be located; but does not include any 
consumer product in consumer use or any water-borne vessel.
    Hazardous materials response (HAZMAT) team means an organized group 
of employees, designated by the employer, who are expected to perform 
work to handle and control actual or potential leaks or spills of 
hazardous substances requiring possible close approach to the substance. 
The team members perform responses to releases or potential releases of 
hazardous substances for the purpose of control or stabilization of the 
incident. A HAZMAT team is not a fire brigade nor is a typical fire 
brigade a HAZMAT team. A HAZMAT team, however, may be a separate 
component of a fire brigade or fire department.
    Hazardous substance means any substance designated or listed under 
paragraphs (A) through (D) of this definition, exposure to which results 
or may result in adverse affects on the health or safety of employees:
    (A) Any substance defined under section 101(14) of CERCLA;
    (B) Any biological agent and other disease-causing agent which after 
release into the environment and upon

[[Page 369]]

exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any person, either 
directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food 
chains, will or may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, 
behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological 
malfunctions (including malfunctions in reproduction) or physical 
deformations in such persons or their offspring;
    (C) Any substance listed by the U.S. Department of Transportation as 
hazardous materials under 49 CFR 172.101 and appendices; and
    (D) Hazardous waste as herein defined.
    Hazardous waste means--
    (A) A waste or combination of wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261.3, or
    (B) Those substances defined as hazardous wastes in 49 CFR 171.8.
    Hazardous waste operation means any operation conducted within the 
scope of this standard.
    Hazardous waste site or Site means any facility or location within 
the scope of this standard at which hazardous waste operations take 
place.
    Health hazard means a chemical, mixture of chemicals or a pathogen 
for which there is statistically significant evidence based on at least 
one study conducted in accordance with established scientific principles 
that acute or chronic health effects may occur in exposed employees. The 
term ``health hazard'' includes chemicals which are carcinogens, toxic 
or highly toxic agents, reproductive toxins, irritants, corrosives, 
sensitizers, heptaotoxins, nephrotoxins, neurotoxins, agents which act 
on the hematopoietic system, and agents which damage the lungs, skin, 
eyes, or mucous membranes. It also includes stress due to temperature 
extremes. Further definition of the terms used above can be found in 
appendix A to 29 CFR 1910.1200.
    IDLH orImmediately dangerous to life or health means an atmospheric 
concentration of any toxic, corrosive or asphyxiant substance that poses 
an immediate threat to life or would cause irreversible or delayed 
adverse health effects or would interfere with an individual's ability 
to escape from a dangerous atmosphere.
    Oxygen deficiency means that concentration of oxygen by volume below 
which atmosphere supplying respiratory protection must be provided. It 
exists in atmospheres where the percentage of oxygen by volume is less 
than 19.5 percent oxygen.
    Permissible exposure limit means the exposure, inhalation or dermal 
permissible exposure limit specified in 29 CFR part 1910, subparts G and 
Z.
    Published exposure level means the exposure limits published in 
``NIOSH Recommendations for Occupational Health Standards'' dated 1986, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6 or if 
none is specified, the exposure limits published in the standards 
specified by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists in their publication ``Threshold Limit Values and Biological 
Exposure Indices for 1987-88'' dated 1987, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    Post emergency response means that portion of an emergency response 
performed after the immediate threat of a release has been stabilized or 
eliminated and clean-up of the site has begun. If post emergency 
response is performed by an employer's own employees who were part of 
the initial emergency response, it is considered to be part of the 
initial response and not post emergency response. However, if a group of 
an employer's own employees, separate from the group providing initial 
response, performs the clean-up operation, then the separate group of 
employees would be considered to be performing post-emergency response 
and subject to paragraph (q)(11) of this section.
    Qualified person means a person with specific training, knowledge 
and experience in the area for which the person has the responsibility 
and the authority to control.
    Site safety and health supervisor (or official) means the individual 
located on a hazardous waste site who is responsible to the employer and 
has the authority and knowledge necessary to implement the site safety 
and health plan and verify compliance with applicable safety and health 
requirements.
    Small quantity qenerator means a generator of hazardous wastes who 
in any

[[Page 370]]

calendar month generates no more than 1,000 kilograms (2,205 pounds) of 
hazardous waste in that month.
    Uncontrolled hazardous waste site, means an area identified as an 
uncontrolled hazardous waste site by a governmental body, whether 
Federal, state, local or other where an accumulation of hazardous 
substances creates a threat to the health and safety of individuals or 
the environment or both. Some sites are found on public lands such as 
those created by former municipal, county or state landfills where 
illegal or poorly managed waste disposal has taken place. Other sites 
are found on private property, often belonging to generators or former 
generators of hazardous substance wastes. Examples of such sites 
include, but are not limited to, surface impoundments, landfills, dumps, 
and tank or drum farms. Normal operations at TSD sites are not covered 
by this definition.

    (b) Safety and health program.

    Note to (b): Safety and health programs developed and implemented to 
meet other Federal, state, or local regulations are considered 
acceptable in meeting this requirement if they cover or are modified to 
cover the topics required in this paragraph. An additional or separate 
safety and health program is not required by this paragraph.

    (1) General. (i) Employers shall develop and implement a written 
safety and health program for their employees involved in hazardous 
waste operations. The program shall be designed to identify, evaluate, 
and control safety and health hazards, and provide for emergency 
response for hazardous waste operations.
    (ii) The written safety and health program shall incorporate the 
following:
    (A) An organizational structure;
    (B) A comprehensive workplan;
    (C) A site-specific safety and health plan which need not repeat the 
employer's standard operating procedures required in paragraph 
(b)(1)(ii)(F) of this section;
    (D) The safety and health training program;
    (E) The medical surveillance program;
    (F) The employer's standard operating procedures for safety and 
health; and
    (G) Any necessary interface between general program and site 
specific activities.
    (iii) Site excavation. Site excavations created during initial site 
preparation or during hazardous waste operations shall be shored or 
sloped as appropriate to prevent accidental collapse in accordance with 
subpart P of 29 CFR part 1926.
    (iv) Contractors and sub-contractors. An employer who retains 
contractor or sub-contractor services for work in hazardous waste 
operations shall inform those contractors, sub-contractors, or their 
representatives of the site emergency response procedures and any 
potential fire, explosion, health, safety or other hazards of the 
hazardous waste operation that have been identified by the employer, 
including those identified in the employer's information program.
    (v) Program availability. The written safety and health program 
shall be made available to any contractor or subcontractor or their 
representative who will be involved with the hazardous waste operation; 
to employees; to employee designated representatives; to OSHA personnel, 
and to personnel of other Federal, state, or local agencies with 
regulatory authority over the site.
    (2) Organizational structure part of the site program--(i) The 
organizationa1 structure part of the program shall establish the 
specific chain of command and specify the overall responsibilities of 
supervisors and employees. It shall include, at a minimum, the following 
elements:
    (A) A general supervisor who has the responsibility and authority to 
direct all hazardous waste operations.
    (B) A site safety and health supervisor who has the responsibility 
and authority to develop and implement the site safety and health plan 
and verify compliance.
    (C) All other personnel needed for hazardous waste site operations 
and emergency response and their general functions and responsibilities.
    (D) The lines of authority, responsibility, and communication.

[[Page 371]]

    (ii) The organizational structure shall be reviewed and updated as 
necessary to reflect the current status of waste site operations.
    (3) Comprehensive workplan part of the site program. The 
comprehensive workplan part of the program shall address the tasks and 
objectives of the site operations and the logistics and resources 
required to reach those tasks and objectives.
    (i) The comprehensive workplan shall address anticipated clean-up 
activities as well as normal operating procedures which need not repeat 
the employer's procedures available elsewhere.
    (ii) The comprehensive workplan shall define work tasks and 
objectives and identify the methods for accomplishing those tasks and 
objectives.
    (iii) The comprehensive workplan shall establish personnel 
requirements for implementing the plan.
    (iv) The comprehensive workplan shall provide for the implementation 
of the training required in paragraph (e) of this section.
    (v) The comprehensive workplan shall provide for the implementation 
of the required informational programs required in paragraph (i) of this 
section.
    (vi) The comprehensive workplan shall provide for the implementation 
of the medical surveillance program described in paragraph (f) of this 
section.
    (4) Site-specific safety and health plan part of the program--(i) 
General. The site safety and health plan, which must be kept on site, 
shall address the safety and health hazards of each phase of site 
operation and include the requirements and procedures for employee 
protection.
    (ii) Elements. The site safety and health plan, as a minimum, shall 
address the following:
    (A) A safety and health risk or hazard analysis for each site task 
and operation found in the workplan.
    (B) Employee training assignments to assure compliance with 
paragraph (e) of this section.
    (C) Personal protective equipment to be used by employees for each 
of the site tasks and operations being conducted as required by the 
personal protective equipment program in paragraph (g)(5) of this 
section.
    (D) Medical surveillance requirements in accordance with the program 
in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (E) Frequency and types of air monitoring, personnel monitoring, and 
environmental sampling techniques and instrumentation to be used, 
including methods of maintenance and calibration of monitoring and 
sampling equipment to be used.
    (F) Site control measures in accordance with the site control 
program required in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (G) Decontamination procedures in accordance with paragraph (k) of 
this section.
    (H) An emergency response plan meeting the requirements of paragraph 
(l) of this section for safe and effective responses to emergencies, 
including the necessary PPE and other equipment.
    (I) Confined space entry procedures.
    (J) A spill containment program meeting the requirements of 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (iii) Pre-entry briefing. The site specific safety and health plan 
shall provide for pre-entry briefings to be held prior to initiating any 
site activity, and at such other times as necessary to ensure that 
employees are apprised of the site safety and health plan and that this 
plan is being followed. The information and data obtained from site 
characterization and analysis work required in paragraph (c) of this 
section shall be used to prepare and update the site safety and health 
plan.
    (iv) Effectiveness of site safety and health plan. Inspections shall 
be conducted by the site safety and health supervisor or, in the absence 
of that individual, another individual who is knowledgeable in 
occupational safety and health, acting on behalf of the employer as 
necessary to determine the effectiveness of the site safety and health 
plan. Any deficiencies in the effectiveness of the site safety and 
health plan shall be corrected by the employer.
    (c) Site characterization and analysis--(1) General. Hazardous waste 
sites shall be evaluated in accordance with this paragraph to identify 
specific site hazards and to determine the appropriate safety and health 
control procedures

[[Page 372]]

needed to protect employees from the identified hazards.
    (2) Preliminary evaluation. A preliminary evaluation of a site's 
characteristics shall be performed prior to site entry by a qualified 
person in order to aid in the selection of appropriate employee 
protection methods prior to site entry. Immediately after initial site 
entry, a more detailed evaluation of the site's specific characteristics 
shall be performed by a qualified person in order to further identify 
existing site hazards and to further aid in the selection of the 
appropriate engineering controls and personal protective equipment for 
the tasks to be performed.
    (3) Hazard identification. All suspected conditions that may pose 
inhalation or skin absorption hazards that are immediately dangerous to 
life or health (IDLH), or other conditions that may cause death or 
serious harm, shall be identified during the preliminary survey and 
evaluated during the detailed survey. Examples of such hazards include, 
but are not limited to, confined space entry, potentially explosive or 
flammable situations, visible vapor clouds, or areas where biological 
indicators such as dead animals or vegetation are located.
    (4) Required information. The following information to the extent 
available shall be obtained by the employer prior to allowing employees 
to enter a site:
    (i) Location and approximate size of the site.
    (ii) Description of the response activity and/or the job task to be 
performed.
    (iii) Duration of the planned employee activity.
    (iv) Site topography and accessibility by air and roads.
    (v) Safety and health hazards expected at the site.
    (vi) Pathways for hazardous substance dispersion.
    (vii) Present status and capabilities of emergency response teams 
that would provide assistance to hazardous waste clean-up site employees 
at the time of an emergency.
    (viii) Hazardous substances and health hazards involved or expected 
at the site, and their chemical and physical properties.
    (5) Personal protective equipment. Personal protective equipment 
(PPE) shall be provided and used during initial site entry in accordance 
with the following requirements:
    (i) Based upon the results of the preliminary site evaluation, an 
ensemble of PPE shall be selected and used during initial site entry 
which will provide protection to a level of exposure below permissible 
exposure limits and published exposure levels for known or suspected 
hazardous substances and health hazards, and which will provide 
protection against other known and suspected hazards identified during 
the preliminary site evaluation. If there is no permissible exposure 
limit or published exposure level, the employer may use other published 
studies and information as a guide to appropriate personal protective 
equipment.
    (ii) If positive-pressure self-contained breathing apparatus is not 
used as part of the entry ensemble, and if respiratory protection is 
warranted by the potential hazards identified during the preliminary 
site evaluation, an escape self-contained breathing apparatus of at 
least five minute's duration shall be carried by employees during 
initial site entry.
    (iii) If the preliminary site evaluation does not produce sufficient 
information to identify the hazards or suspected hazards of the site, an 
ensemble providing protection equivalent to Level B PPE shall be 
provided as minimum protection, and direct reading instruments shall be 
used as appropriate for identifying IDLH conditions. (See appendix B for 
a description of Level B hazards and the recommendations for Level B 
protective equipment.)
    (iv) Once the hazards of the site have been identified, the 
appropriate PPE shall be selected and used in accordance with paragraph 
(g) of this section.
    (6) Monitoring. The following monitoring shall be conducted during 
initial site entry when the site evaluation produces information that 
shows the potential for ionizing radiation or IDLH conditions, or when 
the site information is not sufficient reasonably to eliminate these 
possible conditions:
    (i) Monitoring with direct reading instruments for hazardous levels 
of ionizing radiation.
    (ii) Monitoring the air with appropriate direct reading test 
equipment

[[Page 373]]

(i.e., combustible gas meters, detector tubes) for IDLH and other 
conditions that may cause death or serious harm (combustible or 
explosive atmospheres, oxygen deficiency, toxic substances).
    (iii) Visually observing for signs of actual or potential IDLH or 
other dangerous conditions.
    (iv) An ongoing air monitoring program in accordance with paragraph 
(h) of this section shall be implemented after site characterization has 
determined the site is safe for the start-up of operations.
    (7) Risk identification. Once the presence and concentrations of 
specific hazardous substances and health hazards have been established, 
the risks associated with these substances shall be identified. 
Employees who will be working on the site shall be informed of any risks 
that have been identified. In situations covered by the Hazard 
Communication Standard, 29 CFR 1910.1200, training required by that 
standard need not be duplicated.

    Note to (c)(7).--Risks to consider include, but are not limited to:
    (a) Exposures exceeding the permissible exposure limits and 
published exposure levels.
    (b) IDLH concentrations.
    (c) Potential skin absorption and irritation sources.
    (d) Potential eye irritation sources.
    (e) Explosion sensitivity and flammability ranges.
    (f) Oxygen deficiency.

    (8) Employee notification. Any information concerning the chemical, 
physical, and toxicologic properties of each substance known or expected 
to be present on site that is available to the employer and relevant to 
the duties an employee is expected to perform shall be made available to 
the affected employees prior to the commencement of their work 
activities. The employer may utilize information developed for the 
hazard communication standard for this purpose.
    (d) Site control--(1) General. Appropriate site control procedures 
shall be implemented to control employee exposure to hazardous 
substances before clean-up work begins.
    (2) Site control program. A site control program for protecting 
employees which is part of the employer's site safety and health program 
required in paragraph (b) of this section shall be developed during the 
planning stages of a hazardous waste clean-up operation and modified as 
necessary as new information becomes available.
    (3) Elements of the site control program. The site control program 
shall, as a minimum, include: A site map; site work zones; the use of a 
``buddy system''; site communications including alerting means for 
emergencies; the standard operating procedures or safe work practices; 
and, identification of the nearest medical assistance. Where these 
requirements are covered elsewhere they need not be repeated.
    (e) Training--(1) General. (i) All employees working on site (such 
as but not limited to equipment operators, general laborers and others) 
exposed to hazardous substances, health hazards, or safety hazards and 
their supervisors and management responsible for the site shall receive 
training meeting the requirements of this paragraph before they are 
permitted to engage in hazardous waste operations that could expose them 
to hazardous substances, safety, or health hazards, and they shall 
receive review training as specified in this paragraph.
    (ii) Employees shall not be permitted to participate in or supervise 
field activities until they have been trained to a level required by 
their job function and responsibility.
    (2) Elements to be covered. The training shall thoroughly cover the 
following:
    (i) Names of personnel and alternates responsible for site safety 
and health;
    (ii) Safety, health and other hazards present on the site;
    (iii) Use of personal protective equipment;
    (iv) Work practices by which the employee can minimize risks from 
hazards;
    (v) Safe use of engineering controls and equipment on the site;
    (vi) Medical surveillance requirements, including recognition of 
symptoms and signs which might indicate overexposure to hazards; and
    (vii) The contents of paragraphs (G) through (J) of the site safety 
and health plan set forth in paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section.
    (3) Initial training. (i) General site workers (such as equipment 
operators,

[[Page 374]]

general laborers and supervisory personnel) engaged in hazardous 
substance removal or other activities which expose or potentially expose 
workers to hazardous substances and health hazards shall receive a 
minimum of 40 hours of instruction off the site, and a minimum of three 
days actual field experience under the direct supervision of a trained, 
experienced supervisor.
    (ii) Workers on site only occasionally for a specific limited task 
(such as, but not limited to, ground water monitoring, land surveying, 
or geo-physical surveying) and who are unlikely to be exposed over 
permissible exposure limits and published exposure limits shall receive 
a minimum of 24 hours of instruction off the site, and the minimum of 
one day actual field experience under the direct supervision of a 
trained, experienced supervisor.
    (iii) Workers regularly on site who work in areas which have been 
monitored and fully characterized indicating that exposures are under 
permissible exposure limits and published exposure limits where 
respirators are not necessary, and the characterization indicates that 
there are no health hazards or the possibility of an emergency 
developing, shall receive a minimum of 24 hours of instruction off the 
site and the minimum of one day actual field experience under the direct 
supervision of a trained, experienced supervisor.
    (iv) Workers with 24 hours of training who are covered by paragraphs 
(e)(3)(ii) and (e)(3)(iii) of this section, and who become general site 
workers or who are required to wear respirators, shall have the 
additional 16 hours and two days of training necessary to total the 
training specified in paragraph (e)(3)(i).
    (4) Management and supervisor training. On-site management and 
supervisors directly responsible for, or who supervise employees engaged 
in, hazardous waste operations shall receive 40 hours initial training, 
and three days of supervised field experience (the training may be 
reduced to 24 hours and one day if the only area of their responsibility 
is employees covered by paragraphs (e)(3)(ii) and (e)(3)(iii)) and at 
least eight additional hours of specialized training at the time of job 
assignment on such topics as, but not limited to, the employer's safety 
and health program and the associated employee training program, 
personal protective equipment program, spill containment program, and 
health hazard monitoring procedure and techniques.
    (5) Qualifications for trainers. Trainers shall be qualified to 
instruct employees about the subject matter that is being presented in 
training. Such trainers shall have satisfactorily completed a training 
program for teaching the subjects they are expected to teach, or they 
shall have the academic credentials and instructional experience 
necessary for teaching the subjects. Instructors shall demonstrate 
competent instructional skills and knowledge of the applicable subject 
matter.
    (6) Training certification. Employees and supervisors that have 
received and successfully completed the training and field experience 
specified in paragraphs (e)(1) through (e)(4) of this section shall be 
certified by their instructor or the head instructor and trained 
supervisor as having successfully completed the necessary training. A 
written certificate shall be given to each person so certified. Any 
person who has not been so certified or who does not meet the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(9) of this section shall be prohibited 
from engaging in hazardous waste operations.
    (7) Emergency response. Employees who are engaged in responding to 
hazardous emergency situations at hazardous waste clean-up sites that 
may expose them to hazardous substances shall be trained in how to 
respond to such expected emergencies.
    (8) Refresher training. Employees specified in paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section, and managers and supervisors specified in paragraph (e)(4) 
of this section, shall receive eight hours of refresher training 
annually on the items specified in paragraph (e)(2) and/or (e)(4) of 
this section, any critique of incidents that have occurred in the past 
year that can serve as training examples of related work, and other 
relevant topics.
    (9) Equivalent training. Employers who can show by documentation or 
certification that an employee's work experience and/or training has 
resulted in training equivalent to that training required in paragraphs 
(e)(1) through

[[Page 375]]

(e)(4) of this section shall not be required to provide the initial 
training requirements of those paragraphs to such employees and shall 
provide a copy of the certification or documentation to the employee 
upon request. However, certified employees or employees with equivalent 
training new to a site shall receive appropriate, site specific training 
before site entry and have appropriate supervised field experience at 
the new site. Equivalent training includes any academic training or the 
training that existing employees might have already received from actual 
hazardous waste site work experience.
    (f) Medical surveillance--(1) General. Employers engaged in 
operations specified in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (a)(1)(iv) of this 
section and not covered by (a)(2)(iii) exceptions and employers of 
employees specified in paragraph (q)(9) shall institute a medical 
surveillance program in accordance with this paragraph.
    (2) Employees covered. The medical surveillance program shall be 
instituted by the employer for the following employees:
    (i) All employees who are or may be exposed to hazardous substances 
or health hazards at or above the permissible exposure limits or, if 
there is no permissible exposure limit, above the published exposure 
levels for these substances, without regard to the use of respirators, 
for 30 days or more a year;
    (ii) All employees who wear a respirator for 30 days or more a year 
or as required by Sec. 1910.134;
    (iii) All employees who are injured, become ill or develop signs or 
symptoms due to possible overexposure involving hazardous substances or 
health hazards from an emergency response or hazardous waste operation; 
and
    (iv) Members of HAZMAT teams.
    (3) Frequency of medical examinations and consultations. Medical 
examinations and consultations shall be made available by the employer 
to each employee covered under paragraph (f)(2) of this section on the 
following schedules:
    (i) For employees covered under paragraphs (f)(2)(i), (f)(2)(ii), 
and (f)(2)(iv):
    (A) Prior to assignment;
    (B) At least once every twelve months for each employee covered 
unless the attending physician believes a longer interval (not greater 
than biennially) is appropriate;
    (C) At termination of employment or reassignment to an area where 
the employee would not be covered if the employee has not had an 
examination within the last six months;
    (D) As soon as possible upon notification by an employee that the 
employee has developed signs or symptoms indicating possible 
overexposure to hazardous substances or health hazards, or that the 
employee has been injured or exposed above the permissible exposure 
limits or published exposure levels in an emergency situation;
    (E) At more frequent times, if the examining physician determines 
that an increased frequency of examination is medically necessary.
    (ii) For employees covered under paragraph (f)(2)(iii) and for all 
employees including those of employers covered by paragraph (a)(1)(v) 
who may have been injured, received a health impairment, developed signs 
or symptoms which may have resulted from exposure to hazardous 
substances resulting from an emergency incident, or exposed during an 
emergency incident to hazardous substances at concentrations above the 
permissible exposure limits or the published exposure levels without the 
necessary personal protective equipment being used:
    (A) As soon as possible following the emergency incident or 
development of signs or symptoms;
    (B) At additional times, if the examining physician determines that 
follow-up examinations or consultations are medically necessary.
    (4) Content of medical examinations and consultations. (i) Medical 
examinations required by paragraph (f)(3) of this section shall include 
a medical and work history (or updated history if one is in the 
employee's file) with special emphasis on symptoms related to the 
handling of hazardous substances and health hazards, and to fitness for 
duty including the ability to wear any required PPE under conditions 
(i.e., temperature extremes) that may be expected at the work site.

[[Page 376]]

    (ii) The content of medical examinations or consultations made 
available to employees pursuant to paragraph (f) shall be determined by 
the attending physician. The guidelines in the Occupational Safety and 
Health Guidance Manual for Hazardous Waste Site Activities (See appendix 
D, Reference 10) should be consulted.
    (5) Examination by a physician and costs. All medical examinations 
and procedures shall be performed by or under the supervision of a 
licensed physician, preferably one knowledgeable in occupational 
medicine, and shall be provided without cost to the employee, without 
loss of pay, and at a reasonable time and place.
    (6) Information provided to the physician. The employer shall 
provide one copy of this standard and its appendices to the attending 
physician, and in addition the following for each employee:
    (i) A description of the employee's duties as they relate to the 
employee's exposures.
    (ii) The employee's exposure levels or anticipated exposure levels.
    (iii) A description of any personal protective equipment used or to 
be used.
    (iv) Information from previous medical examinations of the employee 
which is not readily available to the examining physician.
    (v) Information required by Sec. 1910.134.
    (7) Physician's written opinion. (i) The employer shall obtain and 
furnish the employee with a copy of a written opinion from the attending 
physician containing the following:
    (A) The physician's opinion as to whether the employee has any 
detected medical conditions which would place the employee at increased 
risk of material impairment of the employee's health from work in 
hazardous waste operations or emergency response, or from respirator 
use.
    (B) The physician's recommended limitations upon the employee's 
assigned work.
    (C) The results of the medical examination and tests if requested by 
the employee.
    (D) A statement that the employee has been informed by the physician 
of the results of the medical examination and any medical conditions 
which require further examination or treatment.
    (ii) The written opinion obtained by the employer shall not reveal 
specific findings or diagnoses unrelated to occupational exposures.
    (8) Recordkeeping. (i) An accurate record of the medical 
surveillance required by paragraph (f) of this section shall be 
retained. This record shall be retained for the period specified and 
meet the criteria of 29 CFR 1910.20.
    (ii) The record required in paragraph (f)(8)(i) of this section 
shall include at least the following information:
    (A) The name and social security number of the employee;
    (B) Physician's written opinions, recommended limitations, and 
results of examinations and tests;
    (C) Any employee medical complaints related to exposure to hazardous 
substances;
    (D) A copy of the information provided to the examining physician by 
the employer, with the exception of the standard and its appendices.
    (g) Engineering controls, work practices, and personal protective 
equipment for employee protection. Engineering controls, work practices, 
personal protective equipment, or a combination of these shall be 
implemented in accordance with this paragraph to protect employees from 
exposure to hazardous substances and safety and health hazards.
    (1) Engineering controls, work practices and PPE for substances 
regulated in subparts G and Z. (i) Engineering controls and work 
practices shall be instituted to reduce and maintain employee exposure 
to or below the permissible exposure limits for substances regulated by 
29 CFR part 1910, to the extent required by subpart Z, except to the 
extent that such controls and practices are not feasible.

    Note to (g)(1)(i): Engineering controls which may be feasible 
include the use of pressurized cabs or control booths on equipment, and/
or the use of remotely operated material handling equipment. Work 
practices which may be feasible are removing all non-essential employees 
from potential exposure during opening of drums, wetting down dusty 
operations and locating employees upwind of possible hazards.


[[Page 377]]


    (ii) Whenever engineering controls and work practices are not 
feasible or not required, any reasonable combination of engineering 
controls, work practices and PPE shall be used to reduce and maintain 
employee exposures to or below the permissible exposure limits or dose 
limits for substances regulated by 29 CFR part 1910, subpart Z.
    (iii) The employer shall not implement a schedule of employee 
rotation as a means of compliance with permissible exposure limits or 
dose limits except when there is no other feasible way of complying with 
the airborne or dermal dose limits for ionizing radiation.
    (iv) The provisions of 29 CFR, subpart G, shall be followed.
    (2) Engineering controls, work practices, and PPE for substances not 
regulated in subparts G and Z. An appropriate combination of engineering 
controls, work practices and personal protective equipment shall be used 
to reduce and maintain employee exposure to or below published exposure 
levels for hazardous substances and health hazards not regulated by 29 
CFR part 1910, subparts G and Z. The employer may use the published 
literature and MSDS as a guide in making the employer's determination as 
to what level of protection the employer believes is appropriate for 
hazardous substances and health hazards for which there is no 
permissible exposure limit or published exposure limit.
    (3) Personal protective equipment selection. (i) Personal protective 
equipment (PPE) shall be selected and used which will protect employees 
from the hazards and potential hazards they are likely to encounter as 
identified during the site characterization and analysis.
    (ii) Personal protective equipment selection shall be based on an 
evaluation of the performance characteristics of the PPE relative to the 
requirements and limitations of the site, the task-specific conditions 
and duration, and the hazards and potential hazards identified at the 
site.
    (iii) Positive pressure self-contained breathing apparatus, or 
positive pressure air-line respirators equipped with an escape air 
supply, shall be used when chemical exposure levels present will create 
a substantial possibility of immediate death, immediate serious illness 
or injury, or impair the ability to escape.
    (iv) Totally-encapsulating chemical protective suits (protection 
equivalent to Level A protection as recommended in appendix B) shall be 
used in conditions where skin absorption of a hazardous substance may 
result in a substantial possibility of immediate death, immediate 
serious illness or injury, or impair the ability to escape.
    (v) The level of protection provided by PPE selection shall be 
increased when additional information on site conditions indicates that 
increased protection is necessary to reduce employee exposures below 
permissible exposure limits and published exposure levels for hazardous 
substances and health hazards. (See appendix B for guidance on selecting 
PPE ensembles.)

    Note to (g)(3): The level of employee protection provided may be 
decreased when additional information or site conditions show that 
decreased protection will not result in hazardous exposures to 
employees.

    (vi) Personal protective equipment shall be selected and used to 
meet the requirements of 29 CFR part 1910, subpart I, and additional 
requirements specified in this section.
    (4) Totally-encapsulating chemical protective suits. (i) Totally-
encapsulating suits shall protect employees from the particular hazards 
which are identified during site characterization and analysis.
    (ii) Totally-encapsulating suits shall be capable of maintaining 
positive air pressure. (See appendix A for a test method which may be 
used to evaluate this requirement.)
    (iii) Totally-encapsulating suits shall be capable of preventing 
inward test gas leakage of more than 0.5 percent. (See appendix A for a 
test method which may be used to evaluate this requirement.)
    (5) Personal protective equipment (PPE) program. A written personal 
protective equipment program, which is part of the employer's safety and 
health program required in paragraph (b) of this section or required in 
paragraph (p)(1) of this section and which is also a part of the site-
specific safety and health

[[Page 378]]

plan shall be established. The PPE program shall address the elements 
listed below. When elements, such as donning and doffing procedures, are 
provided by the manufacturer of a piece of equipment and are attached to 
the plan, they need not be rewritten into the plan as long as they 
adequately address the procedure or element.
    (i) PPE selection based upon site hazards,
    (ii) PPE use and limitations of the equipment,
    (iii) Work mission duration,
    (iv) PPE maintenance and storage,
    (v) PPE decontamination and disposal,
    (vi) PPE training and proper fitting,
    (vii) PPE donning and doffing procedures,
    (viii) PPE inspection procedures prior to, during, and after use,
    (ix) Evaluation of the effectiveness of the PPE program, and
    (x) Limitations during temperature extremes, heat stress, and other 
appropriate medical considerations.
    (h) Monitoring--(1) General. (i) Monitoring shall be performed in 
accordance with this paragraph where there may be a question of employee 
exposure to hazardous concentrations of hazardous substances in order to 
assure proper selection of engineering controls, work practices and 
personal protective equipment so that employees are not exposed to 
levels which exceed permissible exposure limits, or published exposure 
levels if there are no permissible exposure limits, for hazardous 
substances.
    (ii) Air monitoring shall be used to identify and quantify airborne 
levels of hazardous substances and safety and health hazards in order to 
determine the appropriate level of employee protection needed on site.
    (2) Initial entry. Upon initial entry, representative air monitoring 
shall be conducted to identify any IDLH condition, exposure over 
permissible exposure limits or published exposure levels, exposure over 
a radioactive material's dose limits or other dangerous condition such 
as the presence of flammable atmospheres or oxygen-deficient 
environments.
    (3) Periodic monitoring. Periodic monitoring shall be conducted when 
the possibility of an IDLH condition or flammable atmosphere has 
developed or when there is indication that exposures may have risen over 
permissible exposure limits or published exposure levels since prior 
monitoring. Situations where it shall be considered whether the 
possibility that exposures have risen are as follows:
    (i) When work begins on a different portion of the site.
    (ii) When contaminants other than those previously identified are 
being handled.
    (iii) When a different type of operation is initiated (e.g., drum 
opening as opposed to exploratory well drilling).
    (iv) When employees are handling leaking drums or containers or 
working in areas with obvious liquid contamination (e.g., a spill or 
lagoon).
    (4) Monitoring of high-risk employees. After the actual clean-up 
phase of any hazardous waste operation commences; for example, when 
soil, surface water or containers are moved or disturbed; the employer 
shall monitor those employees likely to have the highest exposures to 
hazardous substances and health hazards likely to be present above 
permissible exposure limits or published exposure levels by using 
personal sampling frequently enough to characterize employee exposures. 
If the employees likely to have the highest exposure are over 
permissible exposure limits or published exposure limits, then 
monitoring shall continue to determine all employees likely to be above 
those limits. The employer may utilize a representative sampling 
approach by documenting that the employees and chemicals chosen for 
monitoring are based on the criteria stated above.

    Note to (h): It is not required to monitor employees engaged in site 
characterization operations covered by paragraph (c) of this section.

    (i) Informational programs. Employers shall develop and implement a 
program, which is part of the employer's safety and health program 
required in paragraph (b) of this section, to inform employees, 
contractors, and subcontractors (or their representative) actually 
engaged in hazardous waste operations of the nature, level and degree of 
exposure likely as a result of

[[Page 379]]

participation in such hazardous waste operations. Employees, contractors 
and subcontractors working outside of the operations part of a site are 
not covered by this standard.
    (j) Handling drums and containers--(1) General. (i) Hazardous 
substances and contaminated soils, liquids, and other residues shall be 
handled, transported, labeled, and disposed of in accordance with this 
paragraph.
    (ii) Drums and containers used during the clean-up shall meet the 
appropriate DOT, OSHA, and EPA regulations for the wastes that they 
contain.
    (iii) When practical, drums and containers shall be inspected and 
their integrity shall be assured prior to being moved. Drums or 
containers that cannot be inspected before being moved because of 
storage conditions (i.e., buried beneath the earth, stacked behind other 
drums, stacked several tiers high in a pile, etc.) shall be moved to an 
accessible location and inspected prior to further handling.
    (iv) Unlabelled drums and containers shall be considered to contain 
hazardous substances and handled accordingly until the contents are 
positively identified and labeled.
    (v) Site operations shall be organized to minimize the amount of 
drum or container movement.
    (vi) Prior to movement of drums or containers, all employees exposed 
to the transfer operation shall be warned of the potential hazards 
associated with the contents of the drums or containers.
    (vii) U.S. Department of Transportation specified salvage drums or 
containers and suitable quantities of proper absorbent shall be kept 
available and used in areas where spills, leaks, or ruptures may occur.
    (viii) Where major spills may occur, a spill containment program, 
which is part of the employer's safety and health program required in 
paragraph (b) of this section, shall be implemented to contain and 
isolate the entire volume of the hazardous substance being transferred.
    (ix) Drums and containers that cannot be moved without rupture, 
leakage, or spillage shall be emptied into a sound container using a 
device classified for the material being transferred.
    (x) A ground-penetrating system or other type of detection system or 
device shall be used to estimate the location and depth of buried drums 
or containers.
    (xi) Soil or covering material shall be removed with caution to 
prevent drum or container rupture.
    (xii) Fire extinguishing equipment meeting the requirements of 29 
CFR part 1910, subpart L, shall be on hand and ready for use to control 
incipient fires.
    (2) Openinq drums and containers. The following procedures shall be 
followed in areas where drums or containers are being opened:
    (i) Where an airline respirator system is used, connections to the 
source of air supply shall be protected from contamination and the 
entire system shall be protected from physical damage.
    (ii) Employees not actually involved in opening drums or containers 
shall be kept a safe distance from the drums or containers being opened.
    (iii) If employees must work near or adjacent to drums or containers 
being opened, a suitable shield that does not interfere with the work 
operation shall be placed between the employee and the drums or 
containers being opened to protect the employee in case of accidental 
explosion.
    (iv) Controls for drum or container opening equipment, monitoring 
equipment, and fire suppression equipment shall be located behind the 
explosion-resistant barrier.
    (v) When there is a reasonable possibility of flammable atmospheres 
being present, material handling equipment and hand tools shall be of 
the type to prevent sources of ignition.
    (vi) Drums and containers shall be opened in such a manner that 
excess interior pressure will be safely relieved. If pressure can not be 
relieved from a remote location, appropriate shielding shall be placed 
between the employee and the drums or containers to reduce the risk of 
employee injury.
    (vii) Employees shall not stand upon or work from drums or 
containers.
    (3) Material handling equipment. Material handiing equipment used to 
transfer drums and containers shall be selected, positioned and operated 
to minimize sources of ignition related to the

[[Page 380]]

equipment from igniting vapors released from ruptured drums or 
containers.
    (4) Radioactive wastes. Drums and containers containing radioactive 
wastes shall not be handled until such time as their hazard to employees 
is properly assessed.
    (5) Shock sensitive wastes. As a minimum, the following special 
precautions shall be taken when drums and containers containing or 
suspected of containing shock-sensitive wastes are handled:
    (i) All non-essential employees shall be evacuated from the area of 
transfer.
    (ii) Material handling equipment shall be provided with explosive 
containment devices or protective shields to protect equipment operators 
from exploding containers.
    (iii) An employee alarm system capable of being perceived above 
surrounding light and noise conditions shall be used to signal the 
commencement and completion of explosive waste handling activities.
    (iv) Continuous communications (i.e., portable radios, hand signals, 
telephones, as appropriate) shall be maintained between the employee-in-
charge of the immediate handling area and both the site safety and 
health supervisor and the command post until such time as the handling 
operation is completed. Communication equipment or methods that could 
cause shock sensitive materials to explode shall not be used.
    (v) Drums and containers under pressure, as evidenced by bulging or 
swelling, shall not be moved until such time as the cause for excess 
pressure is determined and appropriate containment procedures have been 
implemented to protect employees from explosive relief of the drum.
    (vi) Drums and containers containing packaged laboratory wastes 
shall be considered to contain shock-sensitive or explosive materials 
until they have been characterized.

    Caution: Shipping of shock sensitive wastes may be prohibited under 
U.S. Department of Transportation regulations. Employers and their 
shippers should refer to 49 CFR 173.21 and 173.50.

    (6) Laboratory waste packs. In addition to the requirements of 
paragraph (j)(5) of this section, the following precautions shall be 
taken, as a minimum, in handling laboratory waste packs (lab packs):
    (i) Lab packs shall be opened only when necessary and then only by 
an individual knowledgeable in the inspection, classification, and 
segregation of the containers within the pack according to the hazards 
of the wastes.
    (ii) If crystalline material is noted on any container, the contents 
shall be handled as a shock-sensitive waste until the contents are 
identified.
    (7) Sampling of drum and container contents. Sampling of containers 
and drums shall be done in accordance with a sampling procedure which is 
part of the site safety and health plan developed for and available to 
employees and others at the specific worksite.
    (8) Shipping and transport. (i) Drums and containers shall be 
identified and classified prior to packaging for shipment.
    (ii) Drum or container staging areas shall be kept to the minimum 
number necessary to identify and classify materials safely and prepare 
them for transport.
    (iii) Staging areas shall be provided with adequate access and 
egress routes.
    (iv) Bulking of hazardous wastes shall be permitted only after a 
thorough characterization of the materials has been completed.
    (9) Tank and vault procedures. (i) Tanks and vaults containing 
hazardous substances shall be handled in a manner similar to that for 
drums and containers, taking into consideration the size of the tank or 
vault.
    (ii) Appropriate tank or vault entry procedures as described in the 
employer's safety and health plan shall be followed whenever employees 
must enter a tank or vault.
    (k) Decontamination--(1) General. Procedures for all phases of 
decontamination shall be developed and implemented in accordance with 
this paragraph.
    (2) Decontamination procedures. (i) A decontamination procedure 
shall be developed, communicated to employees and implemented before any 
employees or equipment may enter areas on site where potential for 
exposure to hazardous substances exists.

[[Page 381]]

    (ii) Standard operating procedures shall be developed to minimize 
employee contact with hazardous substances or with equipment that has 
contacted hazardous substances.
    (iii) All employees leaving a contaminated area shall be 
appropriately decontaminated; all contaminated clothing and equipment 
leaving a contaminated area shall be appropriately disposed of or 
decontaminated.
    (iv) Decontamination procedures shall be monitored by the site 
safety and health supervisor to determine their effectiveness. When such 
procedures are found to be ineffective, appropriate steps shall be taken 
to correct any deficiencies.
    (3) Location. Decontamination shall be performed in geographical 
areas that will minimize the exposure of uncontaminated employees or 
equipment to contaminated employees or equipment.
    (4) Equipment and solvents. All equipment and solvents used for 
decontamination shall be decontaminated or disposed of properly.
    (5) Personal protective clothing and equipment. (i) Protective 
clothing and equipment shall be decontaminated, cleaned, laundered, 
maintained or replaced as needed to maintain their effectiveness.
    (ii) Employees whose non-impermeable clothing becomes wetted with 
hazardous substances shall immediately remove that clothing and proceed 
to shower. The clothing shall be disposed of or decontaminated before it 
is removed from the work zone.
    (6) Unauthorized employees. Unauthorized employees shall not remove 
protective clothing or equipment from change rooms.
    (7) Commercial laundries or cleaning establishments. Commercial 
laundries or cleaning establishments that decontaminate protective 
clothing or equipment shall be informed of the potentially harmful 
effects of exposures to hazardous substances.
    (8) Showers and change rooms. Where the decontamination procedure 
indicates a need for regular showers and change rooms outside of a 
contaminated area, they shall be provided and meet the requirements of 
29 CFR 1910.141. If temperature conditions prevent the effective use of 
water, then other effective means for cleansing shall be provided and 
used.
    (l) Emergency response by employees at uncontrolled hazardous waste 
sites--(1) Emergency response plan. (i) An emergency response plan shall 
be developed and implemented by all employers within the scope of 
paragraphs (a)(1) (i)-(ii) of this section to handle anticipated 
emergencies prior to the commencement of hazardous waste operations. The 
plan shall be in writing and available for inspection and copying by 
employees, their representatives, OSHA personnel and other governmental 
agencies with relevant responsibilities.
    (ii) Employers who will evacuate their employees from the danger 
area when an emergency occurs, and who do not permit any of their 
employees to assist in handling the emergency, are exempt from the 
requirements of this paragraph if they provide an emergency action plan 
complying with Sec. 1910.38(a) of this part.
    (2) Elements of an emergency response plan. The employer shall 
develop an emergency response plan for emergencies which shall address, 
as a minimum, the following:
    (i) Pre-emergency planning.
    (ii) Personnel roles, lines of authority, and communication.
    (iii) Emergency recognition and prevention.
    (iv) Safe distances and places of refuge.
    (v) Site security and control.
    (vi) Evacuation routes and procedures.
    (vii) Decontamination procedures which are not covered by the site 
safety and health plan.
    (viii) Emergency medical treatment and first aid.
    (ix) Emergency alerting and response procedures.
    (x) Critique of response and follow-up.
    (xi) PPE and emergency equipment.
    (3) Procedures for handling emergency incidents. (i) In addition to 
the elements for the emergency response plan required in paragraph 
(l)(2) of this section, the following elements shall be included for 
emergency response plans:

[[Page 382]]

    (A) Site topography, layout, and prevailing weather conditions.
    (B) Procedures for reporting incidents to local, state, and federal 
governmental agencies.
    (ii) The emergency response plan shall be a separate section of the 
Site Safety and Health Plan.
    (iii) The emergency response plan shall be compatible and integrated 
with the disaster, fire and/or emergency response plans of local, state, 
and federal agencies.
    (iv) The emergency response plan shall be rehearsed regularly as 
part of the overall training program for site operations.
    (v) The site emergency response plan shall be reviewed periodically 
and, as necessary, be amended to keep it current with new or changing 
site conditions or information.
    (vi) An employee alarm system shall be installed in accordance with 
29 CFR 1910.165 to notify employees of an emergency situation; to stop 
work activities if necessary; to lower background noise in order to 
speed communication; and to begin emergency procedures.
    (vii) Based upon the information available at time of the emergency, 
the employer shall evaluate the incident and the site response 
capabilities and proceed with the appropriate steps to implement the 
site emergency response plan.
    (m) Illumination. Areas accessible to employees shall be lighted to 
not less than the minimum illumination intensities listed in the 
following Table H-120.1 while any work is in progress:

     Table H-120.1--Minimum Illumination Intensities in Foot-Candles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Foot-candles                      Area or operations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5......................................   General site areas.
3......................................   Excavation and waste areas,
                                          accessways, active storage
                                          areas, loading platforms,
                                          refueling, and field
                                          maintenance areas.
5......................................   Indoors: Warehouses,
                                          corridors, hallways, and
                                          exitways.
5......................................   Tunnels, shafts, and general
                                          underground work areas.
                                          (Exception: Minimum of 10 foot-
                                          candles is required at tunnel
                                          and shaft heading during
                                          drilling mucking, and scaling.
                                          Mine Safety and Health
                                          Administration approved cap
                                          lights shall be acceptable for
                                          use in the tunnel heading.)
10.....................................   General shops (e.g.,
                                          mechanical and electrical
                                          equipment rooms, active
                                          storerooms, barracks or living
                                          quarters, locker or dressing
                                          rooms, dining areas, and
                                          indoor toilets and workrooms.)
30.....................................   First aid stations,
                                          infirmaries, and offices.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (n) Sanitation at temporary workplaces--(1) Potable water. (i) An 
adequate supply of potable water shall be provided on the site.
    (ii) Portable containers used to dispense drinking water shall be 
capable of being tightly closed, and equipped with a tap. Water shall 
not be dipped from containers.
    (iii) Any container used to distribute drinking water shall be 
clearly marked as to the nature of its contents and not used for any 
other purpose.
    (iv) Where single service cups (to be used but once) are supplied, 
both a sanitary container for the unused cups and a receptacle for 
disposing of the used cups shall be provided.
    (2) Nonpotable water. (i) Outlets for nonpotable water, such as 
water for firefighting purposes, shall be identified to indicate clearly 
that the water is unsafe and is not to be used for drinking, washing, or 
cooking purposes.
    (ii) There shall be no cross-connection, open or potential, between 
a system furnishing potable water and a system furnishing nonpotable 
water.
    (3) Toilet facilities. (i) Toilets shall be provided for employees 
according to the following Table H-120.2.

                    Table H-120.2--Toilet Facilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Minimum number of
            Number of employees                      facilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
20 or fewer...............................   One.
More than 20, fewer than 200..............   One toilet seat and one
                                             urinal per 40 employees.
More than 200.............................   One toilet seat and one
                                             urinal per 50 employees.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Under temporary field conditions, provisions shall be made to 
assure that at least one toilet facility is available.
    (iii) Hazardous waste sites not provided with a sanitary sewer shall 
be provided with the following toilet facilities unless prohibited by 
local codes:

[[Page 383]]

    (A) Chemical toilets;
    (B) Recirculating toilets;
    (C) Combustion toilets; or
    (D) Flush toilets.
    (iv) The requirements of this paragraph for sanitation facilities 
shall not apply to mobile crews having transportation readily available 
to nearby toilet facilities.
    (v) Doors entering toilet facilities shall be provided with entrance 
locks controlled from inside the facility.
    (4) Food handling. All food service facilities and operations for 
employees shall meet the applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of 
the jurisdictions in which they are located.
    (5) Temporary sleeping quarters. When temporary sleeping quarters 
are provided, they shall be heated, ventilated, and lighted.
    (6) Washing facilities. The employer shall provide adequate washing 
facilities for employees engaged in operations where hazardous 
substances may be harmful to employees. Such facilities shall be in near 
proximity to the worksite; in areas where exposures are below 
permissible exposure limits and published exposure levels and which are 
under the controls of the employer; and shall be so equipped as to 
enable employees to remove hazardous substances from themselves.
    (7) Showers and change rooms. When hazardous waste clean-up or 
removal operations commence on a site and the duration of the work will 
require six months or greater time to complete, the employer shall 
provide showers and change rooms for all employees exposed to hazardous 
substances and health hazards involved in hazardous waste clean-up or 
removal operations.
    (i) Showers shall be provided and shall meet the requirements of 29 
CFR 1910.141(d)(3).
    (ii) Change rooms shall be provided and shall meet the requirements 
of 29 CFR 1910.141(e). Change rooms shall consist of two separate change 
areas separated by the shower area required in paragraph (n)(7)(i) of 
this section. One change area, with an exit leading off the worksite, 
shall provide employees with a clean area where they can remove, store, 
and put on street clothing. The second area, with an exit to the 
worksite, shall provide employees with an area where they can put on, 
remove and store work clothing and personal protective equipment.
    (iii) Showers and change rooms shall be located in areas where 
exposures are below the permissible exposure limits and published 
exposure levels. If this cannot be accomplished, then a ventilation 
system shall be provided that will supply air that is below the 
permissible exposure limits and published exposure levels.
    (iv) Employers shall assure that employees shower at the end of 
their work shift and when leaving the hazardous waste site.
    (o) New technology programs. (1) The employer shall develop and 
implement procedures for the introduction of effective new technologies 
and equipment developed for the improved protection of employees working 
with hazardous waste clean-up operations, and the same shall be 
implemented as part of the site safety and health program to assure that 
employee protection is being maintained.
    (2) New technologies, equipment or control measures available to the 
industry, such as the use of foams, absorbents, adsorbents, 
neutralizers, or other means to suppress the level of air contaminates 
while excavating the site or for spill control, shall be evaluated by 
employers or their representatives. Such an evaluation shall be done to 
determine the effectiveness of the new methods, materials, or equipment 
before implementing their use on a large scale for enhancing employee 
protection. Information and data from manufacturers or suppliers may be 
used as part of the employer's evaluation effort. Such evaluations shall 
be made available to OSHA upon request.
    (p) Certain Operations Conducted Under the Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA). Employers conducting operations at 
treatment, storage and disposal (TSD) facilities specified in paragraph 
(a)(1)(iv) of this section shall provide and implement the programs 
specified in this paragraph. See the ``Notes and Exceptions'' to 
paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section for employers not covered.)''.
    (1) Safety and health program. The employer shall develop and 
implement a written safety and health program for

[[Page 384]]

employees involved in hazardous waste operations that shall be available 
for inspection by employees, their representatives and OSHA personnel. 
The program shall be designed to identify, evaluate and control safety 
and health hazards in their facilities for the purpose of employee 
protection, to provide for emergency response meeting the requirements 
of paragraph (p)(8) of this section and to address as appropriate site 
analysis, engineering controls, maximum exposure limits, hazardous waste 
handling procedures and uses of new technologies.
    (2) Hazard communication program. The employer shall implement a 
hazard communication program meeting the requirements of 29 CFR 
1910.1200 as part of the employer's safety and program.

    Note to 1910.120--The exemption for hazardous waste provided in 
Sec. 1910.1200 is applicable to this section.

    (3) Medical surveillance program. The employer shall develop and 
implement a medical surveillance program meeting the requirements of 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (4) Decontamination program. The employer shall develop and 
implement a decontamination procedure meeting the requirements of 
paragraph (k) of this section.
    (5) New technology program. The employer shall develop and implement 
procedures meeting the requirements of paragraph (o) of this section for 
introducing new and innovative equipment into the workplace.
    (6) Material handling program. Where employees will be handling 
drums or containers, the employer shall develop and implement procedures 
meeting the requirements of paragraphs (j)(1) (ii) through (viii) and 
(xi) of this section, as well as (j)(3) and (j)(8) of this section prior 
to starting such work.
    (7) Training program--(i) New employees. The employer shall develop 
and implement a training program, which is part of the employer's safety 
and health program, for employees exposed to health hazards or hazardous 
substances at TSD operations to enable the employees to perform their 
assigned duties and functions in a safe and healthful manner so as not 
endanger themselves or other employees. The initial training shall be 
for 24 hours and refresher training shall be for eight hours annually. 
Employees who have received the initial training required by this 
paragraph shall be given a written certificate attesting that they have 
successfully completed the necessary training.
    (ii) Current employees. Employers who can show by an employee's 
previous work experience and/or training that the employee has had 
training equivalent to the initial training required by this paragraph, 
shall be considered as meeting the initial training requirements of this 
paragraph as to that employee. Equivalent training includes the training 
that existing employees might have already received from actual site 
work experience. Current employees shall receive eight hours of 
refresher training annually.
    (iii) Trainers. Trainers who teach initial training shall have 
satisfactorily completed a training course for teaching the subjects 
they are expected to teach or they shall have the academic credentials 
and instruction experience necessary to demonstrate a good command of 
the subject matter of the courses and competent instructional skills.
    (8) Emergency response program--(i) Emergency response plan. An 
emergency response plan shall be developed and implemented by all 
employers. Such plans need not duplicate any of the subjects fully 
addressed in the employer's contingency planning required by permits, 
such as those issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
provided that the contingency plan is made part of the emergency 
response plan. The emergency response plan shall be a written portion of 
the employers safety and health program required in paragraph (p)(1) of 
this section. Employers who will evacuate their employees from the 
worksite location when an emergency occurs and who do not permit any of 
their employees to assist in handling the emergency are exempt from the 
requirements of paragraph (p)(8) if they provide an emergency action 
plan complying with Sec. 1910.38(a) of this part.
    (ii) Elements of an emergency response plan. The employer shall 
develop an

[[Page 385]]

emergency response plan for emergencies which shall address, as a 
minimum, the following areas to the extent that they are not addressed 
in any specific program required in this paragraph:
    (A) Pre-emergency planning and coordination with outside parties.
    (B) Personnel roles, lines of authority, and communication.
    (C) Emergency recognition and prevention.
    (D) Safe distances and places of refuge.
    (E) Site security and control.
    (F) Evacuation routes and procedures.
    (G) Decontamination procedures.
    (H) Emergency medical treatment and first aid.
    (I) Emergency alerting and response procedures.
    (J) Critique of response and follow-up.
    (K) PPE and emergency equipment.
    (iii) Training. (A) Training for emergency response employees shall 
be completed before they are called upon to perform in real emergencies. 
Such training shall include the elements of the emergency response plan, 
standard operating procedures the employer has established for the job, 
the personal protective equipment to be worn and procedures for handling 
emergency incidents.

    Exception 1: An employer need not train all employees to the degree 
specified if the employer divides the work force in a manner such that a 
sufficient number of employees who have responsibility to control 
emergencies have the training specified, and all other employees, who 
may first respond to an emergency incident, have sufficient awareness 
training to recognize that an emergency response situation exists and 
that they are instructed in that case to summon the fully trained 
employees and not attempt control activities for which they are not 
trained.
    Exception 2: An employer need not train all employees to the degree 
specified if arrangements have been made in advance for an outside 
fully-trained emergency response team to respond in a reasonable period 
and all employees, who may come to the incident first, have sufficient 
awareness training to recognize that an emergency response situation 
exists and they have been instructed to call the designated outside 
fully-trained emergency response team for assistance.

    (B) Employee members of TSD facility emergency response 
organizations shall be trained to a level of competence in the 
recognition of health and safety hazards to protect themselves and other 
employees. This would include training in the methods used to minimize 
the risk from safety and health hazards; in the safe use of control 
equipment; in the selection and use of appropriate personal protective 
equipment; in the safe operating procedures to be used at the incident 
scene; in the techniques of coordination with other employees to 
minimize risks; in the appropriate response to over exposure from health 
hazards or injury to themselves and other employees; and in the 
recognition of subsequent symptoms which may result from over exposures.
    (C) The employer shall certify that each covered employee has 
attended and successfully completed the training required in paragraph 
(p)(8)(iii) of this section, or shall certify the employee's competency 
at least yearly. The method used to demonstrate competency for 
certification of training shall be recorded and maintained by the 
employer.
    (iv) Procedures for handling emergency incidents. (A) In addition to 
the elements for the emergency response plan required in paragraph 
(p)(8)(ii) of this section, the following elements shall be included for 
emergency response plans to the extent that they do not repeat any 
information already contained in the emergency response plan:
    (1) Site topography, layout, and prevailing weather conditions.
    (2) Procedures for reporting incidents to local, state, and federal 
governmental agencies.
    (B) The emergency response plan shall be compatible and integrated 
with the disaster, fire and/or emergency response plans of local, state, 
and federal agencies.
    (C) The emergency response plan shall be rehearsed regularly as part 
of the overall training program for site operations.
    (D) The site emergency response plan shall be reviewed periodically 
and, as necessary, be amended to keep it current with new or changing 
site conditions or information.

[[Page 386]]

    (E) An employee alarm system shall be installed in accordance with 
29 CFR 1910.165 to notify employees of an emergency situation; to stop 
work activities if necessary; to lower background noise in order to 
speed communication; and to begin emergency procedures.
    (F) Based upon the information available at time of the emergency, 
the employer shall evaluate the incident and the site response 
capabilities and proceed with the appropriate steps to implement the 
site emergency response plan.
    (q) Emerqency response to hazardous substance releases. This 
paragraph covers employers whose employees are engaged in emergency 
response no matter where it occurs except that it does not cover 
employees engaged in operations specified in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) 
through (a)(1)(iv) of this section. Those emergency response 
organizations who have developed and implemented programs equivalent to 
this paragraph for handling releases of hazardous substances pursuant to 
section 303 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 
(Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. 
11003) shall be deemed to have met the requirements of this paragraph.
    (1) Emergency response plan. An emergency response plan shall be 
developed and implemented to handle anticipated emergencies prior to the 
commencement of emergency response operations. The plan shall be in 
writing and available for inspection and copying by employees, their 
representatives and OSHA personnel. Employers who will evacuate their 
employees from the danger area when an emergency occurs, and who do not 
permit any of their employees to assist in handling the emergency, are 
exempt from the requirements of this paragraph if they provide an 
emergency action plan in accordance with Sec. 1910.38(a) of this part.
    (2) Elements of an emergency response plan. The employer shall 
develop an emergency response plan for emergencies which shall address, 
as a minimum, the following to the extent that they are not addressed 
elsewhere:
    (i) Pre-emergency planning and coordination with outside parties.
    (ii) Personnel roles, lines of authority, training, and 
communication.
    (iii) Emergency recognition and prevention.
    (iv) Safe distances and places of refuge.
    (v) Site security and control.
    (vi) Evacuation routes and procedures.
    (vii) Decontamination.
    (viii) Emergency medical treatment and first aid.
    (ix) Emergency alerting and response procedures.
    (x) Critique of response and follow-up.
    (xi) PPE and emergency equipment.
    (xii) Emergency response organizations may use the local emergency 
response plan or the state emergency response plan or both, as part of 
their emergency response plan to avoid duplication. Those items of the 
emergency response plan that are being properly addressed by the SARA 
Title III plans may be substituted into their emergency plan or 
otherwise kept together for the employer and employee's use.
    (3) Procedures for handlinq emergency response. (i) The senior 
emergency response official responding to an emergency shall become the 
individual in charge of a site-specific Incident Command System (ICS). 
All emergency responders and their communications shall be coordinated 
and controlled through the individual in charge of the ICS assisted by 
the senior official present for each employer.

    Note to (q)(3)(i).--The ``senior official'' at an emergency response 
is the most senior official on the site who has the responsibility for 
controlling the operations at the site. Initially it is the senior 
officer on the first-due piece of responding emergency apparatus to 
arrive on the incident scene. As more senior officers arrive (i.e., 
battalion chief, fire chief, state law enforcement official, site 
coordinator, etc.) the position is passed up the line of authority which 
has been previously established.


[[Page 387]]


    (ii) The individual in charge of the ICS shall identify, to the 
extent possible, all hazardous substances or conditions present and 
shall address as appropriate site analysis, use of engineering controls, 
maximum exposure limits, hazardous substance handling procedures, and 
use of any new technologies.
    (iii) Based on the hazardous substances and/or conditions present, 
the individual in charge of the ICS shall implement appropriate 
emergency operations, and assure that the personal protective equipment 
worn is appropriate for the hazards to be encountered. However, personal 
protective equipment shall meet, at a minimum, the criteria contained in 
29 CFR 1910.156(e) when worn while performing fire fighting operations 
beyond the incipient stage for any incident.
    (iv) Employees engaged in emergency response and exposed to 
hazardous substances presenting an inhalation hazard or potential 
inhalation hazard shall wear positive pressure self-contained breathing 
apparatus while engaged in emergency response, until such time that the 
individual in charge of the ICS determines through the use of air 
monitoring that a decreased level of respiratory protection will not 
result in hazardous exposures to employees.
    (v) The individual in charge of the ICS shall limit the number of 
emergency response personnel at the emergency site, in those areas of 
potential or actual exposure to incident or site hazards, to those who 
are actively performing emergency operations. However, operations in 
hazardous areas shall be performed using the buddy system in groups of 
two or more.
    (vi) Back-up personnel shall stand by with equipment ready to 
provide assistance or rescue. Advance first aid support personnel, as a 
minimum, shall also stand by with medical equipment and transportation 
capability.
    (vii) The individual in charge of the ICS shall designate a safety 
official, who is knowledgable in the operations being implemented at the 
emergency response site, with specific responsibility to identify and 
evaluate hazards and to provide direction with respect to the safety of 
operations for the emergency at hand.
    (viii) When activities are judged by the safety official to be an 
IDLH condition and/or to involve an imminent danger condition, the 
safety official shall have the authority to alter, suspend, or terminate 
those activities. The safety official shall immediately inform the 
individual in charge of the ICS of any actions needed to be taken to 
correct these hazards at the emergency scene.
    (ix) After emergency operations have terminated, the individual in 
charge of the ICS shall implement appropriate decontamination 
procedures.
    (x) When deemed necessary for meeting the tasks at hand, approved 
self-contained compressed air breathing apparatus may be used with 
approved cylinders from other approved self-contained compressed air 
breathing apparatus provided that such cylinders are of the same 
capacity and pressure rating. All compressed air cylinders used with 
self-contained breathing apparatus shall meet U.S. Department of 
Transportation and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
criteria.
    (4) Skilled support personnel. Personnel, not necessarily an 
employer's own employees, who are skilled in the operation of certain 
equipment, such as mechanized earth moving or digging equipment or crane 
and hoisting equipment, and who are needed temporarily to perform 
immediate emergency support work that cannot reasonably be performed in 
a timely fashion by an employer's own employees, and who will be or may 
be exposed to the hazards at an emergency response scene, are not 
required to meet the training required in this paragraph for the 
employer's regular employees. However, these personnel shall be given an 
initial briefing at the site prior to their participation in any 
emergency response. The initial briefing shall include instruction in 
the wearing of appropriate personal protective equipment, what chemical 
hazards are involved, and what duties are to be performed. All other 
appropriate safety and health precautions provided to the employer's own 
employees shall be used to assure the safety and health of these 
personnel.

[[Page 388]]

    (5) Specialist employees. Employees who, in the course of their 
regular job duties, work with and are trained in the hazards of specific 
hazardous substances, and who will be called upon to provide technical 
advice or assistance at a hazardous substance release incident to the 
individual in charge, shall receive training or demonstrate competency 
in the area of their specialization annually.
    (6) Training. Training shall be based on the duties and function to 
be performed by each responder of an emergency response organization. 
The skill and knowledge levels required for all new responders, those 
hired after the effective date of this standard, shall be conveyed to 
them through training before they are permitted to take part in actual 
emergency operations on an incident. Employees who participate, or are 
expected to participate, in emergency response, shall be given training 
in accordance with the following paragraphs:
    (i) First responder awareness level. First responders at the 
awareness level are individuals who are likely to witness or discover a 
hazardous substance release and who have been trained to initiate an 
emergency response sequence by notifying the proper authorities of the 
release. They would take no further action beyond notifying the 
authorities of the release. First responders at the awareness level 
shall have sufficient training or have had sufficient experience to 
objectively demonstrate competency in the following areas:
    (A) An understanding of what hazardous substances are, and the risks 
associated with them in an incident.
    (B) An understanding of the potential outcomes associated with an 
emergency created when hazardous substances are present.
    (C) The ability to recognize the presence of hazardous substances in 
an emergency.
    (D) The ability to identify the hazardous substances, if possible.
    (E) An understanding of the role of the first responder awareness 
individual in the employer's emergency response plan including site 
security and control and the U.S. Department of Transportation's 
Emergency Response Guidebook.
    (F) The ability to realize the need for additional resources, and to 
make appropriate notifications to the communication center.
    (ii) First responder operations level. First responders at the 
operations level are individuals who respond to releases or potential 
releases of hazardous substances as part of the initial response to the 
site for the purpose of protecting nearby persons, property, or the 
environment from the effects of the release. They are trained to respond 
in a defensive fashion without actually trying to stop the release. 
Their function is to contain the release from a safe distance, keep it 
from spreading, and prevent exposures. First responders at the 
operational level shall have received at least eight hours of training 
or have had sufficient experience to objectively demonstrate competency 
in the following areas in addition to those listed for the awareness 
level and the employer shall so certify:
    (A) Knowledge of the basic hazard and risk assessment techniques.
    (B) Know how to select and use proper personal protective equipment 
provided to the first responder operational level.
    (C) An understanding of basic hazardous materials terms.
    (D) Know how to perform basic control, containment and/or 
confinement operations within the capabilities of the resources and 
personal protective equipment available with their unit.
    (E) Know how to implement basic decontamination procedures.
    (F) An understanding of the relevant standard operating procedures 
and termination procedures.
    (iii) Hazardous materials technician. Hazardous materials 
technicians are individuals who respond to releases or potential 
releases for the purpose of stopping the release. They assume a more 
aggressive role than a first responder at the operations level in that 
they will approach the point of release in order to plug, patch or 
otherwise stop the release of a hazardous substance. Hazardous materials 
technicians shall have received at least 24

[[Page 389]]

hours of training equal to the first responder operations level and in 
addition have competency in the following areas and the employer shall 
so certify:
    (A) Know how to implement the employer's emergency response plan.
    (B) Know the classification, identification and verification of 
known and unknown materials by using field survey instruments and 
equipment.
    (C) Be able to function within an assigned role in the Incident 
Command System.
    (D) Know how to select and use proper specialized chemical personal 
protective equipment provided to the hazardous materials technician.
    (E) Understand hazard and risk assessment techniques.
    (F) Be able to perform advance control, containment, and/or 
confinement operations within the capabilities of the resources and 
personal protective equipment available with the unit.
    (G) Understand and implement decontamination procedures.
    (H) Understand termination procedures.
    (I) Understand basic chemical and toxicological terminology and 
behavior.
    (iv) Hazardous materials specialist. Hazardous materials specialists 
are individuals who respond with and provide support to hazardous 
materials technicians. Their duties parallel those of the hazardous 
materials technician, however, those duties require a more directed or 
specific knowledge of the various substances they may be called upon to 
contain. The hazardous materials specialist would also act as the site 
liaison with Federal, state, local and other government authorities in 
regards to site activities. Hazardous materials specialists shall have 
received at least 24 hours of training equal to the technician level and 
in addition have competency in the following areas and the employer 
shall so certify:
    (A) Know how to implement the local emergency response plan.
    (B) Understand classification, identification and verification of 
known and unknown materials by using advanced survey instruments and 
equipment.
    (C) Know of the state emergency response plan.
    (D) Be able to select and use proper specialized chemical personal 
protective equipment provided to the hazardous materials specialist.
    (E) Understand in-depth hazard and risk techniques.
    (F) Be able to perform specialized control, containment, and/or 
confinement operations within the capabilities of the resources and 
personal protective equipment available.
    (G) Be able to determine and implement decontamination procedures.
    (H) Have the ability to develop a site safety and control plan.
    (I) Understand chemical, radiological and toxicological terminology 
and behavior.
    (v) On scene incident commander. Incident commanders, who will 
assume control of the incident scene beyond the first responder 
awareness level, shall receive at least 24 hours of training equal to 
the first responder operations level and in addition have competency in 
the following areas and the employer shall so certify:
    (A) Know and be able to implement the employer's incident command 
system.
    (B) Know how to implement the employer's emergency response plan.
    (C) Know and understand the hazards and risks associated with 
employees working in chemical protective clothing.
    (D) Know how to implement the local emergency response plan.
    (E) Know of the state emergency response plan and of the Federal 
Regional Response Team.
    (F) Know and understand the importance of decontamination 
procedures.
    (7) Trainers. Trainers who teach any of the above training subjects 
shall have satisfactorily completed a training course for teaching the 
subjects they are expected to teach, such as the courses offered by the 
U.S. National Fire Academy, or they shall have the training and/or 
academic credentials and instructional experience necessary to 
demonstrate competent instructional skills and a good command of the 
subject matter of the courses they are to teach.
    (8) Refresher training. (i) Those employees who are trained in 
accordance with paragraph (q)(6) of this section

[[Page 390]]

shall receive annual refresher training of sufficient content and 
duration to maintain their competencies, or shall demonstrate competency 
in those areas at least yearly.
    (ii) A statement shall be made of the training or competency, and if 
a statement of competency is made, the employer shall keep a record of 
the methodology used to demonstrate competency.
    (9) Medical surveillance and consultation. (i) Members of an 
organized and designated HAZMAT team and hazardous materials specialists 
shall receive a baseline physical examination and be provided with 
medical surveillance as required in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (ii) Any emergency response employees who exhibits signs or symptoms 
which may have resulted from exposure to hazardous substances during the 
course of an emergency incident, either immediately or subsequently, 
shall be provided with medical consultation as required in paragraph 
(f)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (10) Chemical protective clothing. Chemical protective clothing and 
equipment to be used by organized and designated HAZMAT team members, or 
to be used by hazardous materials specialists, shall meet the 
requirements of paragraphs (g) (3) through (5) of this section.
    (11) Post-emergency response operations. Upon completion of the 
emergency response, if it is determined that it is necessary to remove 
hazardous substances, health hazards, and materials contaminated with 
them (such as contaminated soil or other elements of the natural 
environment) from the site of the incident, the employer conducting the 
clean-up shall comply with one of the following:
    (i) Meet all of the requirements of paragraphs (b) through (o) of 
this section; or
    (ii) Where the clean-up is done on plant property using plant or 
workplace employees, such employees shall have completed the training 
requirements of the following: 29 CFR 1910.38(a); 1910.134; 1910.1200, 
and other appropriate safety and health training made necessary by the 
tasks that they are expected to be performed such as personal protective 
equipment and decontamination procedures. All equipment to be used in 
the performance of the clean-up work shall be in serviceable condition 
and shall have been inspected prior to use.

 APPENDICES TO Sec. 1910.120--HAZARDOUS WASTE OPERATIONS AND EMERGENCY 
                                RESPONSE

    Note: The following appendices serve as non-mandatory guidelines to 
assist employees and employers in complying with the appropriate 
requirements of this section. However paragraph 1910.120(g) makes 
mandatory in certain circumstances the use of Level A and Level B PPE 
protection.

 Appendix A to Sec. 1910.120--Personal Protective Equipment Test Methods

    This appendix sets forth the non-mandatory examples of tests which 
may be used to evaluate compliance with Sec. 1910.120 (g)(4) (ii) and 
(iii). Other tests and other challenge agents may be used to evaluate 
compliance.

     A. Totally-encapsulating chemical protective suit pressure test

    1.0--Scope
    1.1  This practice measures the ability of a gas tight totally-
encapsulating chemical protective suit material, seams, and closures to 
maintain a fixed positive pressure. The results of this practice allow 
the gas tight integrity of a totally-encapsulating chemical protective 
suit to be evaluated.
    1.2  Resistance of the suit materials to permeation, penetration, 
and degradation by specific hazardous substances is not determined by 
this test method.
    2.0--Definition of terms
    2.1 Totally-encapsulated chemical protective suit (TECP suit) means 
a full body garment which is constructed of protective clothing 
materials; covers the wearer's torso, head, arms, legs and respirator; 
may cover the wearer's hands and feet with tightly attached gloves and 
boots; completely encloses the wearer and respirator by itself or in 
combination with the wearer's gloves and boots.
    2.2 Protective clothing material means any material or combination 
of materials used in an item of clothing for the purpose of isolating 
parts of the body from direct contact with a potentially hazardous 
liquid or gaseous chemicals.
    2.3 Gas tight means, for the purpose of this test method, the 
limited flow of a gas under pressure from the inside of a TECP suit to 
atmosphere at a prescribed pressure and time interval.
    3.0--Summary of test method

[[Page 391]]

    3.1 The TECP suit is visually inspected and modified for the test. 
The test apparatus is attached to the suit to permit inflation to the 
pre-test suit expansion pressure for removal of suit wrinkles and 
creases. The pressure is lowered to the test pressure and monitored for 
three minutes. If the pressure drop is excessive, the TECP suit fails 
the test and is removed from service. The test is repeated after leak 
location and repair.
    4.0--Required Supplies
    4.1 Source of compressed air.
    4.2 Test apparatus for suit testing, including a pressure 
measurement device with a sensitivity of at least \1/4\ inch water 
gauge.
    4.3 Vent valve closure plugs or sealing tape.
    4.4 Soapy water solution and soft brush.
    4.5 Stop watch or appropriate timing device.
    5.0--Safety Precautions
    5.1 Care shall be taken to provide the correct pressure safety 
devices required for the source of compressed air used.
    6.0--Test Procedure
    6.1 Prior to each test, the tester shall perform a visual inspection 
of the suit. Check the suit for seam integrity by visually examining the 
seams and gently pulling on the seams. Ensure that all air supply lines, 
fittings, visor, zippers, and valves are secure and show no signs of 
deterioration.
    6.1.1 Seal off the vent valves along with any other normal inlet or 
exhaust points (such as umbilical air line fittings or face piece 
opening) with tape or other appropriate means (caps, plugs, fixture, 
etc.). Care should be exercised in the sealing process not to damage any 
of the suit components.
    6.1.2 Close all closure assemblies.
    6.1.3 Prepare the suit for inflation by providing an improvised 
connection point on the suit for connecting an airline. Attach the 
pressure test apparatus to the suit to permit suit inflation from a 
compressed air source equipped with a pressure indicating regulator. The 
leak tightness of the pressure test apparatus should be tested before 
and after each test by closing off the end of the tubing attached to the 
suit and assuring a pressure of three inches water gauge for three 
minutes can be maintained. If a component is removed for the test, that 
component shall be replaced and a second test conducted with another 
component removed to permit a complete test of the ensemble.
    6.1.4 The pre-test expansion pressure (A) and the suit test pressure 
(B) shall be supplied by the suit manufacturer, but in no case shall 
they be less than: (A)=three inches water gauge; and (B)=two inches 
water gauge. The ending suit pressure (C) shall be no less than 80 
percent of the test pressure (B); i.e., the pressure drop shall not 
exceed 20 percent of the test pressure (B).
    6.1.5 Inflate the suit until the pressure inside is equal to 
pressure (A), the pre-test expansion suit pressure. Allow at least one 
minute to fill out the wrinkles in the suit. Release sufficient air to 
reduce the suit pressure to pressure (B), the suit test pressure. Begin 
timing. At the end of three minutes, record the suit pressure as 
pressure (C), the ending suit pressure. The difference between the suit 
test pressure and the ending suit test pressure (B-C) shall be defined 
as the suit pressure drop.
    6.1.6 If the suit pressure drop is more than 20 percent of the suit 
test pressure (B) during the three-minute test period, the suit fails 
the test and shall be removed from service.
    7.0--Retest Procedure
    7.1 If the suit fails the test check for leaks by inflating the suit 
to pressure (A) and brushing or wiping the entire suit (including seams, 
closures, lens gaskets, glove-to-sleeve joints, etc.) with a mild soap 
and water solution. Observe the suit for the formation of soap bubbles, 
which is an indication of a leak. Repair all identified leaks.
    7.2 Retest the TECP suit as outlined in Test procedure 6.0.
    8.0--Report
    8.1 Each TECP suit tested by this practice shall have the following 
information recorded:
    8.1.1 Unique identification number, identifying brand name, date of 
purchase, material of construction, and unique fit features, e.g., 
special breathing apparatus.
    8.1.2 The actual values for test pressures (A), (B), and (C) shall 
be recorded along with the specific observation times. If the ending 
pressure (C) is less than 80 percent of the test pressure (B), the suit 
shall be identified as failing the test. When possible, the specific 
leak location shall be identified in the test records. Retest pressure 
data shall be recorded as an additional test.
    8.1.3 The source of the test apparatus used shall be identified and 
the sensitivity of the pressure gauge shall be recorded.
    8.1.4 Records shall be kept for each pressure test even if repairs 
are being made at the test location.

                                 Caution

    Visually inspect all parts of the suit to be sure they are 
positioned correctly and secured tightly before putting the suit back 
into service. Special care should be taken to examine each exhaust valve 
to make sure it is not blocked.
    Care should also be exercised to assure that the inside and outside 
of the suit is completely dry before it is put into storage.

 B. Totally-encapsulating chemical protective suit qualitative leak test

    1.0--Scope
    1.1 This practice semi-qualitatively tests gas tight totally-
encapsulating chemical protective suit integrity by detecting inward

[[Page 392]]

leakage of ammonia vapor. Since no modifications are made to the suit to 
carry out this test, the results from this practice provide a realistic 
test for the integrity of the entire suit.
    1.2 Resistance of the suit materials to permeation, penetration, and 
degradation is not determined by this test method. ASTM test methods are 
available to test suit materials for these characteristics and the tests 
are usually conducted by the manufacturers of the suits.
    2.0--Definition of terms
    2.1 Totally-encapsulated chemical protective suit (TECP suit) means 
a full body garment which is constructed of protective clothing 
materials; covers the wearer's torso, head, arms, legs and respirator; 
may cover the wearer's hands and feet with tightly attached gloves and 
boots; completely encloses the wearer and respirator by itself or in 
combination with the wearer's gloves, and boots.
    2.2 Protective clothing material means any material or combination 
of materials used in an item of clothing for the purpose of isolating 
parts of the body from direct contact with a potentially hazardous 
liquid or gaseous chemicals.
    2.3 Gas tight means, for the purpose of this test method, the 
limited flow of a gas under pressure from the inside of a TECP suit to 
atmosphere at a prescribed pressure and time interval.
    4.5 A graduated cylinder or other volumetric measuring device of at 
least 50 milliliters in volume with an accuracy of at least 
    2.4 Intrusion Coefficient means a number expressing the level of 
protection provided by a gas tight totally-encapsulating chemical 
protective suit. The intrusion coefficient is calculated by dividing the 
test room challenge agent concentration by the concentration of 
challenge agent found inside the suit. The accuracy of the intrusion 
coefficient is dependent on the challenge agent monitoring methods. The 
larger the intrusion coefficient the greater the protection provided by 
the TECP suit.
    3.0--Summary of recommended practice
    3.1 The volume of concentrated aqueous ammonia solution (ammonia 
hydroxide NH<INF>4</INF> OH) required to generate the test atmosphere is 
determined using the directions outlined in 6.1. The suit is donned by a 
person wearing the appropriate respiratory equipment (either a positive 
pressure self-contained breathing apparatus or a positive pressure 
supplied air respirator) and worn inside the enclosed test room. The 
concentrated aqueous ammonia solution is taken by the suited individual 
into the test room and poured into an open plastic pan. A two-minute 
evaporation period is observed before the test room concentration is 
measured, using a high range ammonia length of stain detector tube. When 
the ammonia vapor reaches a concentration of between 1000 and 1200 ppm, 
the suited individual starts a standardized exercise protocol to stress 
and flex the suit. After this protocol is completed, the test room 
concentration is measured again. The suited individual exits the test 
room and his stand-by person measures the ammonia concentration inside 
the suit using a low range ammonia length of stain detector tube or 
other more sensitive ammonia detector. A stand-by person is required to 
observe the test individual during the test procedure; aid the person in 
donning and doffing the TECP suit; and monitor the suit interior. The 
intrusion coefficient of the suit can be calculated by dividing the 
average test area concentration by the interior suit concentration. A 
colorimetric ammonia indicator strip of bromophenol blue or equivalent 
is placed on the inside of the suit face piece lens so that the suited 
individual is able to detect a color change and know if the suit has a 
significant leak. If a color change is observed the individual shall 
leave the test room immediately.
    4.0--Required supplies
    4.1 A supply of concentrated aqueous ammonium hydroxide (58% by 
weight).
    4.2 A supply of bromophenol/blue indicating paper or equivalent, 
sensitive to 5-10 ppm ammonia or greater over a two-minute period of 
exposure. [pH 3.0 (yellow) to pH 4.6 (blue)]
    4.3 A supply of high range (0.5-10 volume percent) and low range (5-
700 ppm) detector tubes for ammonia and the corresponding sampling pump. 
More sensitive ammonia detectors can be substituted for the low range 
detector tubes to improve the sensitivity of this practice.
    4.4 A shallow plastic pan (PVC) at least 12":14":1" and a half pint 
plastic container (PVC) with tightly closing lid.
    4.5 A graduated cylinder or other volumetric measuring device of at 
least 50 milliliters in volume with an accuracy of at least 
<plus-minus>1 milliliters.
    5.0--Safety precautions
    5.1  Concentrated aqueous ammonium hydroxide, NH<INF>4</INF> OH, is 
a corrosive volatile liquid requiring eye, skin, and respiratory 
protection. The person conducting the test shall review the MSDS for 
aqueous ammonia.
    5.2  Since the established permissible exposure limit for ammonia is 
35 ppm as a 15 minute STEL, only persons wearing a positive pressure 
self-contained breathing apparatus or a positive pressure supplied air 
respirator shall be in the chamber. Normally only the person wearing the 
totally-encapsulating suit will be inside the chamber. A stand-by person 
shall have a positive pressure self-contained breathing apparatus, or a 
positive pressure supplied air respirator available to enter the test 
area should the suited individual need assistance.
    5.3  A method to monitor the suited individual must be used during 
this test. Visual contact is the simplest but other methods using 
communication devices are acceptable.

[[Page 393]]

    5.4  The test room shall be large enough to allow the exercise 
protocol to be carried out and then to be ventilated to allow for easy 
exhaust of the ammonia test atmosphere after the test(s) are completed.
    5.5  Individuals shall be medically screened for the use of 
respiratory protection and checked for allergies to ammonia before 
participating in this test procedure.
    6.0--Test procedure
    6.1.1  Measure the test area to the nearest foot and calculate its 
volume in cubic feet. Multiply the test area volume by 0.2 milliliters 
of concentrated aqueous ammonia solution per cubic foot of test area 
volume to determine the approximate volume of concentrated aqueous 
ammonia required to generate 1000 ppm in the test area.
    6.1.2  Measure this volume from the supply of concentrated aqueous 
ammonia and place it into a closed plastic container.
    6.1.3  Place the container, several high range ammonia detector 
tubes, and the pump in the clean test pan and locate it near the test 
area entry door so that the suited individual has easy access to these 
supplies.
    6.2.1  In a non-contaminated atmosphere, open a pre-sealed ammonia 
indicator strip and fasten one end of the strip to the inside of the 
suit face shield lens where it can be seen by the wearer. Moisten the 
indicator strip with distilled water. Care shall be taken not to 
contaminate the detector part of the indicator paper by touching it. A 
small piece of masking tape or equivalent should be used to attach the 
indicator strip to the interior of the suit face shield.
    6.2.2  If problems are encountered with this method of attachment, 
the indicator strip can be attached to the outside of the respirator 
face piece lens being used during the test.
    6.3  Don the respiratory protective device normally used with the 
suit, and then don the TECP suit to be tested. Check to be sure all 
openings which are intended to be sealed (zippers, gloves, etc.) are 
completely sealed. DO NOT, however, plug off any venting valves.
    6.4  Step into the enclosed test room such as a closet, bathroom, or 
test booth, equipped with an exhaust fan. No air should be exhausted 
from the chamber during the test because this will dilute the ammonia 
challenge concentrations.
    6.5  Open the container with the pre-measured volume of concentrated 
aqueous ammonia within the enclosed test room, and pour the liquid into 
the empty plastic test pan. Wait two minutes to allow for adequate 
volatilization of the concentrated aqueous ammonia. A small mixing fan 
can be used near the evaporation pan to increase the evaporation rate of 
the ammonia solution.
    6.6  After two minutes a determination of the ammonia concentration 
within the chamber should be made using the high range colorimetric 
detector tube. A concentration of 1000 ppm ammonia or greater shall be 
generated before the exercises are started.
    6.7  To test the integrity of the suit the following four minute 
exercise protocol should be followed:
    6.7.1  Raising the arms above the head with at least 15 raising 
motions completed in one minute.
    6.7.2  Walking in place for one minute with at least 15 raising 
motions of each leg in a one-minute period.
    6.7.3  Touching the toes with a least 10 complete motions of the 
arms from above the head to touching of the toes in a one-minute period.
    6.7.4  Knee bends with at least 10 complete standing and squatting 
motions in a one-minute period.
    6.8  If at any time during the test the colorimetric indicating 
paper should change colors, the test should be stopped and section 6.10 
and 6.12 initiated (See para.4.2).
    6.9  After completion of the test exercise, the test area 
concentration should be measured again using the high range colorimetric 
detector tube.
    6.10  Exit the test area.
    6.11  The opening created by the suit zipper or other appropriate 
suit penetration should be used to determine the ammonia concentration 
in the suit with the low range length of stain detector tube or other 
ammonia monitor. The internal TECP suit air should be sampled far enough 
from the enclosed test area to prevent a false ammonia reading.
    6.12  After completion of the measurement of the suit interior 
ammonia concentration the test is concluded and the suit is doffed and 
the respirator removed.
    6.13  The ventilating fan for the test room should be turned on and 
allowed to run for enough time to remove the ammonia gas. The fan shall 
be vented to the outside of the building.
    6.14  Any detectable ammonia in the suit interior (five ppm ammonia 
(NH<INF>3</INF>) or more for the length of stain detector tube) 
indicates that the suit has failed the test. When other ammonia 
detectors are used a lower level of detection is possible, and it should 
be specified as the pass/fail criteria.
    6.15  By following this test method, an intrusion coefficient of 
approximately 200 or more can be measured with the suit in a completely 
operational condition. If the intrusion coefficient is 200 or more, then 
the suit is suitable for emergency response and field use.
    7.0--Retest procedures
    7.1  If the suit fails this test, check for leaks by following the 
pressure test in test A above.
    7.2  Retest the TECP suit as outlined in the test procedure 6.0.

[[Page 394]]

    8.0--Report
    8.1  Each gas tight totally-encapsulating chemical protective suit 
tested by this practice shall have the following information recorded.
    8.1.1  Unique identification number, identifying brand name, date of 
purchase, material of construction, and unique suit features; e.g., 
special breathing apparatus.
    8.1.2  General description of test room used for test.
    8.1.3  Brand name and purchase date of ammonia detector strips and 
color change data.
    8.1.4  Brand name, sampling range, and expiration date of the length 
of stain ammonia detector tubes. The brand name and model of the 
sampling pump should also be recorded. If another type of ammonia 
detector is used, it should be identified along with its minimum 
detection limit for ammonia.
    8.1.5  Actual test results shall list the two test area 
concentrations, their average, the interior suit concentration, and the 
calculated intrusion coefficient. Retest data shall be recorded as an 
additional test.
    8.2  The evaluation of the data shall be specified as ``suit 
passed'' or ``suit failed,'' and the date of the test. Any detectable 
ammonia (five ppm or greater for the length of stain detector tube) in 
the suit interior indicates the suit has failed this test. When other 
ammonia detectors are used, a lower level of detection is possible and 
it should be specified as the pass fail criteria.

                                 Caution

    Visually inspect all parts of the suit to be sure they are 
positioned correctly and secured tightly before putting the suit back 
into service. Special care should be taken to examine each exhaust valve 
to make sure it is not blocked.
    Care should also be exercised to assure that the inside and outside 
of the suit is completely dry before it is put into storage.

 Appendix B to Sec. 1910.120--General Description and Discussion of the 
                Levels of Protection and Protective Gear

    This appendix sets forth information about personal protective 
equipment (PPE) protection levels which may be used to assist employers 
in complying with the PPE requirements of this section.
    As required by the standard, PPE must be selected which will protect 
employees from the specific hazards which they are likely to encounter 
during their work on-site.
    Selection of the appropriate PPE is a complex process which should 
take into consideration a variety of factors. Key factors involved in 
this process are identification of the hazards, or suspected hazards; 
their routes of potential hazard to employees (inhalation, skin 
absorption, ingestion, and eye or skin contact); and the performance of 
the PPE materials (and seams) in providing a barrier to these hazards. 
The amount of protection provided by PPE is material-hazard specific. 
That is, protective equipment materials will protect well against some 
hazardous substances and poorly, or not at all, against others. In many 
instances, protective equipment materials cannot be found which will 
provide continuous protection from the particular hazardous substance. 
In these cases the breakthrough time of the protective material should 
exceed the work durations.
    Other factors in this selection process to be considered are 
matching the PPE to the employee's work requirements and task-specific 
conditions. The durability of PPE materials, such as tear strength and 
seam strength, should be considered in relation to the employee's tasks. 
The effects of PPE in relation to heat stress and task duration are a 
factor in selecting and using PPE. In some cases layers of PPE may be 
necessary to provide sufficient protection, or to protect expensive PPE 
inner garments, suits or equipment.
    The more that is known about the hazards at the site, the easier the 
job of PPE selection becomes. As more information about the hazards and 
conditions at the site becomes available, the site supervisor can make 
decisions to up-grade or down-grade the level of PPE protection to match 
the tasks at hand.
    The following are guidelines which an employer can use to begin the 
selection of the appropriate PPE. As noted above, the site information 
may suggest the use of combinations of PPE selected from the different 
protection levels (i.e., A, B, C, or D) as being more suitable to the 
hazards of the work. It should be cautioned that the listing below does 
not fully address the performance of the specific PPE material in 
relation to the specific hazards at the job site, and that PPE 
selection, evaluation and re-selection is an ongoing process until 
sufficient information about the hazards and PPE performance is 
obtained.
    Part A. Personal protective equipment is divided into four 
categories based on the degree of protection afforded. (See Part B of 
this appendix for further explanation of Levels A, B, C, and D hazards.)
    I. Level A-- To be selected when the greatest level of skin, 
respiratory, and eye protection is required.
    The following constitute Level A equipment; it may be used as 
appropriate;
    1. Positive pressure, full face-piece self-contained breathing 
apparatus (SCBA), or positive pressure supplied air respirator with

[[Page 395]]

escape SCBA, approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH).
    2. Totally-encapsulating chemical-protective suit.
    3. Coveralls.\1\
    4. Long underwear.\1\
    5. Gloves, outer, chemical-resistant.
    6. Gloves, inner, chemical-resistant.
    7. Boots, chemical-resistant, steel toe and shank.
    8. Hard hat (under suit).\1\
    9. Disposable protective suit, gloves and boots (depending on suit 
construction, may be worn over totally-encapsulating suit).
    II. Level B--The highest level of respiratory protection is 
necessary but a lesser level of skin protection is needed.
    The following constitute Level B equipment; it may be used as 
appropriate.
    1. Positive pressure, full-facepiece self-contained breathing 
apparatus (SCBA), or positive pressure supplied air respirator with 
escape SCBA (NIOSH approved).
    2. Hooded chemical-resistant clothing (overalls and long-sleeved 
jacket; coveralls; one or two-piece chemical-splash suit; disposable 
chemical-resistant overalls).
    3. Coveralls. \1\
    4. Gloves, outer, chemical-resistant.
    5. Gloves, inner, chemical-resistant.
    6. Boots, outer, chemical-resistant steel toe and shank.
    7. Boot-covers, outer, chemical-resistant (disposable).\1\
    8. Hard hat. \1\
    9. [Reserved]
    10. Face shield. \1\
    III. Level C--The concentration(s) and type(s) of airborne 
substance(s) is known and the criteria for using air purifying 
respirators are met.
    The following constitute Level C equipment; it may be used as 
appropriate.
    1. Full-face or half-mask, air purifying respirators (NIOSH 
approved).
    2. Hooded chemical-resistant clothing (overalls; two-piece chemical-
splash suit; disposable chemical-resistant overalls).
    3. Coveralls. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Optional, as applicable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    4. Gloves, outer, chemical-resistant.
    5. Gloves, inner, chemical-resistant.
    6. Boots (outer), chemical-resistant steel toe and shank. \1\
    7. Boot-covers, outer, chemical-resistant (disposable) \1\.
    8. Hard hat. \1\
    9. Escape mask. \1\
    10. Face shield. \1\
    IV. Level D--A work uniform affording minimal protection, used for 
nuisance contamination only.
    The following constitute Level D equipment; it may be used as 
appropriate:
    1. Coveralls.
    2. Gloves. \1\
    3. Boots/shoes, chemical-resistant steel toe and shank.
    4. Boots, outer, chemical-resistant (disposable). \1\
    5. Safety glasses or chemical splash goggles*.
    6. Hard hat. \1\
    7. Escape mask. \1\
    8. Face shield. \1\
    Part B. The types of hazards for which levels A, B, C, and D 
protection are appropriate are described below:
    I. Level A--Level A protection should be used when:
    1. The hazardous substance has been identified and requires the 
highest level of protection for skin, eyes, and the respiratory system 
based on either the measured (or potential for) high concentration of 
atmospheric vapors, gases, or particulates; or the site operations and 
work functions involve a high potential for splash, immersion, or 
exposure to unexpected vapors, gases, or particulates of materials that 
are harmful to skin or capable of being absorbed through the skin;
    2. Substances with a high degree of hazard to the skin are known or 
suspected to be present, and skin contact is possible; or
    3. Operations are being conducted in confined, poorly ventilated 
areas, and the absence of conditions requiring Level A have not yet been 
determined.
    II. Level B--Level B protection should be used when:
    1. The type and atmospheric concentration of substances have been 
identified and require a high level of respiratory protection, but less 
skin protection;
    2. The atmosphere contains less than 19.5 percent oxygen; or
    3. The presence of incompletely identified vapors or gases is 
indicated by a direct-reading organic vapor detection instrument, but 
vapors and gases are not suspected of containing high levels of 
chemicals harmful to skin or capable of being absorbed through the skin.

    Note: This involves atmospheres with IDLH concentrations of specific 
substances that present severe inhalation hazards and that do not 
represent a severe skin hazard; or that do not meet the criteria for use 
of air-purifying respirators.

    III. Level C--Level C protection should be used when:
    1. The atmospheric contaminants, liquid splashes, or other direct 
contact will not adversely affect or be absorbed through any exposed 
skin;
    2. The types of air contaminants have been identified, 
concentrations measured, and an air-purifying respirator is available 
that can remove the contaminants; and

[[Page 396]]

    3. All criteria for the use of air-purifying respirators are met.
    IV. Level D--Level D protection should be used when:
    1. The atmosphere contains no known hazard; and
    2. Work functions preclude splashes, immersion, or the potential for 
unexpected inhalation of or contact with hazardous levels of any 
chemicals.

    Note: As stated before, combinations of personal protective 
equipment other than those described for Levels A, B, C, and D 
protection may be more appropriate and may be used to provide the proper 
level of protection.

    As an aid in selecting suitable chemical protective clothing, it 
should be noted that the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) has 
developed standards on chemical protective clothing. The standards that 
have been adopted by include:
    NFPA 1991--Standard on Vapor-Protective Suits for Hazardous Chemical 
Emergencies (EPA Level A Protective Clothing).
    NFPA 1992--Standard on Liquid Splash-Protective Suits for Hazardous 
Chemical Emergencies (EPA Level B Protective Clothing).
    NFPA 1993--Standard on Liquid Splash-Protective Suits for Non-
emergency, Non-flammable Hazardous Chemical Situations (EPA Level B 
Protective Clothing).
    These standards apply documentation and performance requirements to 
the manufacture of chemical protective suits. Chemical protective suits 
meeting these requirements are labelled as compliant with the 
appropriate standard. It is recommended that chemical protective suits 
that meet these standards be used.

           Appendix C to Sec. 1910.120--Compliance Guidelines

    1. Occupational Safety and Health Program. Each hazardous waste site 
clean-up effort will require an occupational safety and health program 
headed by the site coordinator or the employer's representative. The 
purpose of the program will be the protection of employees at the site 
and will be an extension of the employer's overall safety and health 
program. The program will need to be developed before work begins on the 
site and implemented as work proceeds as stated in paragraph (b). The 
program is to facilitate coordination and communication of safety and 
health issues among personnel responsible for the various activities 
which will take place at the site. It will provide the overall means for 
planning and implementing the needed safety and health training and job 
orientation of employees who will be working at the site. The program 
will provide the means for identifying and controlling worksite hazards 
and the means for monitoring program effectiveness. The program will 
need to cover the responsibilities and authority of the site coordinator 
or the employer's manager on the site for the safety and health of 
employees at the site, and the relationships with contractors or support 
services as to what each employer's safety and health responsibilities 
are for their employees on the site. Each contractor on the site needs 
to have its own safety and health program so structured that it will 
smoothly interface with the program of the site coordinator or principal 
contractor.
    Also those employers involved with treating, storing or disposal of 
hazardous waste as covered in paragraph (p) must have implemented a 
safety and health program for their employees. This program is to 
include the hazard communication program required in paragraph (p)(1) 
and the training required in paragraphs (p)(7) and (p)(8) as parts of 
the employers comprehensive overall safety and health program. This 
program is to be in writing.
    Each site or workplace safety and health program will need to 
include the following: (1) Policy statements of the line of authority 
and accountability for implementing the program, the objectives of the 
program and the role of the site safety and health supervisor or manager 
and staff; (2) means or methods for the development of procedures for 
identifying and controlling workplace hazards at the site; (3) means or 
methods for the development and communication to employees of the 
various plans, work rules, standard operating procedures and practices 
that pertain to individual employees and supervisors; (4) means for the 
training of supervisors and employees to develop the needed skills and 
knowledge to perform their work in a safe and healthful manner; (5) 
means to anticipate and prepare for emergency situations; and (6) means 
for obtaining information feedback to aid in evaluating the program and 
for improving the effectiveness of the program. The management and 
employees should be trying continually to improve the effectiveness of 
the program thereby enhancing the protection being afforded those 
working on the site.
    Accidents on the site or workplace should be investigated to provide 
information on how such occurrences can be avoided in the future. When 
injuries or illnesses occur on the site or workplace, they will need to 
be investigated to determine what needs to be done to prevent this 
incident from occurring again. Such information will need to be used as 
feedback on the effectiveness of the program and the information turned 
into positive steps to prevent any reoccurrence. Receipt of employee 
suggestions or complaints relating to safety and health issues involved 
with site or workplace activities is also a

[[Page 397]]

feedback mechanism that can be used effectively to improve the program 
and may serve in part as an evaluative tool(s).
    For the development and implementation of the program to be the most 
effective, professional safety and health personnel should be used. 
Certified Safety Professionals, Board Certified Industrial Hygienists or 
Registered Professional Safety Engineers are good examples of 
professional stature for safety and health managers who will administer 
the employer's program.
    2. Training. The training programs for employees subject to the 
requirements of paragraph (e) of this standard should address: the 
safety and health hazards employees should expect to find on hazardous 
waste clean-up sites; what control measures or techniques are effective 
for those hazards; what monitoring procedures are effective in 
characterizing exposure levels; what makes an effective employer's 
safety and health program; what a site safety and health plan should 
include; hands on training with personal protective equipment and 
clothing they may be expected to use; the contents of the OSHA standard 
relevant to the employee's duties and function; and, employee's 
responsibilities under OSHA and other regulations. Supervisors will need 
training in their responsibilities under the safety and health program 
and its subject areas such as the spill containment program, the 
personal protective equipment program, the medical surveillance program, 
the emergency response plan and other areas.
    The training programs for employees subject to the requirements of 
paragraph (p) of this standard should address: the employers safety and 
health program elements impacting employees; the hazard communication 
program; the medical surveillance program; the hazards and the controls 
for such hazards that employees need to know for their job duties and 
functions. All require annual refresher training.
    The training programs for employees covered by the requirements of 
paragraph (q) of this standard should address those competencies 
required for the various levels of response such as: the hazards 
associated with hazardous substances; hazard identification and 
awareness; notification of appropriate persons; the need for and use of 
personal protective equipment including respirators; the decontamination 
procedures to be used; preplanning activities for hazardous substance 
incidents including the emergency reponse plan; company standard 
operating procedures for hazardous substance emergency responses; the 
use of the incident command system and other subjects. Hands-on training 
should be stressed whenever possible. Critiques done after an incident 
which include an evaluation of what worked and what did not and how 
could the incident be better handled the next time may be counted as 
training time.
    For hazardous materials specialists (usually members of hazardous 
materials teams), the training should address the care, use and/or 
testing of chemical protective clothing including totally encapsulating 
suits, the medical surveillance program, the standard operating 
procedures for the hazardous materials team including the use of 
plugging and patching equipment and other subject areas.
    Officers and leaders who may be expected to be in charge at an 
incident should be fully knowledgeable of their company's incident 
command system. They should know where and how to obtain additional 
assistance and be familiar with the local district's emergency response 
plan and the state emergency response plan.
    Specialist employees such as technical experts, medical experts or 
environmental experts that work with hazardous materials in their 
regular jobs, who may be sent to the incident scene by the shipper, 
manufacturer or governmental agency to advise and assist the person in 
charge of the incident should have training on an annual basis. Their 
training should include the care and use of personal protective 
equipment including respirators; knowledge of the incident command 
system and how they are to relate to it; and those areas needed to keep 
them current in their respective field as it relates to safety and 
health involving specific hazardous substances.
    Those skilled support personnel, such as employees who work for 
public works departments or equipment operators who operate bulldozers, 
sand trucks, backhoes, etc., who may be called to the incident scene to 
provide emergency support assistance, should have at least a safety and 
health briefing before entering the area of potential or actual 
exposure. These skilled support personnel, who have not been a part of 
the emergency response plan and do not meet the training requirements, 
should be made aware of the hazards they face and should be provided all 
necessary protective clothing and equipment required for their tasks.
    There are two National Fire Protection Association standards, NFPA 
472--``Standard for Professional Competence of Responders to Hazardous 
Material Incidents'' and NFPA 471--``Recommended Practice for Responding 
to Hazardous Material Incidents'', which are excellent resource 
documents to aid fire departments and other emergency response 
organizations in developing their training program materials. NFPA 472 
provides guidance on the skills and knowledge needed for first responder 
awareness level, first responder operations level, hazmat technicians, 
and hazmat specialist. It also offers guidance for the officer corp who 
will be in charge of hazardous substance incidents.

[[Page 398]]

    3. Decontamination. Decontamination procedures should be tailored to 
the specific hazards of the site, and may vary in complexity and number 
of steps, depending on the level of hazard and the employee's exposure 
to the hazard. Decontamination procedures and PPE decontamination 
methods will vary depending upon the specific substance, since one 
procedure or method may not work for all substances. Evaluation of 
decontamination methods and procedures should be performed, as 
necessary, to assure that employees are not exposed to hazards by re-
using PPE. References in appendix D may be used for guidance in 
establishing an effective decontamination program. In addition, the U.S. 
Coast Guard's Manual, ``Policy Guidance for Response to Hazardous 
Chemical Releases,'' U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC 
(COMDTINST M16465.30) is a good reference for establishing an effective 
decontamination program.
    4. Emergency response plans. States, along with designated districts 
within the states, will be developing or have developed local emergency 
response plans. These state and district plans should be utilized in the 
emergency response plans called for in the standard. Each employer 
should assure that its emergency response plan is compatible with the 
local plan. The major reference being used to aid in developing the 
state and local district plans is the Hazardous Materials Emergency 
Planning Guide, NRT-1. The current Emergency Response Guidebook from the 
U.S. Department of Transportation, CMA's CHEMTREC and the Fire Service 
Emergency Management Handbook may also be used as resources.
    Employers involved with treatment, storage, and disposal facilities 
for hazardous waste, which have the required contingency plan called for 
by their permit, would not need to duplicate the same planning elements. 
Those items of the emergency response plan that are properly addressed 
in the contingency plan may be substituted into the emergency response 
plan required in 1910.120 or otherwise kept together for employer and 
employee use.
    5. Personal protective equipment programs. The purpose of personal 
protective clothing and equipment (PPE) is to shield or isolate 
individuals from the chemical, physical, and biologic hazards that may 
be encountered at a hazardous substance site.
    As discussed in appendix B, no single combination of protective 
equipment and clothing is capable of protecting against all hazards. 
Thus PPE should be used in conjunction with other protective methods and 
its effectiveness evaluated periodically.
    The use of PPE can itself create significant worker hazards, such as 
heat stress, physical and psychological stress, and impaired vision, 
mobility, and communication. For any given situation, equipment and 
clothing should be selected that provide an adequate level of 
protection. However, over-protection, as well as under-protection, can 
be hazardous and should be avoided where possible.
    Two basic objectives of any PPE program should be to protect the 
wearer from safety and health hazards, and to prevent injury to the 
wearer from incorrect use and/or malfunction of the PPE. To accomplish 
these goals, a comprehensive PPE program should include hazard 
identification, medical monitoring, environmental surveillance, 
selection, use, maintenance, and decontamination of PPE and its 
associated training.
    The written PPE program should include policy statements, 
procedures, and guidelines. Copies should be made available to all 
employees, and a reference copy should be made available at the 
worksite. Technical data on equipment, maintenance manuals, relevant 
regulations, and other essential information should also be collected 
and maintained.
    6. Incident command system (ICS). Paragraph 1910.120(q)(3)(ii) 
requires the implementation of an ICS. The ICS is an organized approach 
to effectively control and manage operations at an emergency incident. 
The individual in charge of the ICS is the senior official responding to 
the incident. The ICS is not much different than the ``command post'' 
approach used for many years by the fire service. During large complex 
fires involving several companies and many pieces of apparatus, a 
command post would be established. This enabled one individual to be in 
charge of managing the incident, rather than having several officers 
from different companies making separate, and sometimes conflicting, 
decisions. The individual in charge of the command post would delegate 
responsibility for performing various tasks to subordinate officers. 
Additionally, all communications were routed through the command post to 
reduce the number of radio transmissions and eliminate confusion. 
However, strategy, tactics, and all decisions were made by one 
individual.
    The ICS is a very similar system, except it is implemented for 
emergency response to all incidents, both large and small, that involve 
hazardous substances.
    For a small incident, the individual in charge of the ICS may 
perform many tasks of the ICS. There may not be any, or little, 
delegation of tasks to subordinates. For example, in response to a small 
incident, the individual in charge of the ICS, in addition to normal 
command activities, may become the safety officer and may designate only 
one employee (with proper equipment) as a back-up to provide assistance 
if needed. OSHA does recommend, however, that at least two employees be 
designated as back-up personnel since the assistance needed may include 
rescue.

[[Page 399]]

    To illustrate the operation of the ICS, the following scenario might 
develop during a small incident, such as an overturned tank truck with a 
small leak of flammable liquid.
    The first responding senior officer would implement and take command 
of the ICS. That person would size-up the incident and determine if 
additional personnel and apparatus were necessary; would determine what 
actions to take to control the leak; and, determine the proper level of 
personal protective equipment. If additional assistance is not needed, 
the individual in charge of the ICS would implement actions to stop and 
control the leak using the fewest number of personnel that can 
effectively accomplish the tasks. The individual in charge of the ICS 
then would designate himself as the safety officer and two other 
employees as a back-up in case rescue may become necessary. In this 
scenario, decontamination procedures would not be necessary.
    A large complex incident may require many employees and difficult, 
time-consuming efforts to control. In these situations, the individual 
in charge of the ICS will want to delegate different tasks to 
subordinates in order to maintain a span of control that will keep the 
number of subordinates, that are reporting, to a manageable level.
    Delegation of task at large incidents may be by location, where the 
incident scene is divided into sectors, and subordinate officers 
coordinate activities within the sector that they have been assigned.
    Delegation of tasks can also be by function. Some of the functions 
that the individual in charge of the ICS may want to delegate at a large 
incident are: medical services; evacuation; water supply; resources 
(equipment, apparatus); media relations; safety; and, site control 
(integrate activities with police for crowd and traffic control). Also 
for a large incident, the individual in charge of the ICS will designate 
several employees as back-up personnel; and a number of safety officers 
to monitor conditions and recommend safety precautions.
    Therefore, no matter what size or complexity an incident may be, by 
implementing an ICS there will be one individual in charge who makes the 
decisions and gives directions; and, all actions, and communications are 
coordinated through one central point of command. Such a system should 
reduce confusion, improve safety, organize and coordinate actions, and 
should facilitate effective management of the incident.
    7. Site Safety and Control Plans. The safety and security of 
response personnel and others in the area of an emergeny response 
incident site should be of primary concern to the incident commander. 
The use of a site safety and control plan could greatly assist those in 
charge of assuring the safety and health of employees on the site.
    A comprehensive site safety and control plan should include the 
following: summary analysis of hazards on the site and a risk analysis 
of those hazards; site map or sketch; site work zones (clean zone, 
transition or decontamination zone, work or hot zone); use of the buddy 
system; site communications; command post or command center; standard 
operating procedures and safe work practices; medical assistance and 
triage area; hazard monitoring plan (air contaminate monitoring, etc.); 
decontamination procedures and area; and other relevant areas. This plan 
should be a part of the employer's emergency response plan or an 
extension of it to the specific site.
    8. Medical surveillance programs. Workers handling hazardous 
substances may be exposed to toxic chemicals, safety hazards, biologic 
hazards, and radiation. Therefore, a medical surveillance program is 
essential to assess and monitor workers' health and fitness for 
employment in hazardous waste operations and during the course of work; 
to provide emergency and other treatment as needed; and to keep accurate 
records for future reference.
    The Occupational Safety and Health Guidance Manual for Hazardous 
Waste Site Activities developed by the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA), the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), and the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); October 1985 provides an 
excellent example of the types of medical testing that should be done as 
part of a medical surveillance program.
    9. New Technology and Spill Containment Programs. Where hazardous 
substances may be released by spilling from a container that will expose 
employees to the hazards of the materials, the employer will need to 
implement a program to contain and control the spilled material. Diking 
and ditching, as well as use of absorbents like diatomaceous earth, are 
traditional techniques which have proven to be effective over the years. 
However, in recent years new products have come into the marketplace, 
the use of which complement and increase the effectiveness of these 
traditional methods. These new products also provide emergency 
responders and others with additional tools or agents to use to reduce 
the hazards of spilled materials.
    These agents can be rapidly applied over a large area and can be 
uniformly applied or otherwise can be used to build a small dam, thus 
improving the workers' ability to control spilled material. These 
application techniques enhance the intimate contact between the agent 
and the spilled material allowing for the quickest effect by the agent 
or quickest control of the spilled material. Agents are available to 
solidify liquid spilled materials, to suppress vapor generation from

[[Page 400]]

spilled materials, and to do both. Some special agents, which when 
applied as recommended by the manufacturer, will react in a controlled 
manner with the spilled material to neutralize acids or caustics, or 
greatly reduce the level of hazard of the spilled material.
    There are several modern methods and devices for use by emergency 
response personnel or others involved with spill control efforts to 
safely apply spill control agents to control spilled material hazards. 
These include portable pressurized applicators similar to hand-held 
portable fire extinguishing devices, and nozzle and hose systems similar 
to portable fire fighting foam systems which allow the operator to apply 
the agent without having to come into contact with the spilled material. 
The operator is able to apply the agent to the spilled material from a 
remote position.
    The solidification of liquids provides for rapid containment and 
isolation of hazardous substance spills. By directing the agent at run-
off points or at the edges of the spill, the reactant solid will 
automatically create a barrier to slow or stop the spread of the 
material. Clean-up of hazardous substances is greatly improved when 
solidifying agents, acid or caustic neutralizers, or activated carbon 
adsorbents are used. Properly applied, these agents can totally solidify 
liquid hazardous substances or neutralize or absorb them, which results 
in materials which are less hazardous and easier to handle, transport, 
and dispose of. The concept of spill treatment, to create less hazardous 
substances, will improve the safety and level of protection of employees 
working at spill clean-up operations or emergency response operations to 
spills of hazardous substances.
    The use of vapor suppression agents for volatile hazardous 
substances, such as flammable liquids and those substances which present 
an inhalation hazard, is important for protecting workers. The rapid and 
uniform distribution of the agent over the surface of the spilled 
material can provide quick vapor knockdown. There are temporary and 
long-term foam-type agents which are effective on vapors and dusts, and 
activated carbon adsorption agents which are effective for vapor control 
and soaking-up of the liquid. The proper use of hose lines or hand-held 
portable pressurized applicators provides good mobility and permits the 
worker to deliver the agent from a safe distance without having to step 
into the untreated spilled material. Some of these systems can be 
recharged in the field to provide coverage of larger spill areas than 
the design limits of a single charged applicator unit. Some of the more 
effective agents can solidify the liquid flammable hazardous substances 
and at the same time elevate the flashpoint above 140  deg.F so the 
resulting substance may be handled as a nonhazardous waste material if 
it meets the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's 40 CFR part 261 
requirements (See particularly Sec. 261.21).
    All workers performing hazardous substance spill control work are 
expected to wear the proper protective clothing and equipment for the 
materials present and to follow the employer's established standard 
operating procedures for spill control. All involved workers need to be 
trained in the established operating procedures; in the use and care of 
spill control equipment; and in the associated hazards and control of 
such hazards of spill containment work.
    These new tools and agents are the things that employers will want 
to evaluate as part of their new technology program. The treatment of 
spills of hazardous substances or wastes at an emergency incident as 
part of the immediate spill containment and control efforts is sometimes 
acceptable to EPA and a permit exception is described in 40 CFR 
264.1(g)(8) and 265.1(c)(11).

                 Appendix D to Sec. 1910.120--References

    The following references may be consulted for further information on 
the subject of this standard:
    1. OSHA Instruction DFO CPL 2.70--January 29, 1986, Special Emphasis 
Program: Hazardous Waste Sites.
    2. OSHA Instruction DFO CPL 2-2.37A--January 29, 1986, Technical 
Assistance and Guidelines for Superfund and Other Hazardous Waste Site 
Activities.
    3. OSHA Instruction DTS CPL 2.74--January 29, 1986, Hazardous Waste 
Activity Form, OSHA 175.
    4. Hazardous Waste Inspections Reference Manual, U.S. Department of 
Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 1986.
    5. Memorandum of Understanding Among the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health, the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, the United States Coast Guard, and the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency, Guidance for Worker Protection During 
Hazardous Waste Site Investigations and Clean-up and Hazardous Substance 
Emergencies. December 18, 1980.
    6. National Priorities List, 1st Edition, October 1984; U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Revised periodically.
    7. The Decontamination of Response Personnel, Field Standard 
Operating Procedures (F.S.O.P.) 7; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, Hazardous Response Support 
Division, December 1984.
    8. Preparation of a Site Safety Plan, Field Standard Operating 
Procedures (F.S.O.P.) 9; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of 
Emergency and Remedial Response, Hazardous Response Support Division, 
April 1985.

[[Page 401]]

    9. Standard Operating Safety Guidelines; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, Hazardous 
Response Support Division, Environmental Response Team; November 1984.
    10. Occupational Safety and Health Guidance Manual for Hazardous 
Waste Site Activities, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH), Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); 
October 1985.
    11. Protecting Health and Safety at Hazardous Waste Sites: An 
Overview, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA/625/9-85/006; 
September 1985.
    12. Hazardous Waste Sites and Hazardous Substance Emergencies, NIOSH 
Worker Bulletin, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public 
Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health; December 1982.
    13. Personal Protective Equipment for Hazardous Materials Incidents: 
A Selection Guide; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public 
Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health; October 1984.
    14. Fire Service Emergency Management Handbook, International 
Association of Fire Chiefs Foundation, 101 East Holly Avenue, Unit 10B, 
Sterling, VA 22170, January 1985.
    15. Emergency Response Guidebook, U.S Department of Transportation, 
Washington, DC, 1987.
    16. Report to the Congress on Hazardous Materials Training, Planning 
and Preparedness, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC, 
July 1986.
    17. Workbook for Fire Command, Alan V. Brunacini and J. David 
Beageron, National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269, 1985.
    18. Fire Command, Alan V. Brunacini, National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park,, Quincy, MA 02269, 1985.
    19. Incident Command System, Fire Protection Publications, Oklahoma 
State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, 1983.
    20. Site Emergency Response Planning, Chemical Manufacturers 
Association, Washington, DC 20037, 1986.
    21. Hazardous Materials Emergency Planning Guide, NRT-1, 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, March 1987.
    22. Community Teamwork: Working Together to Promote Hazardous 
Materials Transportation Safety. U.S. Department of Transportation, 
Washington, DC, May 1983.
    23. Disaster Planning Guide for Business and Industry, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, Publication No. FEMA 141, August 1987.

(The Office of Management and Budget has approved the information 
collection requirements in this section under control number 1218-0139)

      Appendix E to Sec. 1910.120--Training Curriculum Guidelines.

    The following non-mandatory general criteria may be used for 
assistance in developing site-specific training curriculum used to meet 
the training requirements of 29 CFR 1910.120(e); 29 CFR 1910.120(p)(7), 
(p)(8)(iii); and 29 CFR 1910.120(q)(6), (q)(7), and (q)(8). These are 
generic guidelines and they are not presented as a complete training 
curriculum for any specific employer. Site-specific training programs 
must be developed on the basis of a needs assessment of the hazardous 
waste site, RCRA/TSDF, or emergency response operation in accordance 
with 29 CFR 1910.120.
    It is noted that the legal requirements are set forth in the 
regulatory text of Sec. 1910.120. The guidance set forth here presents a 
highly effective program that in the areas covered would meet or exceed 
the regulatory requirements. In addition, other approaches could meet 
the regulatory requirements.

                       Suggested General Criteria

    Definitions:
    ``Competent'' means possessing the skills, knowledge, experience, 
and judgment to perform assigned tasks or activities satisfactorily as 
determined by the employer.
    ``Demonstration'' means the showing by actual use of equipment or 
procedures.
    ``Hands-on training'' means training in a simulated work environment 
that permits each student to have experience performing tasks, making 
decisions, or using equipment appropriate to the job assignment for 
which the training is being conducted.
    ``Initial training'' means training required prior to beginning 
work.
    ``Lecture'' means an interactive discourse with a class lead by an 
instructor.
    ``Proficient'' means meeting a stated level of achievement.
    ``Site-specific'' means individual training directed to the 
operations of a specific job site.
    ``Training hours'' means the number of hours devoted to lecture, 
learning activities, small group work sessions, demonstration, 
evaluations, or hands-on experience.

    Suggested core criteria:

    1. Training facility. The training facility should have available 
sufficient resources, equipment, and site locations to perform didactic 
and hands-on training when appropriate. Training facilities should have 
sufficient organization, support staff, and services to conduct training 
in each of the courses offered.
    2. Training Director. Each training program should be under the 
direction of a training director who is responsible for the program.

[[Page 402]]

The Training Director should have a minimum of two years of employee 
education experience.
    3. Instructors. Instructors should be deem competent on the basis of 
previous documented experience in their area of instruction, successful 
completion of a ``train-the-trainer'' program specific to the topics 
they will teach, and an evaluation of instructional competence by the 
Training Director.
    Instructors should be required to maintain professional competency 
by participating in continuing education or professional development 
programs or by completing successfully an annual refresher course and 
having an annual review by the Training Director.
    The annual review by the Training Director should include 
observation of an instructor's delivery, a review of those observations 
with the trainer, and an analysis of any instructor or class evaluations 
completed by the students during the previous year.
    4. Course materials. The Training Director should approve all course 
materials to be used by the training provider. Course materials should 
be reviewed and updated at least annually. Materials and equipment 
should be in good working order and maintained properly.
    All written and audio-visual materials in training curricula should 
be peer reviewed by technically competent outside reviewers or by a 
standing advisory committee.
    Reviews should possess expertise in the following disciplines were 
applicable: occupational health, industrial hygiene and safety, 
chemical/environmental engineering, employee education, or emergency 
response. One or more of the peer reviewers should be a employee 
experienced in the work activities to which the training is directed.
    5. Students. The program for accepting students should include:
    a. Assurance that the student is or will be involved in work where 
chemical exposures are likely and that the student possesses the skills 
necessary to perform the work.
    b. A policy on the necessary medical clearance.
    6. Ratios. Student-instructor ratios should not exceed 30 students 
per instructor. Hands-on activity requiring the use of personal 
protective equipment should have the following student-instructor 
ratios. For Level C or Level D personal protective equipment the ratio 
should be 10 students per instructor. For Level A or Level B personal 
protective equipment the ratio should be 5 students per instructor.
    7. Proficiency assessment. Proficiency should be evaluated and 
documented by the use of a written assessment and a skill demonstration 
selected and developed by the Training Director and training staff. The 
assessment and demonstration should evaluate the knowledge and 
individual skills developed in the course of training. The level of 
minimum achievement necessary for proficiency shall be specified in 
writing by the Training Director.
    If a written test is used, there should be a minimum of 50 
questions. If a written test is used in combination with a skills 
demonstration, a minimum of 25 questions should be used. If a skills 
demonstration is used, the tasks chosen and the means to rate successful 
completion should be fully documented by the Training Director.
    The content of the written test or of the skill demonstration shall 
be relevant to the objectives of the course. The written test and skill 
demonstration should be updated as necessary to reflect changes in the 
curriculum and any update should be approved by the Training Director.
    The proficiency assessment methods, regardless of the approach or 
combination of approaches used, should be justified, documented and 
approved by the Training Director.
    The proficiency of those taking the additional courses for 
supervisors should be evaluated and documented by using proficiency 
assessment methods acceptable to the Training Director. These 
proficiency assessment methods must reflect the additional 
responsibilities borne by supervisory personnel in hazardous waste 
operations or emergency response.
    8. Course certificate. Written documentation should be provided to 
each student who satisfactorily completes the training course. The 
documentation should include:
    a. Student's name.
    b. Course title.
    c. Course date.
    d. Statement that the student has successfully completed the course.
    e. Name and address of the training provider.
    f. An individual identification number for the certificate.
    g. List of the levels of personal protective equipment used by the 
student to complete the course.
    This documentation may include a certificate and an appropriate 
wallet-sized laminated card with a photograph of the student and the 
above information. When such course certificate cards are used, the 
individual identification number for the training certificate should be 
shown on the card.
    9. Recordkeeping. Training providers should maintain records listing 
the dates courses were presented, the names of the individual course 
attenders, the names of those students successfully completing each 
course, and the number of training certificates issued to each 
successful student. These records should be maintained for a minimum of 
five years after the date an individual participated in a training 
program offered by the training provider. These records should

[[Page 403]]

be available and provided upon the student's request or as mandated by 
law.
    10. Program quality control. The Training Director should conduct or 
direct an annual written audit of the training program. Program 
modifications to address deficiencies, if any, should be documented, 
approved, and implemented by the training provider. The audit and the 
program modification documents should be maintained at the training 
facility.

               Suggested Program Quality Control Criteria

    Factors listed here are suggested criteria for determining the 
quality and appropriateness of employee health and safety training for 
hazardous waste operations and emergency response.

    A. Training Plan.
    Adequacy and appropriateness of the training program's curriculum 
development, instructor training, distribution of course materials, and 
direct student training should be considered, including
    1. The duration of training, course content, and course schedules/
agendas;
    2. The different training requirements of the various target 
populations, as specified in the appropriate generic training 
curriculum;
    3. The process for the development of curriculum, which includes 
appropriate technical input, outside review, evaluation, program 
pretesting.
    4. The adequate and appropriate inclusion of hands-on, 
demonstration, and instruction methods;
    5. Adequate monitoring of student safety, progress, and performance 
during the training.

    B. Program management, Training Director, staff, and consultants.
    Adequacy and appropriateness of staff performance and delivering an 
effective training program should be considered, including
    1. Demonstration of the training director's leadership in assuring 
quality of health and safety training.
    2. Demonstration of the competency of the staff to meet the demands 
of delivering high quality hazardous waste employee health and safety 
training.
    3. Organization charts establishing clear lines of authority.
    4. Clearly defined staff duties including the relationship of the 
training staff to the overall program.
    5. Evidence that the training organizational structure suits the 
needs of the training program.
    6. Appropriateness and adequacy of the training methods used by the 
instructors.
    7. Sufficiency of the time committed by the training director and 
staff to the training program.
    8. Adequacy of the ratio of training staff to students.
    9. Availability and commitment of the training program of adequate 
human and equipment resources in the areas of
    a. Health effects,
    b. Safety,
    c. Personal protective equipment (PPE),
    d. Operational procedures,
    e. Employee protection practices/procedures.
    10. Appropriateness of management controls.
    11. Adequacy of the organization and appropriate resources assigned 
to assure appropriate training.
    12. In the case of multiple-site training programs, adequacy of 
satellite centers management.

    C. Training facilities and resources.
    Adequacy and appropriateness of the facilities and resources for 
supporting the training program should be considered, including,
    1. Space and equipment to conduct the training.
    2. Facilities for representative hands-on training.
    3. In the case of multiple-site programs, equipment and facilities 
at the satellite centers.
    4. Adequacy and appropriateness of the quality control and 
evaluations program to account for instructor performance.
    5. Adequacy and appropriateness of the quality control and 
evaluation program to ensure appropriate course evaluation, feedback, 
updating, and corrective action.
    6. Adequacy and appropriateness of disciplines and expertise being 
used within the quality control and evaluation program.
    7. Adequacy and appropriateness of the role of student evaluations 
to provide feedback for training program improvement.

    D. Quality control and evaluation.
    Adequacy and appropriateness of quality control and evaluation plans 
for training programs should be considered, including:
    1. A balanced advisory committee and/or competent outside reviewers 
to give overall policy guidance;
    2. Clear and adequate definition of the composition and active 
programmatic role of the advisory committee or outside reviewers.
    3. Adequacy of the minutes or reports of the advisory committee or 
outside reviewers' meetings or written communication.
    4. Adequacy and appropriateness of the quality control and 
evaluations program to account for instructor performance.
    5. Adequacy and appropriateness of the quality control and 
evaluation program to ensure appropriate course evaluation, feedback, 
updating, and corrective action.
    6. Adequacy and appropriateness of disciplines and expertise being 
used within the quality control and evaluation program.

[[Page 404]]

    7. Adequacy and appropriateness of the role of student evaluations 
to provide feedback for training program improvement.

    E. Students
    Adequacy and appropriateness of the program for accepting students 
should be considered, including
    1. Assurance that the student already possess the necessary skills 
for their job, including necessary documentation.
    2. Appropriateness of methods the program uses to ensure that 
recruits are capable of satisfactorily completing training.
    3. Review and compliance with any medical clearance policy.

    F. Institutional Environment and Administrative Support
    The adequacy and appropriateness of the institutional environment 
and administrative support system for the training program should be 
considered, including
    1. Adequacy of the institutional commitment to the employee training 
program.
    2. Adequacy and appropriateness of the administrative structure and 
administrative support.

    G. Summary of Evaluation Questions
    Key questions for evaluating the quality and appropriateness of an 
overall training program should include the following:
    1. Are the program objectives clearly stated?
    2. Is the program accomplishing its objectives?
    3. Are appropriate facilities and staff available?
    4. Is there an appropriate mix of classroom, demonstration, and 
hands-on training?
    5. Is the program providing quality employee health and safety 
training that fully meets the intent of regulatory requirements?
    6. What are the program's main strengths?
    7. What are the program's main weaknesses?
    8. What is recommended to improve the program?
    9. Are instructors instructing according to their training outlines?
    10. Is the evaluation tool current and appropriate for the program 
content?
    11. Is the course material current and relevant to the target group?

                Suggested Training Curriculum Guidelines

    The following training curriculum guidelines are for those 
operations specifically identified in 29 CFR 1910.120 as requiring 
training. Issues such as qualifications of instructors, training 
certification, and similar criteria appropriate to all categories of 
operations addressed in 1910.120 have been covered in the preceding 
section and are not re-addressed in each of the generic guidelines. 
Basic core requirements for training programs that are addressed include
    1. General Hazardous Waste Operations
    2. RCRA operations--Treatment, storage, and disposal facilities.
    3. Emergency Response.

    A. General Hazardous Waste Operations and Site-specific Training
    1. Off-site training.Training course content for hazardous waste 
operations, required by 29 CFR 1910.120(e), should include the following 
topics or procedures:
    a. Regulatory knowledge.
    (1) An review of 29 CFR 1910.120 and the core elements of an 
occupational safety and health program.
    (2) The content of a medical surveillance program as outlined in 29 
CFR 1910.120(f).
    (3) The content of an effective site safety and health plan 
consistent with the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.120(b)(4)(ii).
    (4) Emergency response plan and procedures as outlined in 29 CFR 
1910.38 and 29 CFR 1910.120(l).
    (5) Adequate illumination.
    (6) Sanitation recommendation and equipment.
    (7) Review and explanation of OSHA's hazard-communication standard 
(29 CFR 1910.1200) and lock-out-tag-out standard (29 CFR 1910.147).
    (8) Review of other applicable standards including but not limited 
to those in the construction standards (29 CFR Part 1926).
    (9) Rights and responsibilities of employers and employees under 
applicable OSHA and EPA laws.
    b. Technical knowledge.
    (1) Type of potential exposures to chemical, biological, and 
radiological hazards; types of human responses to these hazards and 
recognition of those responses; principles of toxicology and information 
about acute and chronic hazards; health and safety considerations of new 
technology.
    (2) Fundamentals of chemical hazards including but not limited to 
vapor pressure, boiling points, flash points, ph, other physical and 
chemical properties.
    (3) Fire and explosion hazards of chemicals.
    (4) General safety hazards such as but not limited to electrical 
hazards, powered equipment hazards, motor vehicle hazards, walking-
working surface hazards, excavation hazards, and hazards associated with 
working in hot and cold temperature extremes.
    (5) Review and knowledge of confined space entry procedures in 29 
CFR 1910.146.
    (6) Work practices to minimize employee risk from site hazards.
    (7) Safe use of engineering controls, equipment, and any new 
relevant safety technology or safety procedures.
    (8) Review and demonstration of competency with air sampling and 
monitoring equipment that may be used in a site monitoring program.
    (9) Container sampling procedures and safeguarding; general drum and 
container

[[Page 405]]

handling procedures including special requirement for laboratory waste 
packs, shock-sensitive wastes, and radioactive wastes.
    (10) The elements of a spill control program.
    (11) Proper use and limitations of material handling equipment.
    (12) Procedures for safe and healthful preparation of containers for 
shipping and transport.
    (13) Methods of communication including those used while wearing 
respiratory protection.

    c. Technical skills.
    (1) Selection, use maintenance, and limitations of personal 
protective equipment including the components and procedures for 
carrying out a respirator program to comply with 29 CFR 1910.134.
    (2) Instruction in decontamination programs including personnel, 
equipment, and hardware; hands-on training including level A, B, and C 
ensembles and appropriate decontamination lines; field activities 
including the donning and doffing of protective equipment to a level 
commensurate with the employee's anticipated job function and 
responsibility and to the degree required by potential hazards.
    (3) Sources for additional hazard information; exercises using 
relevant manuals and hazard coding systems.

    d. Additional suggested items.
    (1) A laminated, dated card or certificate with photo, denoting 
limitations and level of protection for which the employee is trained 
should be issued to those students successfully completing a course.
    (2) Attendance should be required at all training modules, with 
successful completion of exercises and a final written or oral 
examination with at least 50 questions.
    (3) A minimum of one-third of the program should be devoted to 
hands-on exercises.
    (4) A curriculum should be established for the 8-hour refresher 
training required by 29 CFR 1910.120(e)(8), with delivery of such 
courses directed toward those areas of previous training that need 
improvement or reemphasis.
    (5) A curriculum should be established for the required 8-hour 
training for supervisors. Demonstrated competency in the skills and 
knowledge provided in a 40-hour course should be a prerequisite for 
supervisor training.

    2. Refresher training.
    The 8-hour annual refresher training required in 29 CFR 
1910.120(e)(8) should be conducted by qualified training providers. 
Refresher training should include at a minimum the following topics and 
procedures:
    (a) Review of and retraining on relevant topics covered in the 40-
hour program, as appropriate, using reports by the students on their 
work experiences.
    (b) Update on developments with respect to material covered in the 
40-hour course.
    (c) Review of changes to pertinent provisions of EPA or OSHA 
standards or laws.
    (d) Introduction of additional subject areas as appropriate.
    (e) Hands-on review of new or altered PPE or decontamination 
equipment or procedures. Review of new developments in personal 
protective equipment.
    (f) Review of newly developed air and contaminant monitoring 
equipment.

    3. On-site training.
    a. The employer should provide employees engaged in hazardous waste 
site activities with information and training prior to initial 
assignment into their work area, as follows:
    (1) The requirements of the hazard communication program including 
the location and availability of the written program, required lists of 
hazardous chemicals, and material safety data sheets.
    (2) Activities and locations in their work area where hazardous 
substance may be present.
    (3) Methods and observations that may be used to detect the present 
or release of a hazardous chemical in the work area (such as monitoring 
conducted by the employer, continuous monitoring devices, visual 
appearances, or other evidence (sight, sound or smell) of hazardous 
chemicals being released, and applicable alarms from monitoring devices 
that record chemical releases.
    (4) The physical and health hazards of substances known or 
potentially present in the work area.
    (5) The measures employees can take to help protect themselves from 
work-site hazards, including specific procedures the employer has 
implemented.
    (6) An explanation of the labeling system and material safety data 
sheets and how employees can obtain and use appropriate hazard 
information.
    (7) The elements of the confined space program including special 
PPE, permits, monitoring requirements, communication procedures, 
emergency response, and applicable lock-out procedures.
    b. The employer should provide hazardous waste employees information 
and training and should provide a review and access to the site safety 
and plan as follows:
    (1) Names of personnel and alternate responsible for site safety and 
health.
    (2) Safety and health hazards present on the site.
    (3) Selection, use, maintenance, and limitations of personal 
protective equipment specific to the site.
    (4) Work practices by which the employee can minimize risks from 
hazards.

[[Page 406]]

    (5) Safe use of engineering controls and equipment available on 
site.
    (6) Safe decontamination procedures established to minimize employee 
contact with hazardous substances, including:
    (A) Employee decontamination,
    (B) Clothing decontamination, and
    (C) Equipment decontamination.
    (7) Elements of the site emergency response plan, including:
    (A) Pre-emergency planning.
    (B) Personnel roles and lines of authority and communication.
    (C) Emergency recognition and prevention.
    (D) Safe distances and places of refuge.
    (E) Site security and control.
    (F) Evacuation routes and procedures.
    (G) Decontamination procedures not covered by the site safety and 
health plan.
    (H) Emergency medical treatment and first aid.
    (I) Emergency equipment and procedures for handling emergency 
incidents.
    c. The employer should provide hazardous waste employees information 
and training on personal protective equipment used at the site, such as 
the following:
    (1) PPE to be used based upon known or anticipated site hazards.
    (2) PPE limitations of materials and construction; limitations 
during temperature extremes, heat stress, and other appropriate medical 
considerations; use and limitations of respirator equipment as well as 
documentation procedures as outlined in 29 CFR 1910.134.
    (3) PPE inspection procedures prior to, during, and after use.
    (4) PPE donning and doffing procedures.
    (5) PPE decontamination and disposal procedures.
    (6) PPE maintenance and storage.
    (7) Task duration as related to PPE limitations.
    d. The employer should instruct the employee about the site medical 
surveillance program relative to the particular site, including
    (1) Specific medical surveillance programs that have been adapted 
for the site.
    (2) Specific signs and symptoms related to exposure to hazardous 
materials on the site.
    (3) The frequency and extent of periodic medical examinations that 
will be used on the site.
    (4) Maintenance and availability of records.
    (5) Personnel to be contacted and procedures to be followed when 
signs and symptoms of exposures are recognized.
    e. The employees will review and discuss the site safety plan as 
part of the training program. The location of the site safety plan and 
all written programs should be discussed with employees including a 
discussion of the mechanisms for access, review, and references 
described.

    B. RCRA Operations Training for Treatment, Storage and Disposal 
Facilities.
    1. As a minimum, the training course required in 29 CFR 1910.120 (p) 
should include the following topics:
    (a) Review of the applicable paragraphs of 29 CFR 1910.120 and the 
elements of the employer's occupational safety and health plan.
    (b) Review of relevant hazards such as, but not limited to, 
chemical, biological, and radiological exposures; fire and explosion 
hazards; thermal extremes; and physical hazards.
    (c) General safety hazards including those associated with 
electrical hazards, powered equipment hazards, lock-out-tag-out 
procedures, motor vehicle hazards and walking-working surface hazards.
    (d) Confined-space hazards and procedures.
    (e) Work practices to minimize employee risk from workplace hazards.
    (f) Emergency response plan and procedures including first aid 
meeting the requirements of paragraph (p)(8).
    (g) A review of procedures to minimize exposure to hazardous waste 
and various type of waste streams, including the materials handling 
program and spill containment program.
    (h) A review of hazard communication programs meeting the 
requirements of 29 CFR 1910.1200.
    (i) A review of medical surveillance programs meeting the 
requirements of 29 CFR 1910.120(p)(3) including the recognition of signs 
and symptoms of overexposure to hazardous substance including known 
synergistic interactions.
    (j) A review of decontamination programs and procedures meeting the 
requirements of 29 CFR 1910.120(p)(4).
    (k) A review of an employer's requirements to implement a training 
program and its elements.
    (l) A review of the criteria and programs for proper selection and 
use of personal protective equipment, including respirators.
    (m) A review of the applicable appendices to 29 CFR 1910.120.
    (n) Principles of toxicology and biological monitoring as they 
pertain to occupational health.
    (o) Rights and responsibilities of employees and employers under 
applicable OSHA and EPA laws.
    (p) Hands-on exercises and demonstrations of competency with 
equipment to illustrate the basic equipment principles that may be used 
during the performance of work duties, including the donning and doffing 
of PPE.
    (q) Sources of reference, efficient use of relevant manuals, and 
knowledge of hazard coding systems to include information contained in 
hazardous waste manifests.
    (r) At least 8 hours of hands-on training.

[[Page 407]]

    (s) Training in the job skills required for an employee's job 
function and responsibility before they are permitted to participate in 
or supervise field activities.
    2. The individual employer should provide hazardous waste employees 
with information and training prior to an employee's initial assignment 
into a work area. The training and information should cover the 
following topics:
    (a) The Emergency response plan and procedures including first aid.
    (b) A review of the employer's hazardous waste handling procedures 
including the materials handling program and elements of the spill 
containment program, location of spill response kits or equipment, and 
the names of those trained to respond to releases.
    (c) The hazardous communication program meeting the requirements of 
29 CFR 1910.1200.
    (d) A review of the employer's medical surveillance program 
including the recognition of signs and symptoms of exposure to relevant 
hazardous substance including known synergistic interactions.
    (e) A review of the employer's decontamination program and 
procedures.
    (f) An review of the employer's training program and the parties 
responsible for that program.
    (g) A review of the employer's personal protective equipment program 
including the proper selection and use of PPE based upon specific site 
hazards.
    (h) All relevant site-specific procedures addressing potential 
safety and health hazards. This may include, as appropriate, biological 
and radiological exposures, fire and explosion hazards, thermal hazards, 
and physical hazards such as electrical hazards, powered equipment 
hazards, lock-out-tag-out hazards, motor vehicle hazards, and walking-
working surface hazards.
    (i) Safe use engineering controls and equipment on site.
    (j) Names of personnel and alternates responsible for safety and 
health.

    C. Emergency response training.
    Federal OSHA standards in 29 CFR 1910.120(q) are directed toward 
private sector emergency responders. Therefore, the guidelines provided 
in this portion of the appendix are directed toward that employee 
population. However, they also impact indirectly through State OSHA or 
USEPA regulations some public sector emergency responders. Therefore, 
the guidelines provided in this portion of the appendix may be applied 
to both employee populations.
    States with OSHA state plans must cover their employees with 
regulations at least as effective as the Federal OSHA standards. Public 
employees in states without approved state OSHA programs covering 
hazardous waste operations and emergency response are covered by the 
U.S. EPA under 40 CFR 311, a regulation virtually identical to 
Sec. 1910.120.
    Since this is a non-mandatory appendix and therefore not an 
enforceable standard, OSHA recommends that those employers, employees or 
volunteers in public sector emergency response organizations outside 
Federal OSHA jurisdiction consider the following criteria in developing 
their own training programs. A unified approach to training at the 
community level between emergency response organizations covered by 
Federal OSHA and those not covered directly by Federal OSHA can help 
ensure an effective community response to the release or potential 
release of hazardous substances in the community.
    a. General considerations.
    Emergency response organizations are required to consider the topics 
listed in Sec. 1910.120(q)(6). Emergency response organizations may use 
some or all of the following topics to supplement those mandatory topics 
when developing their response training programs. Many of the topics 
would require an interaction between the response provider and the 
individuals responsible for the site where the response would be 
expected.
    (1) Hazard recognition, including:
    (A) Nature of hazardous substances present,
    (B) Practical applications of hazard recognition, including 
presentations on biology, chemistry, and physics.
    (2) Principles of toxicology, biological monitoring, and risk 
assessment.
    (3) Safe work practices and general site safety.
    (4) Engineering controls and hazardous waste operations.
    (5) Site safety plans and standard operating procedures.
    (6) Decontamination procedures and practices.
    (7) Emergency procedures, first aid, and self-rescue.
    (8) Safe use of field equipment.
    (9) Storage, handling, use and transportation of hazardous 
substances.
    (10) Use, care, and limitations of personal protective equipment.
    (11) Safe sampling techniques.
    (12) Rights and responsibilities of employees under OSHA and other 
related laws concerning right-to-know, safety and health, compensations 
and liability.
    (13) Medical monitoring requirements.
    (14) Community relations.
    b. Suggested criteria for specific courses.
    (1) First responder awareness level.
    (A) Review of and demonstration of competency in performing the 
applicable skills of 29 CFR 1910.120(q).
    (B) Hands-on experience with the U.S. Department of Transportation's 
Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG) and familiarization with OSHA 
standard 29 CFR 1910.1201.

[[Page 408]]

    (C) Review of the principles and practices for analyzing an incident 
to determine both the hazardous substances present and the basic hazard 
and response information for each hazardous substance present.
    (D) Review of procedures for implementing actions consistent with 
the local emergency response plan, the organization's standard operating 
procedures, and the current edition of DOT's ERG including emergency 
notification procedures and follow-up communications.
    (E) Review of the expected hazards including fire and explosions 
hazards, confined space hazards, electrical hazards, powered equipment 
hazards, motor vehicle hazards, and walking-working surface hazards.
    (F) Awareness and knowledge of the competencies for the First 
Responder at the Awareness Level covered in the National Fire Protection 
Association's Standard No. 472, Professional Competence of Responders to 
Hazardous Materials Incidents.
    (2) First responder operations level.
    (A) Review of and demonstration of competency in performing the 
applicable skills of 29 CFR 1910.120(q).
    (B) Hands-on experience with the U.S. Department of Transportation's 
Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG), manufacturer material safety data 
sheets, CHEMTREC/CANUTEC, shipper or manufacturer contacts, and other 
relevant sources of information addressing hazardous substance releases. 
Familiarization with OSHA standard 29 CFR 1910.1201.
    (C) Review of the principles and practices for analyzing an incident 
to determine the hazardous substances present, the likely behavior of 
the hazardous substance and its container, the types of hazardous 
substance transportation containers and vehicles, the types and 
selection of the appropriate defensive strategy for containing the 
release.
    (D) Review of procedures for implementing continuing response 
actions consistent with the local emergency response plan, the 
organization's standard operating procedures, and the current edition of 
DOT's ERG including extended emergency notification procedures and 
follow-up communications.
    (E) Review of the principles and practice for proper selection and 
use of personal protective equipment.
    (F) Review of the principles and practice of personnel and equipment 
decontamination.
    (G) Review of the expected hazards including fire and explosions 
hazards, confined space hazards, electrical hazards, powered equipment 
hazards, motor vehicle hazards, and walking-working surface hazards.
    (H) Awareness and knowledge of the competencies for the First 
Responder at the Operations Level covered in the National Fire 
Protection Association's Standard No. 472, Professional Competence of 
Responders to Hazardous Materials Incidents.
    (3) Hazardous materials technician.
    (A) Review of and demonstration of competency in performing the 
applicable skills of 29 CFR 1910.120(q).
    (B) Hands-on experience with written and electronic information 
relative to response decision making including but not limited to the 
U.S. Department of Transportation's Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG), 
manufacturer material safety data sheets, CHEMTREC/CANUTEC, shipper or 
manufacturer contacts, computer data bases and response models, and 
other relevant sources of information addressing hazardous substance 
releases. Familiarization with OSHA standard 29 CFR 1910.1201.
    (C) Review of the principles and practices for analyzing an incident 
to determine the hazardous substances present, their physical and 
chemical properties, the likely behavior of the hazardous substance and 
its container, the types of hazardous substance transportation 
containers and vehicles involved in the release, the appropriate 
strategy for approaching release sites and containing the release.
    (D) Review of procedures for implementing continuing response 
actions consistent with the local emergency response plan, the 
organization's standard operating procedures, and the current edition of 
DOT's ERG including extended emergency notification procedures and 
follow-up communications.
    (E) Review of the principles and practice for proper selection and 
use of personal protective equipment.
    (F) Review of the principles and practices of establishing exposure 
zones, proper decontamination and medical surveillance stations and 
procedures.
    (G) Review of the expected hazards including fire and explosions 
hazards, confined space hazards, electrical hazards, powered equipment 
hazards, motor vehicle hazards, and walking-working surface hazards.
    (H) Awareness and knowledge of the competencies for the Hazardous 
Materials Technician covered in the National Fire Protection 
Association's Standard No. 472, Professional Competence of Responders to 
Hazardous Materials Incidents.
    (4) Hazardous materials specialist.
    (A) Review of and demonstration of competency in performing the 
applicable skills of 29 CFR 1910.120(q).
    (B) Hands-on experience with retrieval and use of written and 
electronic information relative to response decision making including 
but not limited to the U.S. Department of Transportation's Emergency 
Response Guidebook (ERG), manufacturer material safety data sheets, 
CHEMTREC/CANUTEC, shipper or manufacturer contacts, computer data bases 
and response models, and other relevant sources of information 
addressing hazardous substance releases. Familiarization with OSHA 
standard 29 CFR 1910.1201.

[[Page 409]]

    (C) Review of the principles and practices for analyzing an incident 
to determine the hazardous substances present, their physical and 
chemical properties, and the likely behavior of the hazardous substance 
and its container, vessel, or vehicle.
    (D) Review of the principles and practices for identification of the 
types of hazardous substance transportation containers, vessels and 
vehicles involved in the release; selecting and using the various types 
of equipment available for plugging or patching transportation 
containers, vessels or vehicles; organizing and directing the use of 
multiple teams of hazardous material technicians and selecting the 
appropriate strategy for approaching release sites and containing or 
stopping the release.
    (E) Review of procedures for implementing continuing response 
actions consistent with the local emergency response plan, the 
organization's standard operating procedures, including knowledge of the 
available public and private response resources, establishment of an 
incident command post, direction of hazardous material technician teams, 
and extended emergency notification procedures and follow-up 
communications.
    (F) Review of the principles and practice for proper selection and 
use of personal protective equipment.
    (G) Review of the principles and practices of establishing exposure 
zones and proper decontamination, monitoring and medical surveillance 
stations and procedures.
    (H) Review of the expected hazards including fire and explosions 
hazards, confined space hazards, electrical hazards, powered equipment 
hazards, motor vehicle hazards, and walking-working surface hazards.
    (I) Awareness and knowledge of the competencies for the Off-site 
Specialist Employee covered in the National Fire Protection 
Association's Standard No. 472, Professional Competence of Responders to 
Hazardous Materials Incidents.
    (5) Incident commander.
    The incident commander is the individual who, at any one time, is 
responsible for and in control of the response effort. This individual 
is the person responsible for the direction and coordination of the 
response effort. An incident commander's position should be occupied by 
the most senior, appropriately trained individual present at the 
response site. Yet, as necessary and appropriate by the level of 
response provided, the position may be occupied by many individuals 
during a particular response as the need for greater authority, 
responsibility, or training increases. It is possible for the first 
responder at the awareness level to assume the duties of incident 
commander until a more senior and appropriately trained individual 
arrives at the response site.
    Therefore, any emergency responder expected to perform as an 
incident commander should be trained to fulfill the obligations of the 
position at the level of response they will be providing including the 
following:
    (A) Ability to analyze a hazardous substance incident to determine 
the magnitude of the response problem.
    (B) Ability to plan and implement an appropriate response plan 
within the capabilities of available personnel and equipment.
    (C) Ability to implement a response to favorably change the outcome 
of the incident in a manner consistent with the local emergency response 
plan and the organization's standard operating procedures.
    (D) Ability to evaluate the progress of the emergency response to 
ensure that the response objectives are being met safely, effectively, 
and efficiently.
    (E) Ability to adjust the response plan to the conditions of the 
response and to notify higher levels of response when required by the 
changes to the response plan.
[54 FR 9317, Mar. 6, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 14073, Apr. 13, 1990; 56 
FR 15832, Apr. 18, 1991; 59 FR 43270, Aug. 22, 1994; 61 FR 9238, Mar. 7, 
1996]


<R04>
                Subpart I--Personal Protective Equipment

    Authority:  Sections 4, 6, and 8, Occupational Safety and Health Act 
of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order No. 12-71 
(36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), 1-90 (55 FR 9033), 
or 6-96 (62 FR 111), as applicable.
    Sections 1910.132, 1910.134, and 1910.138 also issued under 29 CFR 
part 1911.
    Sections 1910.133, 1910.135, and 1910.136 also issued under 29 CFR 
part 1911 and 5 U.S.C. 553.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.132  General requirements.

    (a) Application. Protective equipment, including personal protective 
equipment for eyes, face, head, and extremities, protective clothing, 
respiratory devices, and protective shields and barriers, shall be 
provided, used, and maintained in a sanitary and reliable condition 
wherever it is necessary by reason of hazards of processes or 
environment, chemical hazards, radiological hazards, or mechanical 
irritants encountered in a manner capable of causing injury or 
impairment in the function of any part of the body through absorption, 
inhalation or physical contact.
    (b) Employee-owned equipment. Where employees provide their own 
protective

[[Page 410]]

equipment, the employer shall be responsible to assure its adequacy, 
including proper maintenance, and sanitation of such equipment.
    (c) Design. All personal protective equipment shall be of safe 
design and construction for the work to be performed.
    (d) Hazard assessment and equipment selection. (1) The employer 
shall assess the workplace to determine if hazards are present, or are 
likely to be present, which necessitate the use of personal protective 
equipment (PPE). If such hazards are present, or likely to be present, 
the employer shall:
    (i) Select, and have each affected employee use, the types of PPE 
that will protect the affected employee from the hazards identified in 
the hazard assessment;
    (ii) Communicate selection decisions to each affected employee; and,
    (iii) Select PPE that properly fits each affected employee.

    Note: Non-mandatory Appendix B contains an example of procedures 
that would comply with the requirement for a hazard assessment.

    (2) The employer shall verify that the required workplace hazard 
assessment has been performed through a written certification that 
identifies the workplace evaluated; the person certifying that the 
evaluation has been performed; the date(s) of the hazard assessment; 
and, which identifies the document as a certification of hazard 
assessment.
    (e) Defective and damaged equipment. Defective or damaged personal 
protective equipment shall not be used.
    (f) Training. (1) The employer shall provide training to each 
employee who is required by this section to use PPE. Each such employee 
shall be trained to know at least the following:
    (i) When PPE is necessary;
    (ii) What PPE is necessary;
    (iii) How to properly don, doff, adjust, and wear PPE;
    (iv) The limitations of the PPE; and,
    (v) The proper care, maintenance, useful life and disposal of the 
PPE.
    (2) Each affected employee shall demonstrate an understanding of the 
training specified in paragraph (f)(1) of this section, and the ability 
to use PPE properly, before being allowed to perform work requiring the 
use of PPE.
    (3) When the employer has reason to believe that any affected 
employee who has already been trained does not have the understanding 
and skill required by paragraph (f)(2) of this section, the employer 
shall retrain each such employee. Circumstances where retraining is 
required include, but are not limited to, situations where:
    (i) Changes in the workplace render previous training obsolete; or
    (ii) Changes in the types of PPE to be used render previous training 
obsolete; or
    (iii) Inadequacies in an affected employee's knowledge or use of 
assigned PPE indicate that the employee has not retained the requisite 
understanding or skill.
    (4) The employer shall verify that each affected employee has 
received and understood the required training through a written 
certification that contains the name of each employee trained, the 
date(s) of training, and that identifies the subject of the 
certification.
    (g) Paragraphs (d) and (f) of this section apply only to 
Secs. 1910.133, 1910.135, 1919.136, and 1910.138. Parpagraphs (d) and 
(f) of this section do not apply to Secs. 1910.134 and 1910.137.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 59 FR 16334, Apr. 6, 1994; 59 
FR 33910, July 1, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.133  Eye and face protection.

    (a) General requirements. (1) The employer shall ensure that each 
affected employee uses appropriate eye or face protection when exposed 
to eye or face hazards from flying particles, molten metal, liquid 
chemicals, acids or caustic liquids, chemical gases or vapors, or 
potentially injurious light radiation.
    (2) The employer shall ensure that each affected employee uses eye 
protection that provides side protection when there is a hazard from 
flying objects. Detachable side protectors (e.g. clip-on or slide-on 
side shields) meeting the pertinent requirements of this section are 
acceptable.
    (3) The employer shall ensure that each affected employee who wears 
prescription lenses while engaged in operations that involve eye hazards 
wears

[[Page 411]]

eye protection that incorporates the prescription in its design, or 
wears eye protection that can be worn over the prescription lenses 
without disturbing the proper position of the prescription lenses or the 
protective lenses.
    (4) Eye and face PPE shall be distinctly marked to facilitate 
identification of the manufacturer.
    (5) The employer shall ensure that each affected employee uses 
equipment with filter lenses that have a shade number appropriate for 
the work being performed for protection from injurious light radiation. 
The following is a listing of appropriate shade numbers for various 
operations.

Shielded metal arc welding      Less than 3.................  Less than 60...............  7
                                3-5.........................  60-160.....................  8
                                5-8.........................  160-250....................  10
                                More than 8.................  250-550....................  11
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gas metal arc welding and flux                                less than 60...............  7
 cored arc welding
                                                              60-160.....................  10
                                                              160-250....................  10
                                                              250-500....................  10
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gas Tungsten arc welding                                      less than 50...............  8
                                                              50-150.....................  8
                                                              150-500....................  10
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Air carbon                      (Light).....................  less than 500..............  10
Arc cutting                     (Heavy).....................  500-1000...................  11
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Plasma arc welding                                            less than 20...............  6
                                                              20-100.....................  8
                                                              100-400....................  10
                                                              400-800....................  11
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Plasma arc cutting              (light)**...................  less than 300..............  8
                                (medium)**..................  300-400....................  9
                                (heavy)**...................  400-800....................  10
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Torch brazing                                                 ...........................  3
Torch soldering                                               ...........................  2
Carbon arc welding                                            ...........................  14

[[Page 412]]



Gas Welding:
  Light                         Under 1/8...................  Under 3.2..................  4
  Medium                        1/8 to 1/2..................  3.2 to 12.7................  5
  Heavy                         Over 1/2....................  Over 12.7..................  6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oxygen cutting:
  Light                         Under 1.....................  Under 25...................  3
  Medium                        1 to 6......................  25 to 150..................  4
  Heavy                         Over 6......................  Over 150...................  5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* As a rule of thumb, start with a shade that is too dark to see the weld zone. Then go to a lighter shade which
  gives sufficient view of the weld zone without going below the minimum. In oxyfuel gas welding or cutting
  where the torch produces a high yellow light, it is desirable to use a filter lens that absorbs the yellow or
  sodium line in the visible light of the (spectrum) operation.
** These values apply where the actual arc is clearly seen. Experience has shown that lighter filters may be
  used when the arc is hidden by the workpiece.

    (b) Criteria for protective eye and face devices. (1) Protective eye 
and face devices purchased after July 5, 1994 shall comply with ANSI 
Z87.1-1989, ``American National Standard Practice for Occupational and 
Educational Eye and Face Protection,'' which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, or shall be demonstrated by the 
employer to be equally effective.
    (2) Eye and face protective devices purchased before July 5, 1994 
shall comply with the ANSI ``USA standard for Occupational and 
Educational Eye and Face Protection,'' Z87.1-1968, which is incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, or shall be demonstrated by 
the employer to be equally effective.
[59 FR 16360, Apr. 6, 1994; 59 FR 33911, July 1, 1994, as amended at 61 
FR 9238, Mar. 7, 1996; 61 FR 19548, May 2, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.134  Respiratory protection.

    This section applies to General Industry (part 1910), Shipyards 
(part 1915), Marine Terminals (part 1917), Longshoring (part 1918), and 
Construction (part 1926).
    (a) Permissible practice. (1) In the control of those occupational 
diseases caused by breathing air contaminated with harmful dusts, fogs, 
fumes, mists, gases, smokes, sprays, or vapors, the primary objective 
shall be to prevent atmospheric contamination. This shall be 
accomplished as far as feasible by accepted engineering control measures 
(for example, enclosure or confinement of the operation, general and 
local ventilation, and substitution of less toxic materials). When 
effective engineering controls are not feasible, or while they are being 
instituted, appropriate respirators shall be used pursuant to this 
section.
    (2) Respirators shall be provided by the employer when such 
equipment is necessary to protect the health of the employee. The 
employer shall provide the respirators which are applicable and suitable 
for the purpose intended. The employer shall be responsible for the 
establishment and maintenance of a respiratory protection program which 
shall include the requirements outlined in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (b) Definitions. The following definitions are important terms used 
in the respiratory protection standard in this section.
    Air-purifying respirator means a respirator with an air-purifying 
filter, cartridge, or canister that removes specific air contaminants by 
passing ambient air through the air-purifying element.
    Assigned protection factor (APF) [Reserved]
    Atmosphere-supplying respirator means a respirator that supplies the 
respirator user with breathing air from a source independent of the 
ambient atmosphere, and includes supplied-air

[[Page 413]]

respirators (SARs) and self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) units.
    Canister or cartridge means a container with a filter, sorbent, or 
catalyst, or combination of these items, which removes specific 
contaminants from the air passed through the container.
    Demand respirator means an atmosphere-supplying respirator that 
admits breathing air to the facepiece only when a negative pressure is 
created inside the facepiece by inhalation.
    Emergency situation means any occurrence such as, but not limited 
to, equipment failure, rupture of containers, or failure of control 
equipment that may or does result in an uncontrolled significant release 
of an airborne contaminant.
    Employee exposure means exposure to a concentration of an airborne 
contaminant that would occur if the employee were not using respiratory 
protection.
    End-of-service-life indicator (ESLI) means a system that warns the 
respirator user of the approach of the end of adequate respiratory 
protection, for example, that the sorbent is approaching saturation or 
is no longer effective.
    Escape-only respirator means a respirator intended to be used only 
for emergency exit.
    Filter or air purifying element means a component used in 
respirators to remove solid or liquid aerosols from the inspired air.
    Filtering facepiece (dust mask) means a negative pressure 
particulate respirator with a filter as an integral part of the 
facepiece or with the entire facepiece composed of the filtering medium.
    Fit factor means a quantitative estimate of the fit of a particular 
respirator to a specific individual, and typically estimates the ratio 
of the concentration of a substance in ambient air to its concentration 
inside the respirator when worn.
    Fit test means the use of a protocol to qualitatively or 
quantitatively evaluate the fit of a respirator on an individual. (See 
also Qualitative fit test QLFT and Quantitative fit test QNFT.)
    Helmet means a rigid respiratory inlet covering that also provides 
head protection against impact and penetration.
    High efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter means a filter that is 
at least 99.97% efficient in removing monodisperse particles of 0.3 
micrometers in diameter. The equivalent NIOSH 42 CFR 84 particulate 
filters are the N100, R100, and P100 filters.
    Hood means a respiratory inlet covering that completely covers the 
head and neck and may also cover portions of the shoulders and torso.
    Immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH) means an atmosphere 
that poses an immediate threat to life, would cause irreversible adverse 
health effects, or would impair an individual's ability to escape from a 
dangerous atmosphere.
    Interior structural firefighting means the physical activity of fire 
suppression, rescue or both, inside of buildings or enclosed structures 
which are involved in a fire situation beyond the incipient stage. (See 
29 CFR 1910.155)
    Loose-fitting facepiece means a respiratory inlet covering that is 
designed to form a partial seal with the face.
    Maximum use concentration (MUC) [Reserved].
    Negative pressure respirator (tight fitting) means a respirator in 
which the air pressure inside the facepiece is negative during 
inhalation with respect to the ambient air pressure outside the 
respirator.
    Oxygen deficient atmosphere means an atmosphere with an oxygen 
content below 19.5% by volume.
    Physician or other licensed health care professional (PLHCP) means 
an individual whose legally permitted scope of practice (i.e., license, 
registration, or certification) allows him or her to independently 
provide, or be delegated the responsibility to provide, some or all of 
the health care services required by paragraph (e) of this section.
    Positive pressure respirator means a respirator in which the 
pressure inside the respiratory inlet covering exceeds the ambient air 
pressure outside the respirator.
    Powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR) means an air-purifying 
respirator that uses a blower to force the ambient air through air-
purifying elements to the inlet covering.

[[Page 414]]

    Pressure demand respirator means a positive pressure atmosphere-
supplying respirator that admits breathing air to the facepiece when the 
positive pressure is reduced inside the facepiece by inhalation.
    Qualitative fit test (QLFT) means a pass/fail fit test to assess the 
adequacy of respirator fit that relies on the individual's response to 
the test agent.
    Quantitative fit test (QNFT) means an assessment of the adequacy of 
respirator fit by numerically measuring the amount of leakage into the 
respirator.
    Respiratory inlet covering means that portion of a respirator that 
forms the protective barrier between the user's respiratory tract and an 
air-purifying device or breathing air source, or both. It may be a 
facepiece, helmet, hood, suit, or a mouthpiece respirator with nose 
clamp.
    Self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) means an atmosphere-
supplying respirator for which the breathing air source is designed to 
be carried by the user.
    Service life means the period of time that a respirator, filter or 
sorbent, or other respiratory equipment provides adequate protection to 
the wearer.
    Supplied-air respirator (SAR) or airline respirator means an 
atmosphere-supplying respirator for which the source of breathing air is 
not designed to be carried by the user.
    This section means this respiratory protection standard.
    Tight-fitting facepiece means a respiratory inlet covering that 
forms a complete seal with the face.
    User seal check means an action conducted by the respirator user to 
determine if the respirator is properly seated to the face.
    (c) Respiratory protection program. This paragraph requires the 
employer to develop and implement a written respiratory protection 
program with required worksite-specific procedures and elements for 
required respirator use. The program must be administered by a suitably 
trained program administrator. In addition, certain program elements may 
be required for voluntary use to prevent potential hazards associated 
with the use of the respirator. The Small Entity Compliance Guide 
contains criteria for the selection of a program administrator and a 
sample program that meets the requirements of this paragraph. Copies of 
the Small Entity Compliance Guide will be available on or about April 8, 
1998 from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Office of 
Publications, Room N 3101, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC, 
20210 (202-219-4667).
    (1) In any workplace where respirators are necessary to protect the 
health of the employee or whenever respirators are required by the 
employer, the employer shall establish and implement a written 
respiratory protection program with worksite-specific procedures. The 
program shall be updated as necessary to reflect those changes in 
workplace conditions that affect respirator use. The employer shall 
include in the program the following provisions of this section, as 
applicable:
    (i) Procedures for selecting respirators for use in the workplace;
    (ii) Medical evaluations of employees required to use respirators;
    (iii) Fit testing procedures for tight-fitting respirators;
    (iv) Procedures for proper use of respirators in routine and 
reasonably foreseeable emergency situations;
    (v) Procedures and schedules for cleaning, disinfecting, storing, 
inspecting, repairing, discarding, and otherwise maintaining 
respirators;
    (vi) Procedures to ensure adequate air quality, quantity, and flow 
of breathing air for atmosphere-supplying respirators;
    (vii) Training of employees in the respiratory hazards to which they 
are potentially exposed during routine and emergency situations;
    (viii) Training of employees in the proper use of respirators, 
including putting on and removing them, any limitations on their use, 
and their maintenance; and
    (ix) Procedures for regularly evaluating the effectiveness of the 
program.
    (2) Where respirator use is not required:
    (i) An employer may provide respirators at the request of employees 
or permit employees to use their own respirators, if the employer 
determines

[[Page 415]]

that such respirator use will not in itself create a hazard. If the 
employer determines that any voluntary respirator use is permissible, 
the employer shall provide the respirator users with the information 
contained in Appendix D to this section (``Information for Employees 
Using Respirators When Not Required Under the Standard''); and
    (ii) In addition, the employer must establish and implement those 
elements of a written respiratory protection program necessary to ensure 
that any employee using a respirator voluntarily is medically able to 
use that respirator, and that the respirator is cleaned, stored, and 
maintained so that its use does not present a health hazard to the user. 
Exception: Employers are not required to include in a written 
respiratory protection program those employees whose only use of 
respirators involves the voluntary use of filtering facepieces (dust 
masks).
    (3) The employer shall designate a program administrator who is 
qualified by appropriate training or experience that is commensurate 
with the complexity of the program to administer or oversee the 
respiratory protection program and conduct the required evaluations of 
program effectiveness.
    (4) The employer shall provide respirators, training, and medical 
evaluations at no cost to the employee.
    (d) Selection of respirators. This paragraph requires the employer 
to evaluate respiratory hazard(s) in the workplace, identify relevant 
workplace and user factors, and base respirator selection on these 
factors. The paragraph also specifies appropriately protective 
respirators for use in IDLH atmospheres, and limits the selection and 
use of air-purifying respirators.
    (1) General requirements. (i) The employer shall select and provide 
an appropriate respirator based on the respiratory hazard(s) to which 
the worker is exposed and workplace and user factors that affect 
respirator performance and reliability.
    (ii) The employer shall select a NIOSH-certified respirator. The 
respirator shall be used in compliance with the conditions of its 
certification.
    (iii) The employer shall identify and evaluate the respiratory 
hazard(s) in the workplace; this evaluation shall include a reasonable 
estimate of employee exposures to respiratory hazard(s) and an 
identification of the contaminant's chemical state and physical form. 
Where the employer cannot identify or reasonably estimate the employee 
exposure, the employer shall consider the atmosphere to be IDLH.
    (iv) The employer shall select respirators from a sufficient number 
of respirator models and sizes so that the respirator is acceptable to, 
and correctly fits, the user.
    (2) Respirators for IDLH atmospheres. (i) The employer shall provide 
the following respirators for employee use in IDLH atmospheres:
    (A) A full facepiece pressure demand SCBA certified by NIOSH for a 
minimum service life of thirty minutes, or
    (B) A combination full facepiece pressure demand supplied-air 
respirator (SAR) with auxiliary self-contained air supply.
    (ii) Respirators provided only for escape from IDLH atmospheres 
shall be NIOSH-certified for escape from the atmosphere in which they 
will be used.
    (iii) All oxygen-deficient atmospheres shall be considered IDLH. 
Exception: If the employer demonstrates that, under all foreseeable 
conditions, the oxygen concentration can be maintained within the ranges 
specified in Table II of this section (i.e., for the altitudes set out 
in the table), then any atmosphere-supplying respirator may be used.
    (3) Respirators for atmospheres that are not IDLH. (i) The employer 
shall provide a respirator that is adequate to protect the health of the 
employee and ensure compliance with all other OSHA statutory and 
regulatory requirements, under routine and reasonably foreseeable 
emergency situations.
    (A) Assigned Protection Factors (APFs) [Reserved]
    (B) Maximum Use Concentration (MUC) [Reserved]
    (ii) The respirator selected shall be appropriate for the chemical 
state and physical form of the contaminant.
    (iii) For protection against gases and vapors, the employer shall 
provide:
    (A) An atmosphere-supplying respirator, or

[[Page 416]]

    (B) An air-purifying respirator, provided that:
    (1) The respirator is equipped with an end-of-service-life indicator 
(ESLI) certified by NIOSH for the contaminant; or
    (2) If there is no ESLI appropriate for conditions in the employer's 
workplace, the employer implements a change schedule for canisters and 
cartridges that is based on objective information or data that will 
ensure that canisters and cartridges are changed before the end of their 
service life. The employer shall describe in the respirator program the 
information and data relied upon and the basis for the canister and 
cartridge change schedule and the basis for reliance on the data.
    (iv) For protection against particulates, the employer shall 
provide:
    (A) An atmosphere-supplying respirator; or
    (B) An air-purifying respirator equipped with a filter certified by 
NIOSH under 30 CFR part 11 as a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) 
filter, or an air-purifying respirator equipped with a filter certified 
for particulates by NIOSH under 42 CFR part 84; or
    (C) For contaminants consisting primarily of particles with mass 
median aerodynamic diameters (MMAD) of at least 2 micrometers, an air-
purifying respirator equipped with any filter certified for particulates 
by NIOSH.

            Table I.--Assigned Protection Factors [Reserved]


                                Table II
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Oxygen
                                                              deficient
                                                             Atmospheres
                                                              (% 0<INF>2) for
                                                              which the
                       Altitude (ft.)                          employer
                                                             may rely on
                                                             atmosphere-
                                                              supplying
                                                             respirators
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Less than 3,001............................................    16.0-19.5
3,001-4,000................................................    16.4-19.5
4,001-5,000................................................    17.1-19.5
5,001-6,000................................................    17.8-19.5
6,001-7,000................................................    18.5-19.5
7,001-8,000\1\.............................................   19.3-19.5.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Above 8,000 feet the exception does not apply. Oxygen-enriched
  breathing air must be supplied above 14,000 feet.

    (e) Medical evaluation. Using a respirator may place a physiological 
burden on employees that varies with the type of respirator worn, the 
job and workplace conditions in which the respirator is used, and the 
medical status of the employee. Accordingly, this paragraph specifies 
the minimum requirements for medical evaluation that employers must 
implement to determine the employee's ability to use a respirator.
    (1) General. The employer shall provide a medical evaluation to 
determine the employee's ability to use a respirator, before the 
employee is fit tested or required to use the respirator in the 
workplace. The employer may discontinue an employee's medical 
evaluations when the employee is no longer required to use a respirator.
    (2) Medical evaluation procedures. (i) The employer shall identify a 
physician or other licensed health care professional (PLHCP) to perform 
medical evaluations using a medical questionnaire or an initial medical 
examination that obtains the same information as the medical 
questionnaire.
    (ii) The medical evaluation shall obtain the information requested 
by the questionnaire in Sections 1 and 2, Part A of Appendix C of this 
section.
    (3) Follow-up medical examination. (i) The employer shall ensure 
that a follow-up medical examination is provided for an employee who 
gives a positive response to any question among questions 1 through 8 in 
Section 2, Part A of Appendix C or whose initial medical examination 
demonstrates the need for a follow-up medical examination.
    (ii) The follow-up medical examination shall include any medical 
tests, consultations, or diagnostic procedures that the PLHCP deems 
necessary to make a final determination.

[[Page 417]]

    (4) Administration of the medical questionnaire and examinations. 
(i) The medical questionnaire and examinations shall be administered 
confidentially during the employee's normal working hours or at a time 
and place convenient to the employee. The medical questionnaire shall be 
administered in a manner that ensures that the employee understands its 
content.
    (ii) The employer shall provide the employee with an opportunity to 
discuss the questionnaire and examination results with the PLHCP.
    (5) Supplemental information for the PLHCP. (i) The following 
information must be provided to the PLHCP before the PLHCP makes a 
recommendation concerning an employee's ability to use a respirator:
    (A) The type and weight of the respirator to be used by the 
employee;
    (B) The duration and frequency of respirator use (including use for 
rescue and escape);
    (C) The expected physical work effort;
    (D) Additional protective clothing and equipment to be worn; and
    (E) Temperature and humidity extremes that may be encountered.
    (ii) Any supplemental information provided previously to the PLHCP 
regarding an employee need not be provided for a subsequent medical 
evaluation if the information and the PLHCP remain the same.
    (iii) The employer shall provide the PLHCP with a copy of the 
written respiratory protection program and a copy of this section.

    Note to Paragraph (e)(5)(iii): When the employer replaces a PLHCP, 
the employer must ensure that the new PLHCP obtains this information, 
either by providing the documents directly to the PLHCP or having the 
documents transferred from the former PLHCP to the new PLHCP. However, 
OSHA does not expect employers to have employees medically reevaluated 
solely because a new PLHCP has been selected.

    (6) Medical determination. In determining the employee's ability to 
use a respirator, the employer shall:
    (i) Obtain a written recommendation regarding the employee's ability 
to use the respirator from the PLHCP. The recommendation shall provide 
only the following information:
    (A) Any limitations on respirator use related to the medical 
condition of the employee, or relating to the workplace conditions in 
which the respirator will be used, including whether or not the employee 
is medically able to use the respirator;
    (B) The need, if any, for follow-up medical evaluations; and
    (C) A statement that the PLHCP has provided the employee with a copy 
of the PLHCP's written recommendation.
    (ii) If the respirator is a negative pressure respirator and the 
PLHCP finds a medical condition that may place the employee's health at 
increased risk if the respirator is used, the employer shall provide a 
PAPR if the PLHCP's medical evaluation finds that the employee can use 
such a respirator; if a subsequent medical evaluation finds that the 
employee is medically able to use a negative pressure respirator, then 
the employer is no longer required to provide a PAPR.
    (7) Additional medical evaluations. At a minimum, the employer shall 
provide additional medical evaluations that comply with the requirements 
of this section if:
    (i) An employee reports medical signs or symptoms that are related 
to ability to use a respirator;
    (ii) A PLHCP, supervisor, or the respirator program administrator 
informs the employer that an employee needs to be reevaluated;
    (iii) Information from the respiratory protection program, including 
observations made during fit testing and program evaluation, indicates a 
need for employee reevaluation; or
    (iv) A change occurs in workplace conditions (e.g., physical work 
effort, protective clothing, temperature) that may result in a 
substantial increase in the physiological burden placed on an employee.
    (f) Fit testing. This paragraph requires that, before an employee 
may be required to use any respirator with a negative or positive 
pressure tight-fitting facepiece, the employee must be fit tested with 
the same make, model, style, and size of respirator that will be used. 
This paragraph specifies the kinds of fit tests allowed, the procedures 
for conducting them, and how

[[Page 418]]

the results of the fit tests must be used.
    (1) The employer shall ensure that employees using a tight-fitting 
facepiece respirator pass an appropriate qualitative fit test (QLFT) or 
quantitative fit test (QNFT) as stated in this paragraph.
    (2) The employer shall ensure that an employee using a tight-fitting 
facepiece respirator is fit tested prior to initial use of the 
respirator, whenever a different respirator facepiece (size, style, 
model or make) is used, and at least annually thereafter.
    (3) The employer shall conduct an additional fit test whenever the 
employee reports, or the employer, PLHCP, supervisor, or program 
administrator makes visual observations of, changes in the employee's 
physical condition that could affect respirator fit. Such conditions 
include, but are not limited to, facial scarring, dental changes, 
cosmetic surgery, or an obvious change in body weight.
    (4) If after passing a QLFT or QNFT, the employee subsequently 
notifies the employer, program administrator, supervisor, or PLHCP that 
the fit of the respirator is unacceptable, the employee shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity to select a different respirator facepiece and to 
be retested.
    (5) The fit test shall be administered using an OSHA-accepted QLFT 
or QNFT protocol. The OSHA-accepted QLFT and QNFT protocols and 
procedures are contained in Appendix A of this section.
    (6) QLFT may only be used to fit test negative pressure air-
purifying respirators that must achieve a fit factor of 100 or less.
    (7) If the fit factor, as determined through an OSHA-accepted QNFT 
protocol, is equal to or greater than 100 for tight-fitting half 
facepieces, or equal to or greater than 500 for tight-fitting full 
facepieces, the QNFT has been passed with that respirator.
    (8) Fit testing of tight-fitting atmosphere-supplying respirators 
and tight-fitting powered air-purifying respirators shall be 
accomplished by performing quantitative or qualitative fit testing in 
the negative pressure mode, regardless of the mode of operation 
(negative or positive pressure) that is used for respiratory protection.
    (i) Qualitative fit testing of these respirators shall be 
accomplished by temporarily converting the respirator user's actual 
facepiece into a negative pressure respirator with appropriate filters, 
or by using an identical negative pressure air-purifying respirator 
facepiece with the same sealing surfaces as a surrogate for the 
atmosphere-supplying or powered air-purifying respirator facepiece.
    (ii) Quantitative fit testing of these respirators shall be 
accomplished by modifying the facepiece to allow sampling inside the 
facepiece in the breathing zone of the user, midway between the nose and 
mouth. This requirement shall be accomplished by installing a permanent 
sampling probe onto a surrogate facepiece, or by using a sampling 
adapter designed to temporarily provide a means of sampling air from 
inside the facepiece.
    (iii) Any modifications to the respirator facepiece for fit testing 
shall be completely removed, and the facepiece restored to NIOSH-
approved configuration, before that facepiece can be used in the 
workplace.
    (g) Use of respirators. This paragraph requires employers to 
establish and implement procedures for the proper use of respirators. 
These requirements include prohibiting conditions that may result in 
facepiece seal leakage, preventing employees from removing respirators 
in hazardous environments, taking actions to ensure continued effective 
respirator operation throughout the work shift, and establishing 
procedures for the use of respirators in IDLH atmospheres or in interior 
structural firefighting situations.
    (1) Facepiece seal protection. (i) The employer shall not permit 
respirators with tight-fitting facepieces to be worn by employees who 
have:
    (A) Facial hair that comes between the sealing surface of the 
facepiece and the face or that interferes with valve function; or
    (B) Any condition that interferes with the face-to-facepiece seal or 
valve function.
    (ii) If an employee wears corrective glasses or goggles or other 
personal protective equipment, the employer

[[Page 419]]

shall ensure that such equipment is worn in a manner that does not 
interfere with the seal of the facepiece to the face of the user.
    (iii) For all tight-fitting respirators, the employer shall ensure 
that employees perform a user seal check each time they put on the 
respirator using the procedures in Appendix B-1 or procedures 
recommended by the respirator manufacturer that the employer 
demonstrates are as effective as those in Appendix B-1 of this section.
    (2) Continuing respirator effectiveness. (i) Appropriate 
surveillance shall be maintained of work area conditions and degree of 
employee exposure or stress. When there is a change in work area 
conditions or degree of employee exposure or stress that may affect 
respirator effectiveness, the employer shall reevaluate the continued 
effectiveness of the respirator.
    (ii) The employer shall ensure that employees leave the respirator 
use area:
    (A) To wash their faces and respirator facepieces as necessary to 
prevent eye or skin irritation associated with respirator use; or
    (B) If they detect vapor or gas breakthrough, changes in breathing 
resistance, or leakage of the facepiece; or
    (C) To replace the respirator or the filter, cartridge, or canister 
elements.
    (iii) If the employee detects vapor or gas breakthrough, changes in 
breathing resistance, or leakage of the facepiece, the employer must 
replace or repair the respirator before allowing the employee to return 
to the work area.
    (3) Procedures for IDLH atmospheres. For all IDLH atmospheres, the 
employer shall ensure that:
    (i) One employee or, when needed, more than one employee is located 
outside the IDLH atmosphere;
    (ii) Visual, voice, or signal line communication is maintained 
between the employee(s) in the IDLH atmosphere and the employee(s) 
located outside the IDLH atmosphere;
    (iii) The employee(s) located outside the IDLH atmosphere are 
trained and equipped to provide effective emergency rescue;
    (iv) The employer or designee is notified before the employee(s) 
located outside the IDLH atmosphere enter the IDLH atmosphere to provide 
emergency rescue;
    (v) The employer or designee authorized to do so by the employer, 
once notified, provides necessary assistance appropriate to the 
situation;
    (vi) Employee(s) located outside the IDLH atmospheres are equipped 
with:
    (A) Pressure demand or other positive pressure SCBAs, or a pressure 
demand or other positive pressure supplied-air respirator with auxiliary 
SCBA; and either
    (B) Appropriate retrieval equipment for removing the employee(s) who 
enter(s) these hazardous atmospheres where retrieval equipment would 
contribute to the rescue of the employee(s) and would not increase the 
overall risk resulting from entry; or
    (C) Equivalent means for rescue where retrieval equipment is not 
required under paragraph (g)(3)(vi)(B).
    (4) Procedures for interior structural firefighting. In addition to 
the requirements set forth under paragraph (g)(3), in interior 
structural fires, the employer shall ensure that:
    (i) At least two employees enter the IDLH atmosphere and remain in 
visual or voice contact with one another at all times;
    (ii) At least two employees are located outside the IDLH atmosphere; 
and
    (iii) All employees engaged in interior structural firefighting use 
SCBAs.

    Note 1 to paragraph  (g): One of the two individuals located outside 
the IDLH atmosphere may be assigned to an additional role, such as 
incident commander in charge of the emergency or safety officer, so long 
as this individual is able to perform assistance or rescue activities 
without jeopardizing the safety or health of any firefighter working at 
the incident.


    Note 2 to paragraph (g): Nothing in this section is meant to 
preclude firefighters from performing emergency rescue activities before 
an entire team has assembled.

    (h) Maintenance and care of respirators. This paragraph requires the 
employer to provide for the cleaning and disinfecting, storage, 
inspection, and repair of respirators used by employees.
    (1) Cleaning and disinfecting. The employer shall provide each 
respirator user with a respirator that is clean,

[[Page 420]]

sanitary, and in good working order. The employer shall ensure that 
respirators are cleaned and disinfected using the procedures in Appendix 
B-2 of this section, or procedures recommended by the respirator 
manufacturer, provided that such procedures are of equivalent 
effectiveness. The respirators shall be cleaned and disinfected at the 
following intervals:
    (i) Respirators issued for the exclusive use of an employee shall be 
cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to be maintained in a 
sanitary condition;
    (ii) Respirators issued to more than one employee shall be cleaned 
and disinfected before being worn by different individuals;
    (iii) Respirators maintained for emergency use shall be cleaned and 
disinfected after each use; and
    (iv) Respirators used in fit testing and training shall be cleaned 
and disinfected after each use.
    (2) Storage. The employer shall ensure that respirators are stored 
as follows:
    (i) All respirators shall be stored to protect them from damage, 
contamination, dust, sunlight, extreme temperatures, excessive moisture, 
and damaging chemicals, and they shall be packed or stored to prevent 
deformation of the facepiece and exhalation valve.
    (ii) In addition to the requirements of paragraph (h)(2)(i) of this 
section, emergency respirators shall be:
    (A) Kept accessible to the work area;
    (B) Stored in compartments or in covers that are clearly marked as 
containing emergency respirators; and
    (C) Stored in accordance with any applicable manufacturer 
instructions.
    (3) Inspection. (i) The employer shall ensure that respirators are 
inspected as follows:
    (A) All respirators used in routine situations shall be inspected 
before each use and during cleaning;
    (B) All respirators maintained for use in emergency situations shall 
be inspected at least monthly and in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendations, and shall be checked for proper function before and 
after each use; and
    (C) Emergency escape-only respirators shall be inspected before 
being carried into the workplace for use.
    (ii) The employer shall ensure that respirator inspections include 
the following:
    (A) A check of respirator function, tightness of connections, and 
the condition of the various parts including, but not limited to, the 
facepiece, head straps, valves, connecting tube, and cartridges, 
canisters or filters; and
    (B) A check of elastomeric parts for pliability and signs of 
deterioration.
    (iii) In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (h)(3)(i) and 
(ii) of this section, self-contained breathing apparatus shall be 
inspected monthly. Air and oxygen cylinders shall be maintained in a 
fully charged state and shall be recharged when the pressure falls to 
90% of the manufacturer's recommended pressure level. The employer shall 
determine that the regulator and warning devices function properly.
    (iv) For respirators maintained for emergency use, the employer 
shall:
    (A) Certify the respirator by documenting the date the inspection 
was performed, the name (or signature) of the person who made the 
inspection, the findings, required remedial action, and a serial number 
or other means of identifying the inspected respirator; and
    (B) Provide this information on a tag or label that is attached to 
the storage compartment for the respirator, is kept with the respirator, 
or is included in inspection reports stored as paper or electronic 
files. This information shall be maintained until replaced following a 
subsequent certification.
    (4) Repairs. The employer shall ensure that respirators that fail an 
inspection or are otherwise found to be defective are removed from 
service, and are discarded or repaired or adjusted in accordance with 
the following procedures:
    (i) Repairs or adjustments to respirators are to be made only by 
persons appropriately trained to perform such operations and shall use 
only the respirator manufacturer's NIOSH-approved parts designed for the 
respirator;

[[Page 421]]

    (ii) Repairs shall be made according to the manufacturer's 
recommendations and specifications for the type and extent of repairs to 
be performed; and
    (iii) Reducing and admission valves, regulators, and alarms shall be 
adjusted or repaired only by the manufacturer or a technician trained by 
the manufacturer.
    (i) Breathing air quality and use. This paragraph requires the 
employer to provide employees using atmosphere-supplying respirators 
(supplied-air and SCBA) with breathing gases of high purity.
    (1) The employer shall ensure that compressed air, compressed 
oxygen, liquid air, and liquid oxygen used for respiration accords with 
the following specifications:
    (i) Compressed and liquid oxygen shall meet the United States 
Pharmacopoeia requirements for medical or breathing oxygen; and
    (ii) Compressed breathing air shall meet at least the requirements 
for Grade D breathing air described in ANSI/Compressed Gas Association 
Commodity Specification for Air, G-7.1-1989, to include:
    (A) Oxygen content (v/v) of 19.5-23.5%;
    (B) Hydrocarbon (condensed) content of 5 milligrams per cubic meter 
of air or less;
    (C) Carbon monoxide (CO) content of 10 ppm or less;
    (D) Carbon dioxide content of 1,000 ppm or less; and
    (E) Lack of noticeable odor.
    (2) The employer shall ensure that compressed oxygen is not used in 
atmosphere-supplying respirators that have previously used compressed 
air.
    (3) The employer shall ensure that oxygen concentrations greater 
than 23.5% are used only in equipment designed for oxygen service or 
distribution.
    (4) The employer shall ensure that cylinders used to supply 
breathing air to respirators meet the following requirements:
    (i) Cylinders are tested and maintained as prescribed in the 
Shipping Container Specification Regulations of the Department of 
Transportation (49 CFR part 173 and part 178);
    (ii) Cylinders of purchased breathing air have a certificate of 
analysis from the supplier that the breathing air meets the requirements 
for Grade D breathing air; and
    (iii) The moisture content in the cylinder does not exceed a dew 
point of -50  deg.F (-45.6  deg.C) at 1 atmosphere pressure.
    (5) The employer shall ensure that compressors used to supply 
breathing air to respirators are constructed and situated so as to:
    (i) Prevent entry of contaminated air into the air-supply system;
    (ii) Minimize moisture content so that the dew point at 1 atmosphere 
pressure is 10 degrees F (5.56  deg.C) below the ambient temperature;
    (iii) Have suitable in-line air-purifying sorbent beds and filters 
to further ensure breathing air quality. Sorbent beds and filters shall 
be maintained and replaced or refurbished periodically following the 
manufacturer's instructions.
    (iv) Have a tag containing the most recent change date and the 
signature of the person authorized by the employer to perform the 
change. The tag shall be maintained at the compressor.
    (6) For compressors that are not oil-lubricated, the employer shall 
ensure that carbon monoxide levels in the breathing air do not exceed 10 
ppm.
    (7) For oil-lubricated compressors, the employer shall use a high-
temperature or carbon monoxide alarm, or both, to monitor carbon 
monoxide levels. If only high-temperature alarms are used, the air 
supply shall be monitored at intervals sufficient to prevent carbon 
monoxide in the breathing air from exceeding 10 ppm.
    (8) The employer shall ensure that breathing air couplings are 
incompatible with outlets for nonrespirable worksite air or other gas 
systems. No asphyxiating substance shall be introduced into breathing 
air lines.
    (9) The employer shall use breathing gas containers marked in 
accordance with the NIOSH respirator certification standard, 42 CFR part 
84.
    (j) Identification of filters, cartridges, and canisters. The 
employer shall ensure that all filters, cartridges and canisters used in 
the workplace are labeled

[[Page 422]]

and color coded with the NIOSH approval label and that the label is not 
removed and remains legible.
    (k) Training and information. This paragraph requires the employer 
to provide effective training to employees who are required to use 
respirators. The training must be comprehensive, understandable, and 
recur annually, and more often if necessary. This paragraph also 
requires the employer to provide the basic information on respirators in 
Appendix D of this section to employees who wear respirators when not 
required by this section or by the employer to do so.
    (1) The employer shall ensure that each employee can demonstrate 
knowledge of at least the following:
    (i) Why the respirator is necessary and how improper fit, usage, or 
maintenance can compromise the protective effect of the respirator;
    (ii) What the limitations and capabilities of the respirator are;
    (iii) How to use the respirator effectively in emergency situations, 
including situations in which the respirator malfunctions;
    (iv) How to inspect, put on and remove, use, and check the seals of 
the respirator;
    (v) What the procedures are for maintenance and storage of the 
respirator;
    (vi) How to recognize medical signs and symptoms that may limit or 
prevent the effective use of respirators; and
    (vii) The general requirements of this section.
    (2) The training shall be conducted in a manner that is 
understandable to the employee.
    (3) The employer shall provide the training prior to requiring the 
employee to use a respirator in the workplace.
    (4) An employer who is able to demonstrate that a new employee has 
received training within the last 12 months that addresses the elements 
specified in paragraph (k)(1)(i) through (vii) is not required to repeat 
such training provided that, as required by paragraph (k)(1), the 
employee can demonstrate knowledge of those element(s). Previous 
training not repeated initially by the employer must be provided no 
later than 12 months from the date of the previous training.
    (5) Retraining shall be administered annually, and when the 
following situations occur:
    (i) Changes in the workplace or the type of respirator render 
previous training obsolete;
    (ii) Inadequacies in the employee's knowledge or use of the 
respirator indicate that the employee has not retained the requisite 
understanding or skill; or
    (iii) Any other situation arises in which retraining appears 
necessary to ensure safe respirator use.
    (6) The basic advisory information on respirators, as presented in 
Appendix D of this section, shall be provided by the employer in any 
written or oral format, to employees who wear respirators when such use 
is not required by this section or by the employer.
    (l) Program evaluation. This section requires the employer to 
conduct evaluations of the workplace to ensure that the written 
respiratory protection program is being properly implemented, and to 
consult employees to ensure that they are using the respirators 
properly.
    (1) The employer shall conduct evaluations of the workplace as 
necessary to ensure that the provisions of the current written program 
are being effectively implemented and that it continues to be effective.
    (2) The employer shall regularly consult employees required to use 
respirators to assess the employees' views on program effectiveness and 
to identify any problems. Any problems that are identified during this 
assessment shall be corrected. Factors to be assessed include, but are 
not limited to:
    (i) Respirator fit (including the ability to use the respirator 
without interfering with effective workplace performance);
    (ii) Appropriate respirator selection for the hazards to which the 
employee is exposed;
    (iii) Proper respirator use under the workplace conditions the 
employee encounters; and
    (iv) Proper respirator maintenance.
    (m) Recordkeeping. This section requires the employer to establish 
and retain written information regarding

[[Page 423]]

medical evaluations, fit testing, and the respirator program. This 
information will facilitate employee involvement in the respirator 
program, assist the employer in auditing the adequacy of the program, 
and provide a record for compliance determinations by OSHA.
    (1) Medical evaluation. Records of medical evaluations required by 
this section must be retained and made available in accordance with 29 
CFR 1910.1020.
    (2) Fit testing. (i) The employer shall establish a record of the 
qualitative and quantitative fit tests administered to an employee 
including:
    (A) The name or identification of the employee tested;
    (B) Type of fit test performed;
    (C) Specific make, model, style, and size of respirator tested;
    (D) Date of test; and
    (E) The pass/fail results for QLFTs or the fit factor and strip 
chart recording or other recording of the test results for QNFTs.
    (ii) Fit test records shall be retained for respirator users until 
the next fit test is administered.
    (3) A written copy of the current respirator program shall be 
retained by the employer.
    (4) Written materials required to be retained under this paragraph 
shall be made available upon request to affected employees and to the 
Assistant Secretary or designee for examination and copying.
    (n) Dates--(1) Effective date. This section is effective April 8, 
1998. The obligations imposed by this section commence on the effective 
date unless otherwise noted in this paragraph. Compliance with 
obligations that do not commence on the effective date shall occur no 
later than the applicable start-up date.
    (2) Compliance dates. All obligations of this section commence on 
the effective date except as follows:
    (i) The determination that respirator use is required (paragraph 
(a)) shall be completed no later than September 8, 1998.
    (ii) Compliance with provisions of this section for all other 
provisions shall be completed no later than October 5, 1998.
    (3) The provisions of 29 CFR 1910.134 and 29 CFR 1926.103, contained 
in the 29 CFR parts 1900 to 1910.99 and the 29 CFR part 1926 editions, 
revised as of July 1, 1997, are in effect and enforceable until October 
5, 1998, or during any administrative or judicial stay of the provisions 
of this section.
    (4) Existing respiratory protection programs. If, in the 12 month 
period preceding April 8, 1998, the employer has conducted annual 
respirator training, fit testing, respirator program evaluation, or 
medical evaluations, the employer may use the results of those 
activities to comply with the corresponding provisions of this section, 
providing that these activities were conducted in a manner that meets 
the requirements of this section.
    (o) Appendices. (1) Compliance with Appendix A, Appendix B-1, 
Appendix B-2, and Appendix C of this section is mandatory.
    (2) Appendix D of this section is non-mandatory and is not intended 
to create any additional obligations not otherwise imposed or to detract 
from any existing obligations.

     Appendix A to Sec. 1910.134: Fit Testing Procedures (Mandatory)

                Part I. OSHA-Accepted Fit Test Protocols

             A. Fit Testing Procedures--General Requirements

    The employer shall conduct fit testing using the following 
procedures. The requirements in this appendix apply to all OSHA-accepted 
fit test methods, both QLFT and QNFT.
    1. The test subject shall be allowed to pick the most acceptable 
respirator from a sufficient number of respirator models and sizes so 
that the respirator is acceptable to, and correctly fits, the user.
    2. Prior to the selection process, the test subject shall be shown 
how to put on a respirator, how it should be positioned on the face, how 
to set strap tension and how to determine an acceptable fit. A mirror 
shall be available to assist the subject in evaluating the fit and 
positioning of the respirator. This instruction may not constitute the 
subject's formal training on respirator use, because it is only a 
review.
    3. The test subject shall be informed that he/she is being asked to 
select the respirator that provides the most acceptable fit. Each 
respirator represents a different size and

[[Page 424]]

shape, and if fitted and used properly, will provide adequate 
protection.
    4. The test subject shall be instructed to hold each chosen 
facepiece up to the face and eliminate those that obviously do not give 
an acceptable fit.
    5. The more acceptable facepieces are noted in case the one selected 
proves unacceptable; the most comfortable mask is donned and worn at 
least five minutes to assess comfort. Assistance in assessing comfort 
can be given by discussing the points in the following item A.6. If the 
test subject is not familiar with using a particular respirator, the 
test subject shall be directed to don the mask several times and to 
adjust the straps each time to become adept at setting proper tension on 
the straps.
    6. Assessment of comfort shall include a review of the following 
points with the test subject and allowing the test subject adequate time 
to determine the comfort of the respirator:
    (a) Position of the mask on the nose
    (b) Room for eye protection
    (c) Room to talk
    (d) Position of mask on face and cheeks
    7. The following criteria shall be used to help determine the 
adequacy of the respirator fit:
    (a) Chin properly placed;
    (b) Adequate strap tension, not overly tightened;
    (c) Fit across nose bridge;
    (d) Respirator of proper size to span distance from nose to chin;
    (e) Tendency of respirator to slip;
    (f) Self-observation in mirror to evaluate fit and respirator 
position.
    8. The test subject shall conduct a user seal check, either the 
negative and positive pressure seal checks described in Appendix B-1 of 
this section or those recommended by the respirator manufacturer which 
provide equivalent protection to the procedures in Appendix B-1. Before 
conducting the negative and positive pressure checks, the subject shall 
be told to seat the mask on the face by moving the head from side-to-
side and up and down slowly while taking in a few slow deep breaths. 
Another facepiece shall be selected and retested if the test subject 
fails the user seal check tests.
    9. The test shall not be conducted if there is any hair growth 
between the skin and the facepiece sealing surface, such as stubble 
beard growth, beard, mustache or sideburns which cross the respirator 
sealing surface. Any type of apparel which interferes with a 
satisfactory fit shall be altered or removed.
    10. If a test subject exhibits difficulty in breathing during the 
tests, she or he shall be referred to a physician or other licensed 
health care professional, as appropriate, to determine whether the test 
subject can wear a respirator while performing her or his duties.
    11. If the employee finds the fit of the respirator unacceptable, 
the test subject shall be given the opportunity to select a different 
respirator and to be retested.
    12. Exercise regimen. Prior to the commencement of the fit test, the 
test subject shall be given a description of the fit test and the test 
subject's responsibilities during the test procedure. The description of 
the process shall include a description of the test exercises that the 
subject will be performing. The respirator to be tested shall be worn 
for at least 5 minutes before the start of the fit test.
    13. The fit test shall be performed while the test subject is 
wearing any applicable safety equipment that may be worn during actual 
respirator use which could interfere with respirator fit.
    14. Test Exercises. (a) The following test exercises are to be 
performed for all fit testing methods prescribed in this appendix, 
except for the CNP method. A separate fit testing exercise regimen is 
contained in the CNP protocol. The test subject shall perform exercises, 
in the test environment, in the following manner:
    (1) Normal breathing. In a normal standing position, without 
talking, the subject shall breathe normally.
    (2) Deep breathing. In a normal standing position, the subject shall 
breathe slowly and deeply, taking caution so as not to hyperventilate.
    (3) Turning head side to side. Standing in place, the subject shall 
slowly turn his/her head from side to side between the extreme positions 
on each side. The head shall be held at each extreme momentarily so the 
subject can inhale at each side.
    (4) Moving head up and down. Standing in place, the subject shall 
slowly move his/her head up and down. The subject shall be instructed to 
inhale in the up position (i.e., when looking toward the ceiling).
    (5) Talking. The subject shall talk out loud slowly and loud enough 
so as to be heard clearly by the test conductor. The subject can read 
from a prepared text such as the Rainbow Passage, count backward from 
100, or recite a memorized poem or song.

                             Rainbow Passage

    When the sunlight strikes raindrops in the air, they act like a 
prism and form a rainbow. The rainbow is a division of white light into 
many beautiful colors. These take the shape of a long round arch, with 
its path high above, and its two ends apparently beyond the horizon. 
There is, according to legend, a boiling pot of gold at one end. People 
look, but no one ever finds it. When a man looks for something beyond 
reach, his friends say he is looking for the pot of gold at the end of 
the rainbow.

[[Page 425]]

    (6) Grimace. The test subject shall grimace by smiling or frowning. 
(This applies only to QNFT testing; it is not performed for QLFT)
    (7) Bending over. The test subject shall bend at the waist as if he/
she were to touch his/her toes. Jogging in place shall be substituted 
for this exercise in those test environments such as shroud type QNFT or 
QLFT units that do not permit bending over at the waist.
    (8) Normal breathing. Same as exercise (1).
    (b) Each test exercise shall be performed for one minute except for 
the grimace exercise which shall be performed for 15 seconds. The test 
subject shall be questioned by the test conductor regarding the comfort 
of the respirator upon completion of the protocol. If it has become 
unacceptable, another model of respirator shall be tried. The respirator 
shall not be adjusted once the fit test exercises begin. Any adjustment 
voids the test, and the fit test must be repeated.

                B. Qualitative Fit Test (QLFT) Protocols

                               1. General

    (a) The employer shall ensure that persons administering QLFT are 
able to prepare test solutions, calibrate equipment and perform tests 
properly, recognize invalid tests, and ensure that test equipment is in 
proper working order.
    (b) The employer shall ensure that QLFT equipment is kept clean and 
well maintained so as to operate within the parameters for which it was 
designed.

                       2. Isoamyl Acetate Protocol

    Note:  This protocol is not appropriate to use for the fit testing 
of particulate respirators. If used to fit test particulate respirators, 
the respirator must be equipped with an organic vapor filter.

                      (a) Odor Threshold Screening

    Odor threshold screening, performed without wearing a respirator, is 
intended to determine if the individual tested can detect the odor of 
isoamyl acetate at low levels.
    (1) Three 1 liter glass jars with metal lids are required.
    (2) Odor-free water (e.g., distilled or spring water) at 
approximately 25 deg. C (77 deg. F) shall be used for the solutions.
    (3) The isoamyl acetate (IAA) (also known at isopentyl acetate) 
stock solution is prepared by adding 1 ml of pure IAA to 800 ml of odor-
free water in a 1 liter jar, closing the lid and shaking for 30 seconds. 
A new solution shall be prepared at least weekly.
    (4) The screening test shall be conducted in a room separate from 
the room used for actual fit testing. The two rooms shall be well-
ventilated to prevent the odor of IAA from becoming evident in the 
general room air where testing takes place.
    (5) The odor test solution is prepared in a second jar by placing 
0.4 ml of the stock solution into 500 ml of odor-free water using a 
clean dropper or pipette. The solution shall be shaken for 30 seconds 
and allowed to stand for two to three minutes so that the IAA 
concentration above the liquid may reach equilibrium. This solution 
shall be used for only one day.
    (6) A test blank shall be prepared in a third jar by adding 500 cc 
of odor-free water.
    (7) The odor test and test blank jar lids shall be labeled (e.g., 1 
and 2) for jar identification. Labels shall be placed on the lids so 
that they can be peeled off periodically and switched to maintain the 
integrity of the test.
    (8) The following instruction shall be typed on a card and placed on 
the table in front of the two test jars (i.e., 1 and 2): ``The purpose 
of this test is to determine if you can smell banana oil at a low 
concentration. The two bottles in front of you contain water. One of 
these bottles also contains a small amount of banana oil. Be sure the 
covers are on tight, then shake each bottle for two seconds. Unscrew the 
lid of each bottle, one at a time, and sniff at the mouth of the bottle. 
Indicate to the test conductor which bottle contains banana oil.''
    (9) The mixtures used in the IAA odor detection test shall be 
prepared in an area separate from where the test is performed, in order 
to prevent olfactory fatigue in the subject.
    (10) If the test subject is unable to correctly identify the jar 
containing the odor test solution, the IAA qualitative fit test shall 
not be performed.
    (11) If the test subject correctly identifies the jar containing the 
odor test solution, the test subject may proceed to respirator selection 
and fit testing.

                      (b) Isoamyl Acetate Fit Test

    (1) The fit test chamber shall be a clear 55-gallon drum liner 
suspended inverted over a 2-foot diameter frame so that the top of the 
chamber is about 6 inches above the test subject's head. If no drum 
liner is available, a similar chamber shall be constructed using plastic 
sheeting. The inside top center of the chamber shall have a small hook 
attached.
    (2) Each respirator used for the fitting and fit testing shall be 
equipped with organic vapor cartridges or offer protection against 
organic vapors.
    (3) After selecting, donning, and properly adjusting a respirator, 
the test subject shall wear it to the fit testing room. This room shall 
be separate from the room used for odor threshold screening and 
respirator selection, and shall be well-ventilated, as by an exhaust fan 
or lab hood, to prevent general room contamination.
    (4) A copy of the test exercises and any prepared text from which 
the subject is to

[[Page 426]]

read shall be taped to the inside of the test chamber.
    (5) Upon entering the test chamber, the test subject shall be given 
a 6-inch by 5-inch piece of paper towel, or other porous, absorbent, 
single-ply material, folded in half and wetted with 0.75 ml of pure IAA. 
The test subject shall hang the wet towel on the hook at the top of the 
chamber. An IAA test swab or ampule may be substituted for the IAA 
wetted paper towel provided it has been demonstrated that the 
alternative IAA source will generate an IAA test atmosphere with a 
concentration equivalent to that generated by the paper towel method.
    (6) Allow two minutes for the IAA test concentration to stabilize 
before starting the fit test exercises. This would be an appropriate 
time to talk with the test subject; to explain the fit test, the 
importance of his/her cooperation, and the purpose for the test 
exercises; or to demonstrate some of the exercises.
    (7) If at any time during the test, the subject detects the banana-
like odor of IAA, the test is failed. The subject shall quickly exit 
from the test chamber and leave the test area to avoid olfactory 
fatigue.
    (8) If the test is failed, the subject shall return to the selection 
room and remove the respirator. The test subject shall repeat the odor 
sensitivity test, select and put on another respirator, return to the 
test area and again begin the fit test procedure described in (b) (1) 
through (7) above. The process continues until a respirator that fits 
well has been found. Should the odor sensitivity test be failed, the 
subject shall wait at least 5 minutes before retesting. Odor sensitivity 
will usually have returned by this time.
    (9) If the subject passes the test, the efficiency of the test 
procedure shall be demonstrated by having the subject break the 
respirator face seal and take a breath before exiting the chamber.
    (10) When the test subject leaves the chamber, the subject shall 
remove the saturated towel and return it to the person conducting the 
test, so that there is no significant IAA concentration buildup in the 
chamber during subsequent tests. The used towels shall be kept in a 
self-sealing plastic bag to keep the test area from being contaminated.

                 3. Saccharin Solution Aerosol Protocol

    The entire screening and testing procedure shall be explained to the 
test subject prior to the conduct of the screening test.
    (a) Taste threshold screening. The saccharin taste threshold 
screening, performed without wearing a respirator, is intended to 
determine whether the individual being tested can detect the taste of 
saccharin.
    (1) During threshold screening as well as during fit testing, 
subjects shall wear an enclosure about the head and shoulders that is 
approximately 12 inches in diameter by 14 inches tall with at least the 
front portion clear and that allows free movements of the head when a 
respirator is worn. An enclosure substantially similar to the 3M hood 
assembly, parts # FT 14 and # FT 15 combined, is adequate.
    (2) The test enclosure shall have a \3/4\-inch (1.9 cm) hole in 
front of the test subject's nose and mouth area to accommodate the 
nebulizer nozzle.
    (3) The test subject shall don the test enclosure. Throughout the 
threshold screening test, the test subject shall breathe through his/her 
slightly open mouth with tongue extended. The subject is instructed to 
report when he/she detects a sweet taste.
    (4) Using a DeVilbiss Model 40 Inhalation Medication Nebulizer or 
equivalent, the test conductor shall spray the threshold check solution 
into the enclosure. The nozzle is directed away from the nose and mouth 
of the person. This nebulizer shall be clearly marked to distinguish it 
from the fit test solution nebulizer.
    (5) The threshold check solution is prepared by dissolving 0.83 gram 
of sodium saccharin USP in 100 ml of warm water. It can be prepared by 
putting 1 ml of the fit test solution (see (b)(5) below) in 100 ml of 
distilled water.
    (6) To produce the aerosol, the nebulizer bulb is firmly squeezed so 
that it collapses completely, then released and allowed to fully expand.
    (7) Ten squeezes are repeated rapidly and then the test subject is 
asked whether the saccharin can be tasted. If the test subject reports 
tasting the sweet taste during the ten squeezes, the screening test is 
completed. The taste threshold is noted as ten regardless of the number 
of squeezes actually completed.
    (8) If the first response is negative, ten more squeezes are 
repeated rapidly and the test subject is again asked whether the 
saccharin is tasted. If the test subject reports tasting the sweet taste 
during the second ten squeezes, the screening test is completed. The 
taste threshold is noted as twenty regardless of the number of squeezes 
actually completed.
    (9) If the second response is negative, ten more squeezes are 
repeated rapidly and the test subject is again asked whether the 
saccharin is tasted. If the test subject reports tasting the sweet taste 
during the third set of ten squeezes, the screening test is completed. 
The taste threshold is noted as thirty regardless of the number of 
squeezes actually completed.
    (10) The test conductor will take note of the number of squeezes 
required to solicit a taste response.
    (11) If the saccharin is not tasted after 30 squeezes (step 10), the 
test subject is unable to taste saccharin and may not perform the 
saccharin fit test.



[[Page 427]]


    Note to paragraph  3. (a): If the test subject eats or drinks 
something sweet before the screening test, he/she may be unable to taste 
the weak saccharin solution.


    (12) If a taste response is elicited, the test subject shall be 
asked to take note of the taste for reference in the fit test.
    (13) Correct use of the nebulizer means that approximately 1 ml of 
liquid is used at a time in the nebulizer body.
    (14) The nebulizer shall be thoroughly rinsed in water, shaken dry, 
and refilled at least each morning and afternoon or at least every four 
hours.
    (b) Saccharin solution aerosol fit test procedure.
    (1) The test subject may not eat, drink (except plain water), smoke, 
or chew gum for 15 minutes before the test.
    (2) The fit test uses the same enclosure described in 3. (a) above.
    (3) The test subject shall don the enclosure while wearing the 
respirator selected in section I. A. of this appendix. The respirator 
shall be properly adjusted and equipped with a particulate filter(s).
    (4) A second DeVilbiss Model 40 Inhalation Medication Nebulizer or 
equivalent is used to spray the fit test solution into the enclosure. 
This nebulizer shall be clearly marked to distinguish it from the 
screening test solution nebulizer.
    (5) The fit test solution is prepared by adding 83 grams of sodium 
saccharin to 100 ml of warm water.
    (6) As before, the test subject shall breathe through the slightly 
open mouth with tongue extended, and report if he/she tastes the sweet 
taste of saccharin.
    (7) The nebulizer is inserted into the hole in the front of the 
enclosure and an initial concentration of saccharin fit test solution is 
sprayed into the enclosure using the same number of squeezes (either 10, 
20 or 30 squeezes) based on the number of squeezes required to elicit a 
taste response as noted during the screening test. A minimum of 10 
squeezes is required.
    (8) After generating the aerosol, the test subject shall be 
instructed to perform the exercises in section I. A. 14. of this 
appendix.
    (9) Every 30 seconds the aerosol concentration shall be replenished 
using one half the original number of squeezes used initially (e.g., 5, 
10 or 15).
    (10) The test subject shall indicate to the test conductor if at any 
time during the fit test the taste of saccharin is detected. If the test 
subject does not report tasting the saccharin, the test is passed.
    (11) If the taste of saccharin is detected, the fit is deemed 
unsatisfactory and the test is failed. A different respirator shall be 
tried and the entire test procedure is repeated (taste threshold 
screening and fit testing).
    (12) Since the nebulizer has a tendency to clog during use, the test 
operator must make periodic checks of the nebulizer to ensure that it is 
not clogged. If clogging is found at the end of the test session, the 
test is invalid.

     4. Bitrex<SUP>TM</SUP> (Denatonium Benzoate) Solution Aerosol 
                      Qualitative Fit Test Protocol

    The Bitrex<SUP>TM</SUP> (Denatonium benzoate) solution aerosol QLFT 
protocol uses the published saccharin test protocol because that 
protocol is widely accepted. Bitrex is routinely used as a taste 
aversion agent in household liquids which children should not be 
drinking and is endorsed by the American Medical Association, the 
National Safety Council, and the American Association of Poison Control 
Centers. The entire screening and testing procedure shall be explained 
to the test subject prior to the conduct of the screening test.
    (a) Taste Threshold Screening.
    The Bitrex taste threshold screening, performed without wearing a 
respirator, is intended to determine whether the individual being tested 
can detect the taste of Bitrex.
    (1) During threshold screening as well as during fit testing, 
subjects shall wear an enclosure about the head and shoulders that is 
approximately 12 inches (30.5 cm) in diameter by 14 inches (35.6 cm) 
tall. The front portion of the enclosure shall be clear from the 
respirator and allow free movement of the head when a respirator is 
worn. An enclosure substantially similar to the 3M hood assembly, parts 
# FT 14 and # FT 15 combined, is adequate.
    (2) The test enclosure shall have a \3/4\ inch (1.9 cm) hole in 
front of the test subject's nose and mouth area to accommodate the 
nebulizer nozzle.
    (3) The test subject shall don the test enclosure. Throughout the 
threshold screening test, the test subject shall breathe through his or 
her slightly open mouth with tongue extended. The subject is instructed 
to report when he/she detects a bitter taste.
    (4) Using a DeVilbiss Model 40 Inhalation Medication Nebulizer or 
equivalent, the test conductor shall spray the Threshold Check Solution 
into the enclosure. This Nebulizer shall be clearly marked to 
distinguish it from the fit test solution nebulizer.
    (5) The Threshold Check Solution is prepared by adding 13.5 
milligrams of Bitrex to 100 ml of 5% salt (NaCl) solution in distilled 
water.
    (6) To produce the aerosol, the nebulizer bulb is firmly squeezed so 
that the bulb collapses completely, and is then released and allowed to 
fully expand.
    (7) An initial ten squeezes are repeated rapidly and then the test 
subject is asked whether the Bitrex can be tasted. If the test subject 
reports tasting the bitter taste during the ten squeezes, the screening 
test is

[[Page 428]]

completed. The taste threshold is noted as ten regardless of the number 
of squeezes actually completed.
    (8) If the first response is negative, ten more squeezes are 
repeated rapidly and the test subject is again asked whether the Bitrex 
is tasted. If the test subject reports tasting the bitter taste during 
the second ten squeezes, the screening test is completed. The taste 
threshold is noted as twenty regardless of the number of squeezes 
actually completed.
    (9) If the second response is negative, ten more squeezes are 
repeated rapidly and the test subject is again asked whether the Bitrex 
is tasted. If the test subject reports tasting the bitter taste during 
the third set of ten squeezes, the screening test is completed. The 
taste threshold is noted as thirty regardless of the number of squeezes 
actually completed.
    (10) The test conductor will take note of the number of squeezes 
required to solicit a taste response.
    (11) If the Bitrex is not tasted after 30 squeezes (step 10), the 
test subject is unable to taste Bitrex and may not perform the Bitrex 
fit test.
    (12) If a taste response is elicited, the test subject shall be 
asked to take note of the taste for reference in the fit test.
    (13) Correct use of the nebulizer means that approximately 1 ml of 
liquid is used at a time in the nebulizer body.
    (14) The nebulizer shall be thoroughly rinsed in water, shaken to 
dry, and refilled at least each morning and afternoon or at least every 
four hours.
    (b) Bitrex Solution Aerosol Fit Test Procedure.
    (1) The test subject may not eat, drink (except plain water), smoke, 
or chew gum for 15 minutes before the test.
    (2) The fit test uses the same enclosure as that described in 4. (a) 
above.
    (3) The test subject shall don the enclosure while wearing the 
respirator selected according to section I. A. of this appendix. The 
respirator shall be properly adjusted and equipped with any type 
particulate filter(s).
    (4) A second DeVilbiss Model 40 Inhalation Medication Nebulizer or 
equivalent is used to spray the fit test solution into the enclosure. 
This nebulizer shall be clearly marked to distinguish it from the 
screening test solution nebulizer.
    (5) The fit test solution is prepared by adding 337.5 mg of Bitrex 
to 200 ml of a 5% salt (NaCl) solution in warm water.
    (6) As before, the test subject shall breathe through his or her 
slightly open mouth with tongue extended, and be instructed to report if 
he/she tastes the bitter taste of Bitrex..
    (7) The nebulizer is inserted into the hole in the front of the 
enclosure and an initial concentration of the fit test solution is 
sprayed into the enclosure using the same number of squeezes (either 10, 
20 or 30 squeezes) based on the number of squeezes required to elicit a 
taste response as noted during the screening test.
    (8) After generating the aerosol, the test subject shall be 
instructed to perform the exercises in section I. A. 14. of this 
appendix.
    (9) Every 30 seconds the aerosol concentration shall be replenished 
using one half the number of squeezes used initially (e.g., 5, 10 or 
15).
    (10) The test subject shall indicate to the test conductor if at any 
time during the fit test the taste of Bitrex is detected. If the test 
subject does not report tasting the Bitrex, the test is passed.
    (11) If the taste of Bitrex is detected, the fit is deemed 
unsatisfactory and the test is failed. A different respirator shall be 
tried and the entire test procedure is repeated (taste threshold 
screening and fit testing).

              5. Irritant Smoke (Stannic Chloride) Protocol

    This qualitative fit test uses a person's response to the irritating 
chemicals released in the ``smoke'' produced by a stannic chloride 
ventilation smoke tube to detect leakage into the respirator.

                (a) General Requirements and Precautions

    (1) The respirator to be tested shall be equipped with high 
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) or P100 series filter(s).
    (2) Only stannic chloride smoke tubes shall be used for this 
protocol.
    (3) No form of test enclosure or hood for the test subject shall be 
used.
    (4) The smoke can be irritating to the eyes, lungs, and nasal 
passages. The test conductor shall take precautions to minimize the test 
subject's exposure to irritant smoke. Sensitivity varies, and certain 
individuals may respond to a greater degree to irritant smoke. Care 
shall be taken when performing the sensitivity screening checks that 
determine whether the test subject can detect irritant smoke to use only 
the minimum amount of smoke necessary to elicit a response from the test 
subject.
    (5) The fit test shall be performed in an area with adequate 
ventilation to prevent exposure of the person conducting the fit test or 
the build-up of irritant smoke in the general atmosphere.

                     (b) Sensitivity Screening Check

    The person to be tested must demonstrate his or her ability to 
detect a weak concentration of the irritant smoke.
    (1) The test operator shall break both ends of a ventilation smoke 
tube containing stannic chloride, and attach one end of the smoke tube 
to a low flow air pump set to deliver 200 milliliters per minute, or an 
aspirator squeeze bulb. The test operator shall

[[Page 429]]

cover the other end of the smoke tube with a short piece of tubing to 
prevent potential injury from the jagged end of the smoke tube.
    (2) The test operator shall advise the test subject that the smoke 
can be irritating to the eyes, lungs, and nasal passages and instruct 
the subject to keep his/her eyes closed while the test is performed.
    (3) The test subject shall be allowed to smell a weak concentration 
of the irritant smoke before the respirator is donned to become familiar 
with its irritating properties and to determine if he/she can detect the 
irritating properties of the smoke. The test operator shall carefully 
direct a small amount of the irritant smoke in the test subject's 
direction to determine that he/she can detect it.

                  (c) Irritant Smoke Fit Test Procedure

    (1) The person being fit tested shall don the respirator without 
assistance, and perform the required user seal check(s).
    (2) The test subject shall be instructed to keep his/her eyes 
closed.
    (3) The test operator shall direct the stream of irritant smoke from 
the smoke tube toward the faceseal area of the test subject, using the 
low flow pump or the squeeze bulb. The test operator shall begin at 
least 12 inches from the facepiece and move the smoke stream around the 
whole perimeter of the mask. The operator shall gradually make two more 
passes around the perimeter of the mask, moving to within six inches of 
the respirator.
    (4) If the person being tested has not had an involuntary response 
and/or detected the irritant smoke, proceed with the test exercises.
    (5) The exercises identified in section I.A. 14. of this appendix 
shall be performed by the test subject while the respirator seal is 
being continually challenged by the smoke, directed around the perimeter 
of the respirator at a distance of six inches.
    (6) If the person being fit tested reports detecting the irritant 
smoke at any time, the test is failed. The person being retested must 
repeat the entire sensitivity check and fit test procedure.
    (7) Each test subject passing the irritant smoke test without 
evidence of a response (involuntary cough, irritation) shall be given a 
second sensitivity screening check, with the smoke from the same smoke 
tube used during the fit test, once the respirator has been removed, to 
determine whether he/she still reacts to the smoke. Failure to evoke a 
response shall void the fit test.
    (8) If a response is produced during this second sensitivity check, 
then the fit test is passed.

                C. Quantitative Fit Test (QNFT) Protocols

    The following quantitative fit testing procedures have been 
demonstrated to be acceptable: Quantitative fit testing using a non-
hazardous test aerosol (such as corn oil, polyethylene glycol 400 [PEG 
400], di-2-ethyl hexyl sebacate [DEHS], or sodium chloride) generated in 
a test chamber, and employing instrumentation to quantify the fit of the 
respirator; Quantitative fit testing using ambient aerosol as the test 
agent and appropriate instrumentation (condensation nuclei counter) to 
quantify the respirator fit; Quantitative fit testing using controlled 
negative pressure and appropriate instrumentation to measure the 
volumetric leak rate of a facepiece to quantify the respirator fit.

                               1. General

    (a) The employer shall ensure that persons administering QNFT are 
able to calibrate equipment and perform tests properly, recognize 
invalid tests, calculate fit factors properly and ensure that test 
equipment is in proper working order.
    (b) The employer shall ensure that QNFT equipment is kept clean, and 
is maintained and calibrated according to the manufacturer's 
instructions so as to operate at the parameters for which it was 
designed.

         2. Generated Aerosol Quantitative Fit Testing Protocol

    (a) Apparatus.
    (1) Instrumentation. Aerosol generation, dilution, and measurement 
systems using particulates (corn oil, polyethylene glycol 400 [PEG 400], 
di-2-ethyl hexyl sebacate [DEHS] or sodium chloride) as test aerosols 
shall be used for quantitative fit testing.
    (2) Test chamber. The test chamber shall be large enough to permit 
all test subjects to perform freely all required exercises without 
disturbing the test agent concentration or the measurement apparatus. 
The test chamber shall be equipped and constructed so that the test 
agent is effectively isolated from the ambient air, yet uniform in 
concentration throughout the chamber.
    (3) When testing air-purifying respirators, the normal filter or 
cartridge element shall be replaced with a high efficiency particulate 
air (HEPA) or P100 series filter supplied by the same manufacturer.
    (4) The sampling instrument shall be selected so that a computer 
record or strip chart record may be made of the test showing the rise 
and fall of the test agent concentration with each inspiration and 
expiration at fit factors of at least 2,000. Integrators or computers 
that integrate the amount of test agent penetration leakage into the 
respirator for each exercise may be used provided a record of the 
readings is made.
    (5) The combination of substitute air-purifying elements, test agent 
and test agent

[[Page 430]]

concentration shall be such that the test subject is not exposed in 
excess of an established exposure limit for the test agent at any time 
during the testing process, based upon the length of the exposure and 
the exposure limit duration.
    (6) The sampling port on the test specimen respirator shall be 
placed and constructed so that no leakage occurs around the port (e.g., 
where the respirator is probed), a free air flow is allowed into the 
sampling line at all times, and there is no interference with the fit or 
performance of the respirator. The in-mask sampling device (probe) shall 
be designed and used so that the air sample is drawn from the breathing 
zone of the test subject, midway between the nose and mouth and with the 
probe extending into the facepiece cavity at least 1/4 inch.
    (7) The test setup shall permit the person administering the test to 
observe the test subject inside the chamber during the test.
    (8) The equipment generating the test atmosphere shall maintain the 
concentration of test agent constant to within a 10 percent variation 
for the duration of the test.
    (9) The time lag (interval between an event and the recording of the 
event on the strip chart or computer or integrator) shall be kept to a 
minimum. There shall be a clear association between the occurrence of an 
event and its being recorded.
    (10) The sampling line tubing for the test chamber atmosphere and 
for the respirator sampling port shall be of equal diameter and of the 
same material. The length of the two lines shall be equal.
    (11) The exhaust flow from the test chamber shall pass through an 
appropriate filter (i.e., high efficiency particulate filter) before 
release.
    (12) When sodium chloride aerosol is used, the relative humidity 
inside the test chamber shall not exceed 50 percent.
    (13) The limitations of instrument detection shall be taken into 
account when determining the fit factor.
    (14) Test respirators shall be maintained in proper working order 
and be inspected regularly for deficiencies such as cracks or missing 
valves and gaskets.
    (b) Procedural Requirements.
    (1) When performing the initial user seal check using a positive or 
negative pressure check, the sampling line shall be crimped closed in 
order to avoid air pressure leakage during either of these pressure 
checks.
    (2) The use of an abbreviated screening QLFT test is optional. Such 
a test may be utilized in order to quickly identify poor fitting 
respirators that passed the positive and/or negative pressure test and 
reduce the amount of QNFT time. The use of the CNC QNFT instrument in 
the count mode is another optional method to obtain a quick estimate of 
fit and eliminate poor fitting respirators before going on to perform a 
full QNFT.
    (3) A reasonably stable test agent concentration shall be measured 
in the test chamber prior to testing. For canopy or shower curtain types 
of test units, the determination of the test agent's stability may be 
established after the test subject has entered the test environment.
    (4) Immediately after the subject enters the test chamber, the test 
agent concentration inside the respirator shall be measured to ensure 
that the peak penetration does not exceed 5 percent for a half mask or 1 
percent for a full facepiece respirator.
    (5) A stable test agent concentration shall be obtained prior to the 
actual start of testing.
    (6) Respirator restraining straps shall not be over-tightened for 
testing. The straps shall be adjusted by the wearer without assistance 
from other persons to give a reasonably comfortable fit typical of 
normal use. The respirator shall not be adjusted once the fit test 
exercises begin.
    (7) The test shall be terminated whenever any single peak 
penetration exceeds 5 percent for half masks and 1 percent for full 
facepiece respirators. The test subject shall be refitted and retested.
    (8) Calculation of fit factors.
    (i) The fit factor shall be determined for the quantitative fit test 
by taking the ratio of the average chamber concentration to the 
concentration measured inside the respirator for each test exercise 
except the grimace exercise.
    (ii) The average test chamber concentration shall be calculated as 
the arithmetic average of the concentration measured before and after 
each test (i.e., 7 exercises) or the arithmetic average of the 
concentration measured before and after each exercise or the true 
average measured continuously during the respirator sample.
    (iii) The concentration of the challenge agent inside the respirator 
shall be determined by one of the following methods:
    (A) Average peak penetration method means the method of determining 
test agent penetration into the respirator utilizing a strip chart 
recorder, integrator, or computer. The agent penetration is determined 
by an average of the peak heights on the graph or by computer 
integration, for each exercise except the grimace exercise. Integrators 
or computers that calculate the actual test agent penetration into the 
respirator for each exercise will also be considered to meet the 
requirements of the average peak penetration method.
    (B) Maximum peak penetration method means the method of determining 
test agent penetration in the respirator as determined by strip chart 
recordings of the test. The highest peak penetration for a given 
exercise

[[Page 431]]

is taken to be representative of average penetration into the respirator 
for that exercise.
    (C) Integration by calculation of the area under the individual peak 
for each exercise except the grimace exercise. This includes 
computerized integration.
    (D) The calculation of the overall fit factor using individual 
exercise fit factors involves first converting the exercise fit factors 
to penetration values, determining the average, and then converting that 
result back to a fit factor. This procedure is described in the 
following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08JA98.006

Where ff<INF>1</INF>, ff<INF>2</INF>, ff<INF>3</INF>, etc. are the fit 
          factors for exercises 1, 2, 3, etc.

    (9) The test subject shall not be permitted to wear a half mask or 
quarter facepiece respirator unless a minimum fit factor of 100 is 
obtained, or a full facepiece respirator unless a minimum fit factor of 
500 is obtained.
    (10) Filters used for quantitative fit testing shall be replaced 
whenever increased breathing resistance is encountered, or when the test 
agent has altered the integrity of the filter media.
    3. Ambient aerosol condensation nuclei counter (CNC) quantitative 
fit testing protocol.
    The ambient aerosol condensation nuclei counter (CNC) quantitative 
fit testing (Portacount <SUP>TM</SUP> ) protocol quantitatively fit 
tests respirators with the use of a probe. The probed respirator is only 
used for quantitative fit tests. A probed respirator has a special 
sampling device, installed on the respirator, that allows the probe to 
sample the air from inside the mask. A probed respirator is required for 
each make, style, model, and size that the employer uses and can be 
obtained from the respirator manufacturer or distributor. The CNC 
instrument manufacturer, TSI Inc., also provides probe attachments (TSI 
sampling adapters) that permit fit testing in an employee's own 
respirator. A minimum fit factor pass level of at least 100 is necessary 
for a half-mask respirator and a minimum fit factor pass level of at 
least 500 is required for a full facepiece negative pressure respirator. 
The entire screening and testing procedure shall be explained to the 
test subject prior to the conduct of the screening test.
    (a) Portacount Fit Test Requirements. (1) Check the respirator to 
make sure the sampling probe and line are properly attached to the 
facepiece and that the respirator is fitted with a particulate filter 
capable of preventing significant penetration by the ambient particles 
used for the fit test (e.g., NIOSH 42 CFR 84 series 100, series 99, or 
series 95 particulate filter) per manufacturer's instruction.
    (2) Instruct the person to be tested to don the respirator for five 
minutes before the fit test starts. This purges the ambient particles 
trapped inside the respirator and permits the wearer to make certain the 
respirator is comfortable. This individual shall already have been 
trained on how to wear the respirator properly.
    (3) Check the following conditions for the adequacy of the 
respirator fit: Chin properly placed; Adequate strap tension, not overly 
tightened; Fit across nose bridge; Respirator of proper size to span 
distance from nose to chin; Tendency of the respirator to slip; Self-
observation in a mirror to evaluate fit and respirator position.
    (4) Have the person wearing the respirator do a user seal check. If 
leakage is detected, determine the cause. If leakage is from a poorly 
fitting facepiece, try another size of the same model respirator, or 
another model of respirator.
    (5) Follow the manufacturer's instructions for operating the 
Portacount and proceed with the test.
    (6) The test subject shall be instructed to perform the exercises in 
section I. A. 14. of this appendix.
    (7) After the test exercises, the test subject shall be questioned 
by the test conductor regarding the comfort of the respirator upon 
completion of the protocol. If it has become unacceptable, another model 
of respirator shall be tried.
    (b) Portacount Test Instrument.
    (1) The Portacount will automatically stop and calculate the overall 
fit factor for the entire set of exercises. The overall fit factor is 
what counts. The Pass or Fail message will indicate whether or not the 
test was successful. If the test was a Pass, the fit test is over.
    (2) Since the pass or fail criterion of the Portacount is user 
programmable, the test operator shall ensure that the pass or fail 
criterion meet the requirements for minimum respirator performance in 
this Appendix.
    (3) A record of the test needs to be kept on file, assuming the fit 
test was successful. The record must contain the test subject's name; 
overall fit factor; make, model, style, and size of respirator used; and 
date tested.

[[Page 432]]

    4. Controlled negative pressure (CNP) quantitative fit testing 
protocol.
    The CNP protocol provides an alternative to aerosol fit test 
methods. The CNP fit test method technology is based on exhausting air 
from a temporarily sealed respirator facepiece to generate and then 
maintain a constant negative pressure inside the facepiece. The rate of 
air exhaust is controlled so that a constant negative pressure is 
maintained in the respirator during the fit test. The level of pressure 
is selected to replicate the mean inspiratory pressure that causes 
leakage into the respirator under normal use conditions. With pressure 
held constant, air flow out of the respirator is equal to air flow into 
the respirator. Therefore, measurement of the exhaust stream that is 
required to hold the pressure in the temporarily sealed respirator 
constant yields a direct measure of leakage air flow into the 
respirator. The CNP fit test method measures leak rates through the 
facepiece as a method for determining the facepiece fit for negative 
pressure respirators. The CNP instrument manufacturer Dynatech Nevada 
also provides attachments (sampling manifolds) that replace the filter 
cartridges to permit fit testing in an employee's own respirator. To 
perform the test, the test subject closes his or her mouth and holds 
his/her breath, after which an air pump removes air from the respirator 
facepiece at a pre-selected constant pressure. The facepiece fit is 
expressed as the leak rate through the facepiece, expressed as 
milliliters per minute. The quality and validity of the CNP fit tests 
are determined by the degree to which the in-mask pressure tracks the 
test pressure during the system measurement time of approximately five 
seconds. Instantaneous feedback in the form of a real-time pressure 
trace of the in-mask pressure is provided and used to determine test 
validity and quality. A minimum fit factor pass level of 100 is 
necessary for a half-mask respirator and a minimum fit factor of at 
least 500 is required for a full facepiece respirator. The entire 
screening and testing procedure shall be explained to the test subject 
prior to the conduct of the screening test.
    (a) CNP Fit Test Requirements.
    (1) The instrument shall have a non-adjustable test pressure of 15.0 
mm water pressure.
    (2) The CNP system defaults selected for test pressure shall be set 
at -15 mm of water (-0.58 inches of water) and the modeled inspiratory 
flow rate shall be 53.8 liters per minute for performing fit tests.

    Note:  CNP systems have built-in capability to conduct fit testing 
that is specific to unique work rate, mask, and gender situations that 
might apply in a specific workplace. Use of system default values, which 
were selected to represent respirator wear with medium cartridge 
resistance at a low-moderate work rate, will allow inter-test comparison 
of the respirator fit.)

    (3) The individual who conducts the CNP fit testing shall be 
thoroughly trained to perform the test.
    (4) The respirator filter or cartridge needs to be replaced with the 
CNP test manifold. The inhalation valve downstream from the manifold 
either needs to be temporarily removed or propped open.
    (5) The test subject shall be trained to hold his or her breath for 
at least 20 seconds.
    (6) The test subject shall don the test respirator without any 
assistance from the individual who conducts the CNP fit test.
    (7) The QNFT protocol shall be followed according to section I. C. 
1. of this appendix with an exception for the CNP test exercises.
    (b) CNP Test Exercises.
    (1) Normal breathing. In a normal standing position, without 
talking, the subject shall breathe normally for 1 minute. After the 
normal breathing exercise, the subject needs to hold head straight ahead 
and hold his or her breath for 10 seconds during the test measurement.
    (2) Deep breathing. In a normal standing position, the subject shall 
breathe slowly and deeply for 1 minute, being careful not to 
hyperventilate. After the deep breathing exercise, the subject shall 
hold his or her head straight ahead and hold his or her breath for 10 
seconds during test measurement.
    (3)Turning head side to side. Standing in place, the subject shall 
slowly turn his or her head from side to side between the extreme 
positions on each side for 1 minute. The head shall be held at each 
extreme momentarily so the subject can inhale at each side. After the 
turning head side to side exercise, the subject needs to hold head full 
left and hold his or her breath for 10 seconds during test measurement. 
Next, the subject needs to hold head full right and hold his or her 
breath for 10 seconds during test measurement.
    (4) Moving head up and down. Standing in place, the subject shall 
slowly move his or her head up and down for 1 minute. The subject shall 
be instructed to inhale in the up position (i.e., when looking toward 
the ceiling). After the moving head up and down exercise, the subject 
shall hold his or her head full up and hold his or her breath for 10 
seconds during test measurement. Next, the subject shall hold his or her 
head full down and hold his or her breath for 10 seconds during test 
measurement.
    (5) Talking. The subject shall talk out loud slowly and loud enough 
so as to be heard clearly by the test conductor. The subject can read 
from a prepared text such as the Rainbow Passage, count backward from 
100, or recite a memorized poem or song for 1 minute. After the talking 
exercise, the subject shall hold his or her head straight ahead and hold 
his or her breath for 10 seconds during the test measurement.

[[Page 433]]

    (6) Grimace. The test subject shall grimace by smiling or frowning 
for 15 seconds.
    (7) Bending Over. The test subject shall bend at the waist as if he 
or she were to touch his or her toes for 1 minute. Jogging in place 
shall be substituted for this exercise in those test environments such 
as shroud-type QNFT units that prohibit bending at the waist. After the 
bending over exercise, the subject shall hold his or her head straight 
ahead and hold his or her breath for 10 seconds during the test 
measurement.
    (8) Normal Breathing. The test subject shall remove and re-don the 
respirator within a one-minute period. Then, in a normal standing 
position, without talking, the subject shall breathe normally for 1 
minute. After the normal breathing exercise, the subject shall hold his 
or her head straight ahead and hold his or her breath for 10 seconds 
during the test measurement. After the test exercises, the test subject 
shall be questioned by the test conductor regarding the comfort of the 
respirator upon completion of the protocol. If it has become 
unacceptable, another model of a respirator shall be tried.
    (c) CNP Test Instrument.
    (1) The test instrument shall have an effective audio warning device 
when the test subject fails to hold his or her breath during the test. 
The test shall be terminated whenever the test subject failed to hold 
his or her breath. The test subject may be refitted and retested.
    (2) A record of the test shall be kept on file, assuming the fit 
test was successful. The record must contain the test subject's name; 
overall fit factor; make, model, style and size of respirator used; and 
date tested.

                     Part II. New Fit Test Protocols

    A. Any person may submit to OSHA an application for approval of a 
new fit test protocol. If the application meets the following criteria, 
OSHA will initiate a rulemaking proceeding under section 6(b)(7) of the 
OSH Act to determine whether to list the new protocol as an approved 
protocol in this Appendix A.
    B. The application must include a detailed description of the 
proposed new fit test protocol. This application must be supported by 
either:
    1. A test report prepared by an independent government research 
laboratory (e.g., Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Los Alamos 
National Laboratory, the National Institute for Standards and 
Technology) stating that the laboratory has tested the protocol and had 
found it to be accurate and reliable; or
    2. An article that has been published in a peer-reviewed industrial 
hygiene journal describing the protocol and explaining how test data 
support the protocol's accuracy and reliability.
    C. If OSHA determines that additional information is required before 
the Agency commences a rulemaking proceeding under this section, OSHA 
will so notify the applicant and afford the applicant the opportunity to 
submit the supplemental information. Initiation of a rulemaking 
proceeding will be deferred until OSHA has received and evaluated the 
supplemental information.

  Appendix B-1 to Sec. 1910.134: User Seal Check Procedures (Mandatory)

    The individual who uses a tight-fitting respirator is to perform a 
user seal check to ensure that an adequate seal is achieved each time 
the respirator is put on. Either the positive and negative pressure 
checks listed in this appendix, or the respirator manufacturer's 
recommended user seal check method shall be used. User seal checks are 
not substitutes for qualitative or quantitative fit tests.

          I. Facepiece Positive and/or Negative Pressure Checks

    A. Positive pressure check. Close off the exhalation valve and 
exhale gently into the facepiece. The face fit is considered 
satisfactory if a slight positive pressure can be built up inside the 
facepiece without any evidence of outward leakage of air at the seal. 
For most respirators this method of leak testing requires the wearer to 
first remove the exhalation valve cover before closing off the 
exhalation valve and then carefully replacing it after the test.
    B. Negative pressure check. Close off the inlet opening of the 
canister or cartridge(s) by covering with the palm of the hand(s) or by 
replacing the filter seal(s), inhale gently so that the facepiece 
collapses slightly, and hold the breath for ten seconds. The design of 
the inlet opening of some cartridges cannot be effectively covered with 
the palm of the hand. The test can be performed by covering the inlet 
opening of the cartridge with a thin latex or nitrile glove. If the 
facepiece remains in its slightly collapsed condition and no inward 
leakage of air is detected, the tightness of the respirator is 
considered satisfactory.

        II. Manufacturer's Recommended User Seal Check Procedures

    The respirator manufacturer's recommended procedures for performing 
a user seal check may be used instead of the positive and/or negative 
pressure check procedures provided that the employer demonstrates that 
the manufacturer's procedures are equally effective.

     Appendix B-2 to Sec. 1910.134: Respirator Cleaning Procedures 
                               (Mandatory)

    These procedures are provided for employer use when cleaning 
respirators. They

[[Page 434]]

are general in nature, and the employer as an alternative may use the 
cleaning recommendations provided by the manufacturer of the respirators 
used by their employees, provided such procedures are as effective as 
those listed here in Appendix B-2. Equivalent effectiveness simply means 
that the procedures used must accomplish the objectives set forth in 
Appendix B-2, i.e., must ensure that the respirator is properly cleaned 
and disinfected in a manner that prevents damage to the respirator and 
does not cause harm to the user.

                 I. Procedures for Cleaning Respirators

    A. Remove filters, cartridges, or canisters. Disassemble facepieces 
by removing speaking diaphragms, demand and pressure-demand valve 
assemblies, hoses, or any components recommended by the manufacturer. 
Discard or repair any defective parts.
    B. Wash components in warm (43 deg. C [110 deg. F] maximum) water 
with a mild detergent or with a cleaner recommended by the manufacturer. 
A stiff bristle (not wire) brush may be used to facilitate the removal 
of dirt.
    C. Rinse components thoroughly in clean, warm (43 deg. C [110 deg. 
F] maximum), preferably running water. Drain.
    D. When the cleaner used does not contain a disinfecting agent, 
respirator components should be immersed for two minutes in one of the 
following:
    1. Hypochlorite solution (50 ppm of chlorine) made by adding 
approximately one milliliter of laundry bleach to one liter of water at 
43 deg. C (110 deg. F); or,
    2. Aqueous solution of iodine (50 ppm iodine) made by adding 
approximately 0.8 milliliters of tincture of iodine (6-8 grams ammonium 
and/or potassium iodide/100 cc of 45% alcohol) to one liter of water at 
43 deg. C (110 deg. F); or,
    3. Other commercially available cleansers of equivalent disinfectant 
quality when used as directed, if their use is recommended or approved 
by the respirator manufacturer.
    E. Rinse components thoroughly in clean, warm (43 deg. C [110 deg. 
F] maximum), preferably running water. Drain. The importance of thorough 
rinsing cannot be overemphasized. Detergents or disinfectants that dry 
on facepieces may result in dermatitis. In addition, some disinfectants 
may cause deterioration of rubber or corrosion of metal parts if not 
completely removed.
    F. Components should be hand-dried with a clean lint-free cloth or 
air-dried.
    G. Reassemble facepiece, replacing filters, cartridges, and 
canisters where necessary.
    H. Test the respirator to ensure that all components work properly.

    Appendix C to Sec. 1910.134: OSHA Respirator Medical Evaluation 
                        Questionnaire (Mandatory)

    To the employer: Answers to questions in Section 1, and to question 
9 in Section 2 of Part A, do not require a medical examination.
    To the employee:

Can you read (circle one): Yes/No

    Your employer must allow you to answer this questionnaire during 
normal working hours, or at a time and place that is convenient to you. 
To maintain your confidentiality, your employer or supervisor must not 
look at or review your answers, and your employer must tell you how to 
deliver or send this questionnaire to the health care professional who 
will review it.
    Part A. Section 1. (Mandatory) The following information must be 
provided by every employee who has been selected to use any type of 
respirator (please print).

 1. Today's date:_______________________________________________________

 2. Your name:__________________________________________________________

 3. Your age (to nearest year):_________________________________________

4. Sex (circle one): Male/Female

5. Your height: __________ ft. __________ in.

6. Your weight: ____________ lbs.

 7. Your job title:_____________________________________________________
8. A phone number where you can be reached by the health care 
professional who reviews this questionnaire (include the Area Code): 
____________________

9. The best time to phone you at this number: ________________
10. Has your employer told you how to contact the health care 
professional who will review this questionnaire (circle one): Yes/No
11. Check the type of respirator you will use (you can check more than 
one category):

    a. ______ N, R, or P disposable respirator (filter-mask, non-
cartridge type only).
    b. ______ Other type (for example, half- or full-facepiece type, 
powered-air purifying, supplied-air, self-contained breathing 
apparatus).

12. Have you worn a respirator (circle one): Yes/No

 7  If ``yes,'' what type(s):___________________________________________

 _______________________________________________________________________

    Part A. Section 2. (Mandatory) Questions 1 through 9 below must be 
answered by every employee who has been selected to use any type of 
respirator (please circle ``yes'' or ``no'').

1. Do you currently smoke tobacco, or have you smoked tobacco in the 
          last month: Yes/No
2. Have you ever had any of the following conditions?
    a. Seizures (fits): Yes/No

[[Page 435]]

    b. Diabetes (sugar disease): Yes/No
    c. Allergic reactions that interfere with your breathing: Yes/No
    d. Claustrophobia (fear of closed-in places): Yes/No
    e. Trouble smelling odors: Yes/No
3. Have you ever had any of the following pulmonary or lung problems?
    a. Asbestosis: Yes/No
    b. Asthma: Yes/No
    c. Chronic bronchitis: Yes/No
    d. Emphysema: Yes/No
    e. Pneumonia: Yes/No
    f. Tuberculosis: Yes/No
    g. Silicosis: Yes/No
    h. Pneumothorax (collapsed lung): Yes/No
    i. Lung cancer: Yes/No
    j. Broken ribs: Yes/No
    k. Any chest injuries or surgeries: Yes/No
    l. Any other lung problem that you've been told about: Yes/No
4. Do you currently have any of the following symptoms of pulmonary or 
          lung illness?
    a. Shortness of breath: Yes/No
    b. Shortness of breath when walking fast on level ground or walking 
up a slight hill or incline: Yes/No
    c. Shortness of breath when walking with other people at an ordinary 
pace on level ground: Yes/No
    d. Have to stop for breath when walking at your own pace on level 
ground: Yes/No
    e. Shortness of breath when washing or dressing yourself: Yes/No
    f. Shortness of breath that interferes with your job: Yes/No
    g. Coughing that produces phlegm (thick sputum): Yes/No
    h. Coughing that wakes you early in the morning: Yes/No
    i. Coughing that occurs mostly when you are lying down: Yes/No
    j. Coughing up blood in the last month: Yes/No
    k. Wheezing: Yes/No
    l. Wheezing that interferes with your job: Yes/No
    m. Chest pain when you breathe deeply: Yes/No
    n. Any other symptoms that you think may be related to lung 
problems: Yes/No
5. Have you ever had any of the following cardiovascular or heart 
          problems?
    a. Heart attack: Yes/No
    b. Stroke: Yes/No
    c. Angina: Yes/No
    d. Heart failure: Yes/No
    e. Swelling in your legs or feet (not caused by walking): Yes/No
    f. Heart arrhythmia (heart beating irregularly): Yes/No
    g. High blood pressure: Yes/No
    h. Any other heart problem that you've been told about: Yes/No
6. Have you ever had any of the following cardiovascular or heart 
          symptoms?
    a. Frequent pain or tightness in your chest: Yes/No
    b. Pain or tightness in your chest during physical activity: Yes/No
    c. Pain or tightness in your chest that interferes with your job: 
Yes/No
    d. In the past two years, have you noticed your heart skipping or 
missing a beat: Yes/No
    e. Heartburn or indigestion that is not related to eating: Yes/No
    f. Any other symptoms that you think may be related to heart or 
circulation problems: Yes/No
7. Do you currently take medication for any of the following problems?
    a. Breathing or lung problems: Yes/No
    b. Heart trouble: Yes/No
    c. Blood pressure: Yes/No
    d. Seizures (fits): Yes/No
8. If you've used a respirator, have you ever had any of the following 
          problems? (If you've never used a respirator, check the 
          following space and go to question 9:)
    a. Eye irritation: Yes/No
    b. Skin allergies or rashes: Yes/No
    c. Anxiety: Yes/No
    d. General weakness or fatigue: Yes/No
    e. Any other problem that interferes with your use of a respirator: 
Yes/No
9. Would you like to talk to the health care professional who will 
          review this questionnaire about your answers to this 
          questionnaire: Yes/No

    Questions 10 to 15 below must be answered by every employee who has 
been selected to use either a full-facepiece respirator or a self-
contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). For employees who have been 
selected to use other types of respirators, answering these questions is 
voluntary.

10. Have you ever lost vision in either eye (temporarily or 
          permanently): Yes/No
11. Do you currently have any of the following vision problems?
    a. Wear contact lenses: Yes/No
    b. Wear glasses: Yes/No
    c. Color blind: Yes/No
    d. Any other eye or vision problem: Yes/No
12. Have you ever had an injury to your ears, including a broken ear 
          drum: Yes/No
13. Do you currently have any of the following hearing problems?
    a. Difficulty hearing: Yes/No
    b. Wear a hearing aid: Yes/No
    c. Any other hearing or ear problem: Yes/No
14. Have you ever had a back injury: Yes/No
15. Do you currently have any of the following musculoskeletal problems?
    a. Weakness in any of your arms, hands, legs, or feet: Yes/No
    b. Back pain: Yes/No
    c. Difficulty fully moving your arms and legs: Yes/No
    d. Pain or stiffness when you lean forward or backward at the waist: 
Yes/No

[[Page 436]]

    e. Difficulty fully moving your head up or down: Yes/No
    f. Difficulty fully moving your head side to side: Yes/No
    g. Difficulty bending at your knees: Yes/No
    h. Difficulty squatting to the ground: Yes/No
    i. Climbing a flight of stairs or a ladder carrying more than 25 
lbs: Yes/No
    j. Any other muscle or skeletal problem that interferes with using a 
respirator: Yes/No

    Part B  Any of the following questions, and other questions not 
listed, may be added to the questionnaire at the discretion of the 
health care professional who will review the questionnaire.

1. In your present job, are you working at high altitudes (over 5,000 
          feet) or in a place that has lower than normal amounts of 
          oxygen: Yes/No
    If ``yes,'' do you have feelings of dizziness, shortness of breath, 
pounding in your chest, or other symptoms when you're working under 
these conditions: Yes/No
2. At work or at home, have you ever been exposed to hazardous solvents, 
          hazardous airborne chemicals (e.g., gases, fumes, or dust), or 
          have you come into skin contact with hazardous chemicals: Yes/
          No

   If ``yes,'' name the chemicals if you know them:_____________________

3. Have you ever worked with any of the materials, or under any of the 
          conditions, listed below:
    a. Asbestos: Yes/No
    b. Silica (e.g., in sandblasting): Yes/No
    c. Tungsten/cobalt (e.g., grinding or welding this material): Yes/No
    d. Beryllium: Yes/No
    e. Aluminum: Yes/No
    f. Coal (for example, mining): Yes/No
    g. Iron: Yes/No
    h. Tin: Yes/No
    i. Dusty environments: Yes/No
    j. Any other hazardous exposures: Yes/No

   If ``yes,'' describe these exposures:________________________________

 _______________________________________________________________________

4. List any second jobs or side businesses you have:____________________

 _______________________________________________________________________

5. List your previous occupations:______________________________________

 _______________________________________________________________________

6. List your current and previous hobbies:______________________________

 _______________________________________________________________________

7. Have you been in the military services? Yes/No
    If ``yes,'' were you exposed to biological or chemical agents 
(either in training or combat): Yes/No
8. Have you ever worked on a HAZMAT team? Yes/No
9. Other than medications for breathing and lung problems, heart 
          trouble, blood pressure, and seizures mentioned earlier in 
          this questionnaire, are you taking any other medications for 
          any reason (including over-the-counter medications): Yes/No

   If ``yes,'' name the medications if you know them:___________________

10. Will you be using any of the following items with your 
          respirator(s)?
    a. HEPA Filters: Yes/No
    b. Canisters (for example, gas masks): Yes/No
    c. Cartridges: Yes/No
11. How often are you expected to use the respirator(s) (circle ``yes'' 
          or ``no'' for all answers that apply to you)?:
    a. Escape only (no rescue): Yes/No
    b. Emergency rescue only: Yes/No
    c. Less than 5 hours per week: Yes/No
    d. Less than 2 hours per day: Yes/No
    e. 2 to 4 hours per day: Yes/No
    f. Over 4 hours per day: Yes/No
12. During the period you are using the respirator(s), is your work 
          effort:
    a. Light (less than 200 kcal per hour): Yes/No

If ``yes,'' how long does this period last during the average 
          shift:____________hrs.____________mins.

    Examples of a light work effort are sitting while writing, typing, 
drafting, or performing light assembly work; or standing while operating 
a drill press (1-3 lbs.) or controlling machines.

    b. Moderate (200 to 350 kcal per hour): Yes/No

    If ``yes,'' how long does this period last during the average 
shift:____________hrs.____________mins.

    Examples of moderate work effort are sitting while nailing or 
filing; driving a truck or bus in urban traffic; standing while 
drilling, nailing, performing assembly work, or transferring a moderate 
load (about 35 lbs.) at trunk level; walking on a level surface about 2 
mph or down a 5-degree grade about 3 mph; or pushing a wheelbarrow with 
a heavy load (about 100 lbs.) on a level surface.

    c. Heavy (above 350 kcal per hour): Yes/No

    If ``yes,'' how long does this period last during the average 
shift:____________hrs.____________mins.

    Examples of heavy work are lifting a heavy load (about 50 lbs.) from 
the floor to your waist or shoulder; working on a loading dock; 
shoveling; standing while bricklaying or chipping castings; walking up 
an 8-degree grade about 2 mph; climbing stairs with a heavy load (about 
50 lbs.).

13. Will you be wearing protective clothing and/or equipment (other than 
          the respirator) when you're using your respirator: Yes/No

[[Page 437]]

   If ``yes,'' describe this protective clothing and/or equipment:______

 _______________________________________________________________________

14. Will you be working under hot conditions (temperature exceeding 
          77 deg. F): Yes/No
15. Will you be working under humid conditions: Yes/No
16. Describe the work you'll be doing while you're using your 
          respirator(s):

 _______________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________

17. Describe any special or hazardous conditions you might encounter 
          when you're using your respirator(s) (for example, confined 
          spaces, life-threatening gases):

 _______________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________

18. Provide the following information, if you know it, for each toxic 
          substance that you'll be exposed to when you're using your 
          respirator(s):

   Name of the first toxic substance:___________________________________

   Estimated maximum exposure level per shift:__________________________

   Duration of exposure per shift_______________________________________

   Name of the second toxic substance:__________________________________

   Estimated maximum exposure level per shift:__________________________

   Duration of exposure per shift:______________________________________

   Name of the third toxic substance:___________________________________

   Estimated maximum exposure level per shift:__________________________

   Duration of exposure per shift:______________________________________

    The name of any other toxic substances that you'll be exposed to 
while using your respirator:

 _______________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________

19. Describe any special responsibilities you'll have while using your 
          respirator(s) that may affect the safety and well-being of 
          others (for example, rescue, security):

 _______________________________________________________________________

Appendix D to Sec. 1910.134 (Mandatory) Information for Employees Using 
            Respirators When Not Required Under the Standard

    Respirators are an effective method of protection against designated 
hazards when properly selected and worn. Respirator use is encouraged, 
even when exposures are below the exposure limit, to provide an 
additional level of comfort and protection for workers. However, if a 
respirator is used improperly or not kept clean, the respirator itself 
can become a hazard to the worker. Sometimes, workers may wear 
respirators to avoid exposures to hazards, even if the amount of 
hazardous substance does not exceed the limits set by OSHA standards. If 
your employer provides respirators for your voluntary use, of if you 
provide your own respirator, you need to take certain precautions to be 
sure that the respirator itself does not present a hazard.
    You should do the following:
    1. Read and heed all instructions provided by the manufacturer on 
use, maintenance, cleaning and care, and warnings regarding the 
respirators limitations.
    2. Choose respirators certified for use to protect against the 
contaminant of concern. NIOSH, the National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
certifies respirators. A label or statement of certification should 
appear on the respirator or respirator packaging. It will tell you what 
the respirator is designed for and how much it will protect you.
    3. Do not wear your respirator into atmospheres containing 
contaminants for which your respirator is not designed to protect 
against. For example, a respirator designed to filter dust particles 
will not protect you against gases, vapors, or very small solid 
particles of fumes or smoke.
    4. Keep track of your respirator so that you do not mistakenly use 
someone else's respirator.
[63 FR 1270, Jan. 8, 1998; 63 FR 20098, 20099, Apr. 23, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.135  Head protection.

    (a) General requirements. (1) The employer shall ensure that each 
affected employee wears a protective helmet when working in areas where 
there is a potential for injury to the head from falling objects.
    (2) The employer shall ensure that a protective helmet designed to 
reduce electrical shock hazard is worn by each such affected employee 
when near exposed electrical conductors which could contact the head.
    (b) Criteria for protective helmets. (1) Protective helmets 
purchased after July 5, 1994 shall comply with ANSI Z89.1-1986, 
``American National Standard for Personnel Protection--Protective 
Headwear for Industrial Workers-Requirements,'' which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, or shall be demonstrated to be 
equally effective.
    (2) Protective helmets purchased before July 5, 1994 shall comply 
with the ANSI standard ``American National Standard Safety Requirements 
for Industrial Head Protection,'' ANSI Z89.1-1969, which is incorporated 
by reference

[[Page 438]]

as specified in Sec. 1910.6, or shall be demonstrated by the employer to 
be equally effective.
[59 FR 16362, Apr. 6, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 9238, Mar. 7, 1996; 61 
FR 19548, May 2, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.136  Foot protection.

    (a) General requirements. The employer shall ensure that each 
affected employee uses protective footwear when working in areas where 
there is a danger of foot injuries due to falling or rolling objects, or 
objects piercing the sole, and where such employee's feet are exposed to 
electrical hazards.
    (b) Criteria for protective footwear. (1) Protective footwear 
purchased after July 5, 1994 shall comply with ANSI Z41-1991, ``American 
National Standard for Personal Protection--Protective Footwear,'' which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, or shall be 
demonstrated by the employer to be equally effective.
    (2) Protective footwear purchased before July 5, 1994 shall comply 
with the ANSI standard ``USA Standard for Men's Safety-Toe Footwear,'' 
Z41.1-1967, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6, or shall be demonstrated by the employer to be equally 
effective.
[59 FR 16362, Apr. 6, 1994; 59 FR 33911, July 1, 1994, as amended at 61 
FR 9238, Mar. 7, 1996; 61 FR 19548, May 2, 1996; 61 FR 21228, May 9, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.137  Electrical protective equipment.

    (a) Design requirements. Insulating blankets, matting, covers, line 
hose, gloves, and sleeves made of rubber shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) Manufacture and marking. (i) Blankets, gloves, and sleeves shall 
be produced by a seamless process.
    (ii) Each item shall be clearly marked as follows:
    (A) Class 0 equipment shall be marked Class 0.
    (B) Class 1 equipment shall be marked Class 1.
    (C) Class 2 equipment shall be marked Class 2.
    (D) Class 3 equipment shall be marked Class 3.
    (E) Class 4 equipment shall be marked Class 4.
    (F) Non-ozone-resistant equipment other than matting shall be marked 
Type I.
    (G) Ozone-resistant equipment other than matting shall be marked 
Type II.
    (H) Other relevant markings, such as the manufacturer's 
identification and the size of the equipment, may also be provided.
    (iii) Markings shall be nonconducting and shall be applied in such a 
manner as not to impair the insulating qualities of the equipment.
    (iv) Markings on gloves shall be confined to the cuff portion of the 
glove.
    (2) Electrical requirements. (i) Equipment shall be capable of 
withstanding the a-c proof-test voltage specified in Table I-2 or the d-
c proof-test voltage specified in Table I-3.
    (A) The proof test shall reliably indicate that the equipment can 
withstand the voltage involved.
    (B) The test voltage shall be applied continuously for 3 minutes for 
equipment other than matting and shall be applied continuously for 1 
minute for matting.
    (C) Gloves shall also be capable of withstanding the a-c proof-test 
voltage specified in Table I-2 after a 16-hour water soak. (See the note 
following paragraph (a)(3)(ii)(B) of this section.)
    (ii) When the a-c proof test is used on gloves, the 60-hertz proof-
test current may not exceed the values specified in Table I-2 at any 
time during the test period.
    (A) If the a-c proof test is made at a frequency other than 60 
hertz, the permissible proof-test current shall be computed from the 
direct ratio of the frequencies.
    (B) For the test, gloves (right side out) shall be filled with tap 
water and immersed in water to a depth that is in accordance with Table 
I-4. Water shall be added to or removed from the glove, as necessary, so 
that the water level is the same inside and outside the glove.
    (C) After the 16-hour water soak specified in paragraph (a)(2)(i)(C) 
of this section, the 60-hertz proof-test current may exceed the values 
given in Table I-2 by not more than 2 milliamperes.
    (iii) Equipment that has been subjected to a minimum breakdown 
voltage test may not be used for electrical

[[Page 439]]

protection. (See the note following paragraph (a)(3)(ii)(B) of this 
section.)
    (iv) Material used for Type II insulating equipment shall be capable 
of withstanding an ozone test, with no visible effects. The ozone test 
shall reliably indicate that the material will resist ozone exposure in 
actual use. Any visible signs of ozone deterioration of the material, 
such as checking, cracking, breaks, or pitting, is evidence of failure 
to meet the requirements for ozone-resistant material. (See the note 
following paragraph (a)(3)(ii)(B) of this section.)
    (3) Workmanship and finish. (i) Equipment shall be free of harmful 
physical irregularities that can be detected by the tests or inspections 
required under this section.
    (ii) Surface irregularities that may be present on all rubber goods 
because of imperfections on forms or molds or because of inherent 
difficulties in the manufacturing process and that may appear as 
indentations, protuberances, or imbedded foreign material are acceptable 
under the following conditions:
    (A) The indentation or protuberance blends into a smooth slope when 
the material is stretched.
    (B) Foreign material remains in place when the insulating material 
is folded and stretches with the insulating material surrounding it.

    Note: Rubber insulating equipment meeting the following national 
consensus standards is deemed to be in compliance with paragraph (a) of 
this section:

    American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D 120-87, 
Specification for Rubber Insulating Gloves.
    ASTM D 178-93 (or D 178-88) Specification for Rubber Insulating 
Matting.
    ASTM D 1048-93 (or D 1048-88a) Specification for Rubber Insulating 
Blankets.
    ASTM D 1049-93 (or D 1049-88) Specification for Rubber Insulating 
Covers.
    ASTM D 1050-90, Specification for Rubber Insulating Line Hose.
    ASTM D 1051-87, Specification for Rubber Insulating Sleeves.
    These standards contain specifications for conducting the various 
tests required in paragraph (a) of this section. For example, the a-c 
and d-c proof tests, the breakdown test, the water soak procedure, and 
the ozone test mentioned in this paragraph are described in detail in 
the ASTM standards.

    (b) In-service care and use. (1) Electrical protective equipment 
shall be maintained in a safe, reliable condition.
    (2) The following specific requirements apply to insulating 
blankets, covers, line hose, gloves, and sleeves made of rubber:
    (i) Maximum use voltages shall conform to those listed in Table I-5.
    (ii) Insulating equipment shall be inspected for damage before each 
day's use and immediately following any incident that can reasonably be 
suspected of having caused damage. Insulating gloves shall be given an 
air test, along with the inspection.
    (iii) Insulating equipment with any of the following defects may not 
be used:
    (A) A hole, tear, puncture, or cut;
    (B) Ozone cutting or ozone checking (the cutting action produced by 
ozone on rubber under mechanical stress into a series of interlacing 
cracks);
    (C) An embedded foreign object;
    (D) Any of the following texture changes: swelling, softening, 
hardening, or becoming sticky or inelastic.
    (E) Any other defect that damages the insulating properties.
    (iv) Insulating equipment found to have other defects that might 
affect its insulating properties shall be removed from service and 
returned for testing under paragraphs (b)(2)(viii) and (b)(2)(ix) of 
this section.
    (v) Insulating equipment shall be cleaned as needed to remove 
foreign substances.
    (vi) Insulating equipment shall be stored in such a location and in 
such a manner as to protect it from light, temperature extremes, 
excessive humidity, ozone, and other injurious substances and 
conditions.
    (vii) Protector gloves shall be worn over insulating gloves, except 
as follows:
    (A) Protector gloves need not be used with Class 0 gloves, under 
limited-use conditions, where small equipment and parts manipulation 
necessitate unusually high finger dexterity.

    Note: Extra care is needed in the visual examination of the glove 
and in the avoidance of handling sharp objects.


[[Page 440]]


    (B) Any other class of glove may be used for similar work without 
protector gloves if the employer can demonstrate that the possibility of 
physical damage to the gloves is small and if the class of glove is one 
class higher than that required for the voltage involved. Insulating 
gloves that have been used without protector gloves may not be used at a 
higher voltage until they have been tested under the provisions of 
paragraphs (b)(2)(viii) and (b)(2)(ix) of this section.
    (viii) Electrical protective equipment shall be subjected to 
periodic electrical tests. Test voltages and the maximum intervals 
between tests shall be in accordance with Table I-5 and Table I-6.
    (ix) The test method used under paragraphs (b)(2)(viii) and 
(b)(2)(ix) of this section shall reliably indicate whether the 
insulating equipment can withstand the voltages involved.

    Note: Standard electrical test methods considered as meeting this 
requirement are given in the following national consensus standards:
    American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D 120-87, 
Specification for Rubber Insulating Gloves.
    ASTM D 1048-93, Specification for Rubber Insulating Blankets.
    ASTM D 1049-93, Specification for Rubber Insulating Covers.
    ASTM D 1050-90, Specification for Rubber Insulating Line Hose.
    ASTM D 1051-87, Specification for Rubber Insulating Sleeves.
    ASTM F 478-92, Specification for In-Service Care of Insulating Line 
Hose and Covers.
    ASTM F 479-93, Specification for In-Service Care of Insulating 
Blankets.
    ASTM F 496-93b Specification for In-Service Care of Insulating 
Gloves and Sleeves.

    (x) Insulating equipment failing to pass inspections or electrical 
tests may not be used by employees, except as follows:
    (A) Rubber insulating line hose may be used in shorter lengths with 
the defective portion cut off.
    (B) Rubber insulating blankets may be repaired using a compatible 
patch that results in physical and electrical properties equal to those 
of the blanket.
    (C) Rubber insulating blankets may be salvaged by severing the 
defective area from the undamaged portion of the blanket. The resulting 
undamaged area may not be smaller than 22 inches by 22 inches (560 mm by 
560 mm) for Class 1, 2, 3, and 4 blankets.
    (D) Rubber insulating gloves and sleeves with minor physical 
defects, such as small cuts, tears, or punctures, may be repaired by the 
application of a compatible patch. Also, rubber insulating gloves and 
sleeves with minor surface blemishes may be repaired with a compatible 
liquid compound. The patched area shall have electrical and physical 
properties equal to those of the surrounding material. Repairs to gloves 
are permitted only in the area between the wrist and the reinforced edge 
of the opening.
    (xi) Repaired insulating equipment shall be retested before it may 
be used by employees.
    (xii) The employer shall certify that equipment has been tested in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraphs (b)(2)(viii), (b)(2)(ix), 
and (b)(2)(xi) of this section. The certification shall identify the 
equipment that passed the test and the date it was tested.

    Note: Marking of equipment and entering the results of the tests and 
the dates of testing onto logs are two acceptable means of meeting this 
requirement.


                                     Table I-2.--A-C Proof-Test Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   Maximum proof-test current, mA (gloves only)
                                                      Proof-test -----------------------------------------------
                 Class of equipment                     voltage     267-mm
                                                         rms V     (10.5-in)  356-mm (14- 406-mm (16- 457-mm (18-
                                                                     glove     in) glove   in) glove   in) glove
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0...................................................       5,000           8          12          14          16
1...................................................      10,000  ..........          14          16          18
2...................................................      20,000  ..........          16          18          20
3...................................................      30,000  ..........          18          20          22
4...................................................      40,000  ..........  ..........          22          24

[[Page 441]]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                 Table I-3.--D-C Proof-Test Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Proof-test
                     Class of equipment                        voltage
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0..........................................................       20,000
1..........................................................       40,000
2..........................................................       50,000
3..........................................................       60,000
4..........................................................       70,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Note: The d-c voltages listed in this table are not appropriate for 
proof testing rubber insulating line hose or covers. For this equipment, 
d-c proof tests shall use a voltage high enough to indicate that the 
equipment can be safely used at the voltages listed in Table I-4. See 
ASTM D 1050-90 and ASTM D 1049-88 for further information on proof tests 
for rubber insulating line hose and covers.


                 Table I-4.--Glove Tests--Water Level <SUP>12
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           AC proof test   DC proof test
             Class of glove              -------------------------------
                                            mm.     in.     mm.     in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.......................................      38     1.5      38     1.5
1.......................................      38     1.5      51     2.0
2.......................................      64     2.5      76     3.0
3.......................................      89     3.5     102     4.0
4.......................................     127     5.0     153     6.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The water level is given as the clearance from the cuff of the glove
  to the water line, with a tolerance of <plus-minus>13 mm. (<plus-
  minus>0.5 in.).
\2\ If atmospheric conditions make the specified clearances impractical,
  the clearances may be increased by a maximum of 25 mm. (1 in.).


                          Table I-5.--Rubber Insulating Equipment Voltage Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Maximum use   Retest voltage  Retest voltage
                       Class of equipment                         voltage \1\ a-   \2\ a-c--rms    \2\ d-c--avg
                                                                      c--rms
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0...............................................................           1,000           5,000          20,000
1...............................................................           7,500          10,000          40,000
2...............................................................          17,000          20,000          50,000
3...............................................................          26,500          30,000          60,000
4...............................................................          36,000          40,000          70,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The maximum use voltage is the a-c voltage (rms) classification of the protective equipment that designates
  the maximum nominal design voltage of the energized system that may be safely worked. The nominal design
  voltage is equal to the phase-to-phase voltage on multiphase circuits. However, the phase-to-ground potential
  is considered to be the nominal design voltage:
(1) If there is no multiphase exposure in a system area and if the voltage exposure is limited to the phase-to-
  ground potential, or
(2) If the electrical equipment and devices are insulated or isolated or both so that the multiphase exposure on
  a grounded wye circuit is removed.
\2\ The proof-test voltage shall be applied continuously for at least 1 minute, but no more than 3 minutes.


         Table I-6.--Rubber Insulating Equipment Test Intervals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Type of equipment                       When to test
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rubber insulating line hose............  Upon indication that insulating
                                          value is suspect.
Rubber insulating covers...............  Upon indication that insulating
                                          value is suspect.
Rubber insulating blankets.............  Before first issue and every 12
                                          months thereafter.\1\
Rubber insulating gloves...............  Before first issue and every 6
                                          months thereafter.\1\
Rubber insulating sleeves..............  Before first issue and every 12
                                          months thereafter.\1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ If the insulating equipment has been electrically tested but not
  issued for service, it may not be placed into service unless it has
  been electrically tested within the previous 12 months.

[59 FR 4435, Jan. 31, 1994; 59 FR 33662, June 30, 1994]


<R05>
1910.138  Hand protection.

    (a) General requirements. Employers shall select and require 
employees to use appropriate hand protection when employees' hands are 
exposed to hazards such as those from skin absorption of harmful 
substances; severe cuts

[[Page 442]]

or lacerations; severe abrasions; punctures; chemical burns; thermal 
burns; and harmful temperature extremes.
    (b) Selection. Employers shall base the selection of the appropriate 
hand protection on an evaluation of the performance characteristics of 
the hand protection relative to the task(s) to be performed, conditions 
present, duration of use, and the hazards and potential hazards 
identified.
[59 FR 16362, Apr. 6, 1994; 59 FR 33911, July 1, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.139  Respiratory protection for M. tuberculosis.

    This section applies only to respiratory protection against M. 
tuberculosis and applies in lieu of Sec. 1910.134.
    (a) Permissible practice. (1) In the control of those occupational 
diseases caused by breathing air contaminated with harmful dusts, fogs, 
fumes, mists, gases, smokes, sprays, or vapors, the primary objective 
shall be to prevent atmospheric contamination. This shall be 
accomplished as far as feasible by accepted engineering control measures 
(for example, enclosure or confinement of the operation, general and 
local ventilation, and substitution of less toxic materials). When 
effective engineering controls are not feasible, or while they are being 
instituted, appropriate respirators shall be used pursuant to the 
following requirements.
    (2) Respirators shall be provided by the employer when such 
equipment is necessary to protect the health of the employee. The 
employer shall provide the respirators which are applicable and suitable 
for the purpose intended. The employer shall be responsible for the 
establishment and maintenance of a respiratory protective program which 
shall include the requirements outlined in paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (3) The employee shall use the provided respiratory protection in 
accordance with instructions and training received.
    (b) Requirements for a minimal acceptable program. (1) Written 
standard operating procedures governing the selection and use of 
respirators shall be established.
    (2) Respirators shall be selected on the basis of hazards to which 
the worker is exposed.
    (3) The user shall be instructed and trained in the proper use of 
respirators and their limitations.
    (4) [Reserved]
    (5) Respirators shall be regularly cleaned and disinfected. Those 
used by more than one worker shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected 
after each use.
    (6) Respirators shall be stored in a convenient, clean, and sanitary 
location.
    (7) Respirators used routinely shall be inspected during cleaning. 
Worn or deteriorated parts shall be replaced. Respirators for emergency 
use such as self-contained devices shall be thoroughly inspected at 
least once a month and after each use.
    (8) Appropriate surveillance of work area conditions and degree of 
em- ployee exposure or stress shall be maintained.
    (9) There shall be regular inspection and evaluation to determine 
the continued effectiveness of the program.
    (10) Persons should not be assigned to tasks requiring use of 
respirators unless it has been determined that they are physically able 
to perform the work and use the equipment. The local physician shall 
determine what health and physical conditions are pertinent. The 
respirator user's medical status should be reviewed periodically (for 
instance, annually).
    (11) Respirators shall be selected from among those jointly approved 
by the Mine Safety and Health Administration and the National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health under the provisions of 30 CFR part 
11.
    (c) Selection of respirators. Proper selection of respirators shall 
be made according to the guidance of American National Standard 
Practices for Respiratory Protection Z88.2-1969.
    (d) Air quality. (1) Compressed air, compressed oxygen, liquid air, 
and liquid oxygen used for respiration shall be of high purity. Oxygen 
shall meet the requirements of the United States Pharmacopoeia for 
medical or breathing oxygen. Breathing air shall meet at least the 
requirements of the specification for Grade D breathing air as described 
in Compressed Gas Association Commodity Specification G-7.1-1966. 
Compressed oxygen shall not be used in

[[Page 443]]

supplied-air respirators or in open circuit self-contained breathing 
apparatus that have previously used compressed air. Oxygen must never be 
used with air line respirators.
    (2) Breathing air may be supplied to respirators from cylinders or 
air compressors.
    (i) Cylinders shall be tested and maintained as prescribed in the 
Shipping Container Specification Regulations of the Department of 
Transportation (49 CFR part 178).
    (ii) The compressor for supplying air shall be equipped with 
necessary safety and standby devices. A breathing air-type compressor 
shall be used. Compressors shall be constructed and situated so as to 
avoid entry of contaminated air into the system and suitable in-line air 
purifying sorbent beds and filters installed to further assure breathing 
air quality. A receiver of sufficient capacity to enable the respirator 
wearer to escape from a contaminated atmosphere in event of compressor 
failure, and alarms to indicate compressor failure and overheating shall 
be installed in the system. If an oil-lubricated compressor is used, it 
shall have a high-temperature or carbon monoxide alarm, or both. If only 
a high-temperature alarm is used, the air from the compressor shall be 
frequently tested for carbon monoxide to insure that it meets the 
specifications in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
    (3) Air line couplings shall be incompatible with outlets for other 
gas systems to prevent inadvertent servicing of air line respirators 
with nonrespirable gases or oxygen.
    (4) Breathing gas containers shall be marked in accordance with 
American National Standard Method of Marking Portable Compressed Gas 
Containers to Identify the Material Contained, Z48.1-1954; Federal 
Specification BB-A-1034a, June 21, 1968, Air, Compressed for Breathing 
Purposes; or Interim Federal Specification GG-B-00675b, April 27, 1965, 
Breathing Apparatus, Self-Contained.
    (e) Use of respirators. (1) Standard procedures shall be developed 
for respirator use. These should include all information and guidance 
necessary for their proper selection, use, and care. Possible emergency 
and routine uses of respirators should be anticipated and planned for.
    (2) The correct respirator shall be specified for each job. The 
respirator type is usually specified in the work procedures by a 
qualified individual supervising the respiratory protective program. The 
individual issuing them shall be adequately instructed to insure that 
the correct respirator is issued.
    (3) Written procedures shall be prepared covering safe use of 
respirators in dangerous atmospheres that might be encountered in normal 
operations or in emergencies. Personnel shall be familiar with these 
procedures and the available respirators.
    (i) In areas where the wearer, with failure of the respirator, could 
be overcome by a toxic or oxygen-deficient atmosphere, at least one 
additional man shall be present. Communications (visual, voice, or 
signal line) shall be maintained between both or all individuals 
present. Planning shall be such that one individual will be unaffected 
by any likely incident and have the proper rescue equipment to be able 
to assist the other(s) in case of emergency.
    (ii) When self-contained breathing apparatus or hose masks with 
blowers are used in atmospheres immediately dangerous to life or health, 
standby men must be present with suitable rescue equipment.
    (iii) Persons using air line respirators in atmospheres immediately 
hazardous to life or health shall be equipped with safety harnesses and 
safety lines for lifting or removing persons from hazardous atmospheres 
or other and equivalent provisions for the rescue of persons from 
hazardous atmospheres shall be used. A standby man or men with suitable 
self-contained breathing apparatus shall be at the nearest fresh air 
base for emergency rescue.
    (4) Respiratory protection is no better than the respirator in use, 
even though it is worn conscientiously. Frequent random inspections 
shall be conducted by a qualified individual to assure that respirators 
are properly selected, used, cleaned, and maintained.
    (5) For safe use of any respirator, it is essential that the user be 
properly instructed in its selection, use, and maintenance. Both 
supervisors and

[[Page 444]]

workers shall be so instructed by competent persons. Training shall 
provide the men an opportunity to handle the respirator, have it fitted 
properly, test its face-piece-to-face seal, wear it in normal air for a 
long familiarity period, and, finally, to wear it in a test atmosphere.
    (i) Every respirator wearer shall receive fitting instructions 
including demonstrations and practice in how the respirator should be 
worn, how to adjust it, and how to determine if it fits properly. 
Respirators shall not be worn when conditions prevent a good face seal. 
Such conditions may be a growth of beard, sideburns, a skull cap that 
projects under the facepiece, or temple pieces on glasses. Also, the 
absence of one or both dentures can seriously affect the fit of a 
facepiece. The worker's diligence in observing these factors shall be 
evaluated by periodic check. To assure proper protection, the facepiece 
fit shall be checked by the wearer each time he puts on the respirator. 
This may be done by following the manufacturer's facepiece fitting 
instructions.
    (ii) Providing respiratory protection for individuals wearing 
corrective glasses is a serious problem. A proper seal cannot be 
established if the temple bars of eye glasses extend through the sealing 
edge of the full facepiece. As a temporary measure, glasses with short 
temple bars or without temple bars may be taped to the wearer's head. 
Wearing of contact lenses in contaminated atmospheres with a respirator 
shall not be allowed. Systems have been developed for mounting 
corrective lenses inside full facepieces. When a workman must wear 
corrective lenses as part of the facepiece, the facepiece and lenses 
shall be fitted by qualified individuals to provide good vision, 
comfort, and a gas-tight seal.
    (iii) If corrective spectacles or goggles are required, they shall 
be worn so as not to affect the fit of the facepiece. Proper selection 
of equipment will minimize or avoid this problem.
    (f) Maintenance and care of respirators. (1) A program for 
maintenance and care of respirators shall be adjusted to the type of 
plant, working conditions, and hazards involved, and shall include the 
following basic services:
    (i) Inspection for defects (including a leak check),
    (ii) Cleaning and disinfecting,
    (iii) Repair,
    (iv) Storage


Equipment shall be properly maintained to retain its original 
effectiveness.
    (2)(i) All respirators shall be inspected routinely before and after 
each use. A respirator that is not routinely used but is kept ready for 
emergency use shall be inspected after each use and at least monthly to 
assure that it is in satisfactory working condition.
    (ii) Self-contained breathing apparatus shall be inspected monthly. 
Air and oxygen cylinders shall be fully charged according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. It shall be determined that the regulator 
and warning devices function properly.
    (iii) Respirator inspection shall include a check of the tightness 
of connections and the condition of the facepiece, headbands, valves, 
connecting tube, and canisters. Rubber or elastomer parts shall be 
inspected for pliability and signs of deterioration. Stretching and 
manipulating rubber or elastomer parts with a massaging action will keep 
them pliable and flexible and prevent them from taking a set during 
storage.
    (iv) A record shall be kept of inspection dates and findings for 
respirators maintained for emergency use.
    (3) Routinely used respirators shall be collected, cleaned, and 
disinfected as frequently as necessary to insure that proper protection 
is provided for the wearer. Respirators maintained for emergency use 
shall be cleaned and disinfected after each use.
    (4) Replacement or repairs shall be done only by experienced persons 
with parts designed for the respirator. No attempt shall be made to 
replace components or to make adjustment or repairs beyond the 
manufacturer's recommendations. Reducing or admission valves or 
regulators shall be returned to the manufacturer or to a trained 
technician for adjustment or repair.
    (5)(i) After inspection, cleaning, and necessary repair, respirators 
shall be stored to protect against dust, sunlight, heat, extreme cold, 
excessive

[[Page 445]]

moisture, or damaging chemicals. Respirators placed at stations and work 
areas for emergency use should be quickly accessible at all times and 
should be stored in compartments built for the purpose. The compartments 
should be clearly marked. Routinely used respirators, such as dust 
respirators, may be placed in plastic bags. Respirators should not be 
stored in such places as lockers or tool boxes unless they are in 
carrying cases or cartons.
    (ii) Respirators should be packed or stored so that the facepiece 
and exhalation valve will rest in a normal position and function will 
not be impaired by the elastomer setting in an abnormal position.
    (iii) Instructions for proper storage of emergency respirators, such 
as gas masks and self-contained breathing apparatus, are found in ``use 
and care'' instructions usually mounted inside the carrying case lid.
    (g) Identification of gas mask canisters. (1) The primary means of 
identifying a gas mask canister shall be by means of properly worded 
labels. The secondary means of identifying a gas mask canister shall be 
by a color code.
    (2) All who issue or use gas masks falling within the scope of this 
section shall see that all gas mask canisters purchased or used by them 
are properly labeled and colored in accordance with these requirements 
before they are placed in service and that the labels and colors are 
properly maintained at all times thereafter until the canisters have 
completely served their purpose.
    (3) On each canister shall appear in bold letters the following:

    (i)--
 Canister for___________________________________________________________

                   (Name for atmospheric contaminant)

                                   or

                        Type N Gas Mask Canister

    (ii) In addition, essentially the following wording shall appear 
beneath the appropriate phrase on the canister label: ``For respiratory 
protection in atmospheres containing not more than -------------- 
percent by volume of ----------------------------.''
    (Name of atmospheric contaminant)

    (4) Canisters having a special high- efficiency filter for 
protection against radionuclides and other highly toxic particulates 
shall be labeled with a statement of the type and degree of protection 
afforded by the filter. The label shall be affixed to the neck end of, 
or to the gray stripe which is around and near the top of, the canister. 
The degree of protection shall be marked as the percent of penetration 
of the canister by a 0.3-micron-diameter dioctyl phthalate (DOP) smoke 
at a flow rate of 85 liters per minute.
    (5) Each canister shall have a label warning that gas masks should 
be used only in atmospheres containing sufficient oxygen to support life 
(at least 16 percent by volume), since gas mask canisters are only 
designed to neutralize or remove contaminants from the air.
    (6) Each gas mask canister shall be painted a distinctive color or 
combination of colors indicated in Table I-1. All colors used shall be 
such that they are clearly identifiable by the user and clearly 
distinguishable from one another. The color coating used shall offer a 
high degree of resistance to chipping, scaling, peeling, blistering, 
fading, and the effects of the ordinary atmospheres to which they may be 
exposed under normal conditions of storage and use. Appropriately 
colored pressure sensitive tape may be used for the stripes.

                                Table I-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Atmospheric contaminants to be
           protected against                   Colors assigned \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acid gases.............................  White.
Hydrocyanic acid gas...................  White with \1/2\-inch green
                                          stripe completely around the
                                          canister near the bottom.
Chlorine gas...........................  White with \1/2\-inch yellow
                                          stripe completely around the
                                          canister near the bottom.
Organic vapors.........................  Black.
Ammonia gas............................  Green.

[[Page 446]]

Acid gases and ammonia gas.............  Green with \1/2\-inch white
                                          stripe completely around the
                                          canister near the bottom.
Carbon monoxide........................  Blue.
Acid gases and organic vapors..........  Yellow.
Hydrocyanic acid gas and chloropicrin    Yellow with \1/2\-inch blue
 vapor.                                   stripe completely around the
                                          canister near the bottom.
Acid gases, organic vapors, and ammonia  Brown.
 gases.
Radioactive materials, excepting         Purple (Magenta).
 tritium and noble gases.
Particulates (dusts, fumes, mists,       Canister color for contaminant,
 fogs, or smokes) in combination with     as designated above, with \1/
 any of the above gases or vapors.        2\-inch gray stripe completely
                                          around the canister near the
                                          top.
All of the above atmospheric             Red with \1/2\-inch gray stripe
 contaminants.                            completely around the canister
                                          near the top.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Gray shall not be assigned as the main color for a canister designed
  to remove acids or vapors.
Note: Orange shall be used as a complete body, or stripe color to
  represent gases not included in this table. The user will need to
  refer to the canister label to determine the degree of protection the
  canister will afford.

[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49748, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 49 FR 18295, Apr. 30, 1984; 58 FR 35309, June 
30, 1993. Redesignated and amended at 63 FR 1270, Jan. 8, 1998]

Appendix A to Subpart I to Part 1910--References for Further Information 
                             (Non-mandatory)

    The documents in appendix A provide information which may be helpful 
in understanding and implementing the standards in Subpart I.
    1. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). ``Accidents Involving Eye 
Injuries.'' Report 597, Washington, D.C.: BLS, 1980.
    2. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). ``Accidents Involving Face 
Injuries.'' Report 604, Washington, D.C.: BLS, 1980.
    3. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). ``Accidents Involving Head 
Injuries.'' Report 605, Washington, D.C.: BLS, 1980.
    4. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). ``Accidents Involving Foot 
Injuries.'' Report 626, Washington, D.C.: BLS, 1981.
    5. National Safety Council. ``Accident Facts'', Annual edition, 
Chicago, IL: 1981.
    6. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). ``Occupational Injuries and 
Illnesses in the United States by Industry,'' Annual edition, 
Washington, D.C.: BLS.
    7. National Society to Prevent Blindness. ``A Guide for Controlling 
Eye Injuries in Industry,'' Chicago, Il: 1982.
[59 FR 16362, Apr. 6, 1994]

     Appendix B to Subpart I to Part 1910--Non-mandatory Compliance 
   Guidelines for Hazard Assessment and Personal Protective Equipment 
                                Selection

    This appendix is intended to provide compliance assistance for 
employers and employees in implementing requirements for a hazard 
assessment and the selection of personal protective equipment.
    1. Controlling hazards. PPE devices alone should not be relied on to 
provide protection against hazards, but should be used in conjunction 
with guards, engineering controls, and sound manufacturing practices.
    2. Assessment and selection. It is necessary to consider certain 
general guidelines for assessing the foot, head, eye and face, and hand 
hazard situations that exist in an occupational or educational operation 
or process, and to match the protective devices to the particular 
hazard. It should be the responsibility of the safety officer to 
exercise common sense and appropriate expertise to accomplish these 
tasks.
    3. Assessment guidelines. In order to assess the need for PPE the 
following steps should be taken:
    a. Survey. Conduct a walk-through survey of the areas in question. 
The purpose of the survey is to identify sources of hazards to workers 
and co-workers. Consideration should be given to the basic hazard 
categories:
    (a) Impact
    (b) Penetration
    (c) Compression (roll-over)
    (d) Chemical
    (e) Heat
    (f) Harmful dust
    (g) Light (optical) radiation
    b. Sources. During the walk-through survey the safety officer should 
observe: (a) sources of motion; i.e., machinery or processes where any 
movement of tools, machine elements or particles could exist, or 
movement of personnel that could result in collision with stationary 
objects; (b) sources of high temperatures that could result in burns, 
eye injury or ignition of protective equipment, etc.; (c) types of 
chemical exposures; (d) sources of harmful dust; (e) sources of light 
radiation, i.e., welding, brazing, cutting, furnaces, heat treating, 
high intensity lights, etc.; (f)

[[Page 447]]

sources of falling objects or potential for dropping objects; (g) 
sources of sharp objects which might pierce the feet or cut the hands; 
(h) sources of rolling or pinching objects which could crush the feet; 
(i) layout of workplace and location of co-workers; and (j) any 
electrical hazards. In addition, injury/accident data should be reviewed 
to help identify problem areas.
    c. Organize data. Following the walk-through survey, it is necessary 
to organize the data and information for use in the assessment of 
hazards. The objective is to prepare for an analysis of the hazards in 
the environment to enable proper selection of protective equipment.
    d. Analyze data. Having gathered and organized data on a workplace, 
an estimate of the potential for injuries should be made. Each of the 
basic hazards (paragraph 3.a.) should be reviewed and a determination 
made as to the type, level of risk, and seriousness of potential injury 
from each of the hazards found in the area. The possibility of exposure 
to several hazards simultaneously should be considered.
    4. Selection guidelines. After completion of the procedures in 
paragraph 3, the general procedure for selection of protective equipment 
is to: a) Become familiar with the potential hazards and the type of 
protective equipment that is available, and what it can do; i.e., splash 
protection, impact protection, etc.; b) compare the hazards associated 
with the environment; i.e., impact velocities, masses, projectile shape, 
radiation intensities, with the capabilities of the available protective 
equipment; c) select the protective equipment which ensures a level of 
protection greater than the minimum required to protect employees from 
the hazards; and d) fit the user with the protective device and give 
instructions on care and use of the PPE. It is very important that end 
users be made aware of all warning labels for and limitations of their 
PPE.
    5. Fitting the device. Careful consideration must be given to 
comfort and fit. PPE that fits poorly will not afford the necessary 
protection. Continued wearing of the device is more likely if it fits 
the wearer comfortably. Protective devices are generally available in a 
variety of sizes. Care should be taken to ensure that the right size is 
selected.
    6. Devices with adjustable features. Adjustments should be made on 
an individual basis for a comfortable fit that will maintain the 
protective device in the proper position. Particular care should be 
taken in fitting devices for eye protection against dust and chemical 
splash to ensure that the devices are sealed to the face. In addition, 
proper fitting of helmets is important to ensure that it will not fall 
off during work operations. In some cases a chin strap may be necessary 
to keep the helmet on an employee's head. (Chin straps should break at a 
reasonably low force, however, so as to prevent a strangulation hazard). 
Where manufacturer's instructions are available, they should be followed 
carefully.
    7. Reassessment of hazards. It is the responsibility of the safety 
officer to reassess the workplace hazard situation as necessary, by 
identifying and evaluating new equipment and processes, reviewing 
accident records, and reevaluating the suitability of previously 
selected PPE.
    8. Selection chart guidelines for eye and face protection. Some 
occupations (not a complete list) for which eye protection should be 
routinely considered are: carpenters, electricians, machinists, 
mechanics and repairers, millwrights, plumbers and pipe fitters, sheet 
metal workers and tinsmiths, assemblers, sanders, grinding machine 
operators, lathe and milling machine operators, sawyers, welders, 
laborers, chemical process operators and handlers, and timber cutting 
and logging workers. The following chart provides general guidance for 
the proper selection of eye and face protection to protect against 
hazards associated with the listed hazard ``source'' operations.

                 Eye and Face Protection Selection Chart
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Assessment of
             Source                    Hazard            Protection
------------------------------------------------------------------------
IMPACT--Chipping, grinding       Flying fragments,  Spectacles with side
 machining, masonry work,         objects, large     protection,
 woodworking, sawing, drilling,   chips, particles   goggles, face
 chiseling, powered fastening,    sand, dirt, etc.   shields. See notes
 riveting, and sanding.                              (1), (3), (5), (6),
                                                     (10). For severe
                                                     exposure, use
                                                     faceshield.
HEAT--Furnace operations,        Hot sparks.......  Faceshields,
 pouring, casting, hot dipping,                      goggles, spectacles
 and welding.                                        with side
                                                     protection. For
                                                     severe exposure use
                                                     faceshield. See
                                                     notes (1), (2),
                                                     (3).
                                 Splash from        Faceshields worn
                                  molten metals.     over goggles. See
                                                     notes (1), (2),
                                                     (3).
                                 High temperature   Screen face shields,
                                  exposure.          reflective face
                                                     shields. See notes
                                                     (1), (2), (3).
CHEMICALS--Acid and chemicals    Splash...........  Goggles, eyecup and
 handling, degreasing plating.                       cover types. For
                                                     severe exposure,
                                                     use face shield.
                                                     See notes (3),
                                                     (11).

[[Page 448]]

                                 Irritating mists.  Special-purpose
                                                     goggles.
DUST-- Woodworking, buffing,     Nuisance dust....  Goggles, eyecup and
 general dusty conditions.                           cover types. See
                                                     note (8).
LIGHT and/or RADIATION--.......
  Welding: Electric arc          Optical radiation  Welding helmets or
                                                     welding shields.
                                                     Typical shades: 10-
                                                     14. See notes (9),
                                                     (12)
  Welding: Gas                   Optical radiation  Welding goggles or
                                                     welding face
                                                     shield. Typical
                                                     shades: gas welding
                                                     4-8, cutting 3-6,
                                                     brazing 3-4. See
                                                     note (9)
  Cutting, Torch brazing, Torch  Optical radiation  Spectacles or
   soldering                                         welding face-
                                                     shield. Typical
                                                     shades, 1.5-3. See
                                                     notes (3), (9)
  Glare                          Poor vision......  Spectacles with
                                                     shaded or special-
                                                     purpose lenses, as
                                                     suitable. See notes
                                                     (9), (10).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes to Eye and Face Protection Selection Chart:
(1) Care should be taken to recognize the possibility of multiple and
  simultaneous exposure to a variety of hazards. Adequate protection
  against the highest level of each of the hazards should be provided.
  Protective devices do not provide unlimited protection.
(2) Operations involving heat may also involve light radiation. As
  required by the standard, protection from both hazards must be
  provided.
(3) Faceshields should only be worn over primary eye protection
  (spectacles or goggles).
(4) As required by the standard, filter lenses must meet the
  requirements for shade designations in Sec. 1910.133(a)(5). Tinted and
  shaded lenses are not filter lenses unless they are marked or
  identified as such.
(5) As required by the standard, persons whose vision requires the use
  of prescription (Rx) lenses must wear either protective devices fitted
  with prescription (Rx) lenses or protective devices designed to be
  worn over regular prescription (Rx) eyewear.
(6) Wearers of contact lenses must also wear appropriate eye and face
  protection devices in a hazardous environment. It should be recognized
  that dusty and/or chemical environments may represent an additional
  hazard to contact lens wearers.
(7) Caution should be exercised in the use of metal frame protective
  devices in electrical hazard areas.
(8) Atmospheric conditions and the restricted ventilation of the
  protector can cause lenses to fog. Frequent cleansing may be
  necessary.
(9) Welding helmets or faceshields should be used only over primary eye
  protection (spectacles or goggles).
(10) Non-sideshield spectacles are available for frontal protection
  only, but are not acceptable eye protection for the sources and
  operations listed for ``impact.''
(11) Ventilation should be adequate, but well protected from splash
  entry. Eye and face protection should be designed and used so that it
  provides both adequate ventilation and protects the wearer from splash
  entry.
(12) Protection from light radiation is directly related to filter lens
  density. See note (4) . Select the darkest shade that allows task
  performance.

    9. Selection guidelines for head protection. All head protection 
(helmets) is designed to provide protection from impact and penetration 
hazards caused by falling objects. Head protection is also available 
which provides protection from electric shock and burn. When selecting 
head protection, knowledge of potential electrical hazards is important. 
Class A helmets, in addition to impact and penetration resistance, 
provide electrical protection from low-voltage conductors (they are 
proof tested to 2,200 volts). Class B helmets, in addition to impact and 
penetration resistance, provide electrical protection from high-voltage 
conductors (they are proof tested to 20,000 volts). Class C helmets 
provide impact and penetration resistance (they are usually made of 
aluminum which conducts electricity), and should not be used around 
electrical hazards.
    Where falling object hazards are present, helmets must be worn. Some 
examples include: working below other workers who are using tools and 
materials which could fall; working around or under conveyor belts which 
are carrying parts or materials; working below machinery or processes 
which might cause material or objects to fall; and working on exposed 
energized conductors.
    Some examples of occupations for which head protection should be 
routinely considered are: carpenters, electricians, linemen, mechanics 
and repairers, plumbers and pipe fitters, assemblers, packers, wrappers, 
sawyers, welders, laborers, freight handlers, timber cutting and 
logging, stock handlers, and warehouse laborers.
    10. Selection guidelines for foot protection. Safety shoes and boots 
which meet the ANSI Z41-1991 Standard provide both impact and 
compression protection. Where necessary, safety shoes can be obtained 
which provide puncture protection. In some work situations, metatarsal 
protection should be provided, and in other special situations 
electrical conductive or insulating safety shoes would be appropriate.
    Safety shoes or boots with impact protection would be required for 
carrying or handling materials such as packages, objects, parts or heavy 
tools, which could be dropped; and, for other activities where objects 
might fall onto the feet. Safety shoes or boots with compression 
protection would be required for work activities involving skid trucks 
(manual material handling carts) around bulk rolls (such as paper rolls) 
and around heavy pipes, all of which could potentially roll over an 
employee's feet. Safety shoes or boots

[[Page 449]]

with puncture protection would be required where sharp objects such as 
nails, wire, tacks, screws, large staples, scrap metal etc., could be 
stepped on by employees causing a foot injury.
    Some occupations (not a complete list) for which foot protection 
should be routinely considered are: shipping and receiving clerks, stock 
clerks, carpenters, electricians, machinists, mechanics and repairers, 
plumbers and pipe fitters, structural metal workers, assemblers, drywall 
installers and lathers, packers, wrappers, craters, punch and stamping 
press operators, sawyers, welders, laborers, freight handlers, gardeners 
and grounds-keepers, timber cutting and logging workers, stock handlers 
and warehouse laborers.
    11. Selection guidelines for hand protection. Gloves are often 
relied upon to prevent cuts, abrasions, burns, and skin contact with 
chemicals that are capable of causing local or systemic effects 
following dermal exposure. OSHA is unaware of any gloves that provide 
protection against all potential hand hazards, and commonly available 
glove materials provide only limited protection against many chemicals. 
Therefore, it is important to select the most appropriate glove for a 
particular application and to determine how long it can be worn, and 
whether it can be reused.
    It is also important to know the performance characteristics of 
gloves relative to the specific hazard anticipated; e.g., chemical 
hazards, cut hazards, flame hazards, etc. These performance 
characteristics should be assessed by using standard test procedures. 
Before purchasing gloves, the employer should request documentation from 
the manufacturer that the gloves meet the appropriate test standard(s) 
for the hazard(s) anticipated.
    Other factors to be considered for glove selection in general 
include:
    (A) As long as the performance characteristics are acceptable, in 
certain circumstances, it may be more cost effective to regularly change 
cheaper gloves than to reuse more expensive types; and,
    (B) The work activities of the employee should be studied to 
determine the degree of dexterity required, the duration, frequency, and 
degree of exposure of the hazard, and the physical stresses that will be 
applied.
    With respect to selection of gloves for protection against chemical 
hazards:
    (A) The toxic properties of the chemical(s) must be determined; in 
particular, the ability of the chemical to cause local effects on the 
skin and /or to pass through the skin and cause systemic effects;
    (B) Generally, any ``chemical resistant'' glove can be used for dry 
powders;
    (C) For mixtures and formulated products (unless specific test data 
are available), a glove should be selected on the basis of the chemical 
component with the shortest breakthrough time, since it is possible for 
solvents to carry active ingredients through polymeric materials; and,
    (D) Employees must be able to remove the gloves in such a manner as 
to prevent skin contamination.
    12. Cleaning and maintenance. It is important that all PPE be kept 
clean and properly maintained. Cleaning is particularly important for 
eye and face protection where dirty or fogged lenses could impair 
vision.
    For the purposes of compliance with Sec. 1910.132 (a) and (b), PPE 
should be inspected, cleaned, and maintained at regular intervals so 
that the PPE provides the requisite protection.
    It is also important to ensure that contaminated PPE which cannot be 
decontaminated is disposed of in a manner that protects employees from 
exposure to hazards.
[59 FR 16362, Apr. 6, 1994]


<R04>
                Subpart J--General Environmental Controls

    Authority:  Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 6-96 
(62 FR 111), as applicable, 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.141  Sanitation.

    (a) General--(1) Scope. This section applies to permanent places of 
employment.
    (2) Definitions applicable to this section. (i) Lavatory means a 
basin or similar vessel used exclusively for washing of the hands, arms, 
faces, and head.
    (ii) Nonwater carriage toilet facility, means a toilet facility not 
connected to a sewer.
    (iii) Number of employees means, unless otherwise specified, the 
maximum number of employees present at any one time on a regular shift.
    (iv) Personal service room, means a room used for activities not 
directly connected with the production or service function performed by 
the establishment. Such activities include, but are not limited to, 
first-aid, medical services, dressing, showering, toilet use, washing, 
and eating.
    (v) Potable water means water which meets the quality standards 
prescribed in the U.S. Public Health Service Drinking Water Standards, 
published

[[Page 450]]

in 42 CFR part 72, or water which is approved for drinking purposes by 
the State or local authority having jurisdiction.
    (vi) Toilet facility, means a fixture maintained within a toilet 
room for the purpose of defecation or urination, or both.
    (vii) Toilet room, means a room maintained within or on the premises 
of any place of employment, containing toilet facilities for use by 
employees.
    (viii) Toxic material means a material in concentration or amount 
which exceeds the applicable limit established by a standard, such as 
Secs. 1910.1000 and 1910.1001 or, in the absence of an applicable 
standard, which is of such toxicity so as to constitute a recognized 
hazard that is causing or is likely to cause death or serious physical 
harm.
    (ix) Urinal means a toilet facility maintained within a toilet room 
for the sole purpose of urination.
    (x) Water closet means a toilet facility maintained within a toilet 
room for the purpose of both defecation and urination and which is 
flushed with water.
    (xi) Wet process means any process or operation in a workroom which 
normally results in surfaces upon which employees may walk or stand 
becoming wet.
    (3) Housekeeping. (i) All places of employment shall be kept clean 
to the extent that the nature of the work allows.
    (ii) The floor of every workroom shall be maintained, so far as 
practicable, in a dry condition. Where wet processes are used, drainage 
shall be maintained and false floors, platforms, mats, or other dry 
standing places shall be provided, where practicable, or appropriate 
waterproof footgear shall be provided.
    (iii) To facilitate cleaning, every floor, working place, and 
passageway shall be kept free from protruding nails, splinters, loose 
boards, and unnecessary holes and openings.
    (4) Waste disposal. (i) Any receptacle used for putrescible solid or 
liquid waste or refuse shall be so constructed that it does not leak and 
may be thoroughly cleaned and maintained in a sanitary condition. Such a 
receptacle shall be equipped with a solid tight-fitting cover, unless it 
can be maintained in a sanitary condition without a cover. This 
requirement does not prohibit the use of receptacles which are designed 
to permit the maintenance of a sanitary condition without regard to the 
aforementioned requirements.
    (ii) All sweepings, solid or liquid wastes, refuse, and garbage 
shall be removed in such a manner as to avoid creating a menace to 
health and as often as necessary or appropriate to maintain the place of 
employment in a sanitary condition.
    (5) Vermin control. Every enclosed workplace shall be so 
constructed, equipped, and maintained, so far as reasonably practicable, 
as to prevent the entrance or harborage of rodents, insects, and other 
vermin. A continuing and effective extermination program shall be 
instituted where their presence is detected.
    (b) Water supply--(1) Potable water. (i) Potable water shall be 
provided in all places of employment, for drinking, washing of the 
person, cooking, washing of foods, washing of cooking or eating 
utensils, washing of food preparation or processing premises, and 
personal service rooms.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Portable drinking water dispensers shall be designed, 
constructed, and serviced so that sanitary conditions are maintained, 
shall be capable of being closed, and shall be equipped with a tap.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Open containers such as barrels, pails, or tanks for drinking 
water from which the water must be dipped or poured, whether or not they 
are fitted with a cover, are prohibited.
    (vi) A common drinking cup and other common utensils are prohibited.
    (2) Nonpotable water. (i) Outlets for nonpotable water, such as 
water for industrial or firefighting purposes, shall be posted or 
otherwise marked in a manner that will indicate clearly that the water 
is unsafe and is not to be used for drinking, washing of the person, 
cooking, washing of food, washing of cooking or eating utensils, washing 
of food preparation or processing premises, or personal service rooms, 
or for washing clothes.
    (ii) Construction of nonpotable water systems or systems carrying 
any other

[[Page 451]]

nonpotable substance shall be such as to prevent backflow or 
backsiphonage into a potable water system.
    (iii) Nonpotable water shall not be used for washing any portion of 
the person, cooking or eating utensils, or clothing. Nonpotable water 
may be used for cleaning work premises, other than food processing and 
preparation premises and personal service rooms: Provided, That this 
nonpotable water does not contain concentrations of chemicals, fecal 
coliform, or other substances which could create insanitary conditions 
or be harmful to employees.
    (c) Toilet facilities--(1) General. (i) Except as otherwise 
indicated in this paragraph (c)(1)(i), toilet facilities, in toilet 
rooms separate for each sex, shall be provided in all places of 
employment in accordance with table J-1 of this section. The number of 
facilities to be provided for each sex shall be based on the number of 
employees of that sex for whom the facilities are furnished. Where 
toilet rooms will be occupied by no more than one person at a time, can 
be locked from the inside, and contain at least one water closet, 
separate toilet rooms for each sex need not be provided. Where such 
single-occupancy rooms have more than one toilet facility, only one such 
facility in each toilet room shall be counted for the purpose of table 
J-1.

                                Table J-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Minimum
                                                              number of
                    Number of employees                         water
                                                             closets \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 to 15....................................................            1
16 to 35...................................................            2
36 to 55...................................................            3
56 to 80...................................................            4
81 to 110..................................................           5.
111 to 150.................................................            6
Over 150...................................................        (\2\)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Where toilet facilities will not be used by women, urinals may be
  provided instead of water closets, except that the number of water
  closets in such cases shall not be reduced to less than \2/3\ of the
  minimum specified.
\2\ 1 additional fixture for each additional 40 employees.

    (ii) The requirements of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section do not 
apply to mobile crews or to normally unattended work locations so long 
as employees working at these locations have transportation immediately 
available to nearby toilet facilities which meet the other requirements 
of this subparagraph.
    (iii) The sewage disposal method shall not endanger the health of 
employees.
    (2) Construction of toilet rooms. (i) Each water closet shall occupy 
a separate compartment with a door and walls or partitions between 
fixtures sufficiently high to assure privacy.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (d) Washing facilities--(1) General. Washing facilities shall be 
maintained in a sanitary condition.
    (2) Lavatories. (i) Lavatories shall be made available in all places 
of employment. The requirements of this subdivision do not apply to 
mobile crews or to normally unattended work locations if employees 
working at these locations have transportation readily available to 
nearby washing facilities which meet the other requirements of this 
paragraph.
    (ii) Each lavatory shall be provided with hot and cold running 
water, or tepid running water.
    (iii) Hand soap or similar cleansing agents shall be provided.
    (iv) Individual hand towels or sections thereof, of cloth or paper, 
warm air blowers or clean individual sections of continuous cloth 
toweling, convenient to the lavatories, shall be provided.
    (3) Showers. (i) Whenever showers are required by a particular 
standard, the showers shall be provided in accordance with paragraphs 
(d)(3) (ii) through (v) of this section.
    (ii) One shower shall be provided for each 10 employees of each sex, 
or numerical fraction thereof, who are required to shower during the 
same shift.
    (iii) Body soap or other appropriate cleansing agents convenient to 
the showers shall be provided as specified in paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of 
this section.
    (iv) Showers shall be provided with hot and cold water feeding a 
common discharge line.
    (v) Employees who use showers shall be provided with individual 
clean towels.
    (e) Change rooms. Whenever employees are required by a particular 
standard to wear protective clothing because of the possibility of 
contamination with toxic materials, change rooms

[[Page 452]]

equipped with storage facilities for street clothes and separate storage 
facilities for the protective clothing shall be provided.
    (f) Clothes drying facilities. Where working clothes are provided by 
the employer and become wet or are washed between shifts, provision 
shall be made to insure that such clothing is dry before reuse.
    (g) Consumption of food and beverages on the premises--(1) 
Application. This paragraph shall apply only where employees are 
permitted to consume food or beverages, or both, on the premises.
    (2) Eating and drinking areas. No employee shall be allowed to 
consume food or beverages in a toilet room nor in any area exposed to a 
toxic material.
    (3) Waste disposal containers. Receptacles constructed of smooth, 
corrosion resistant, easily cleanable, or disposable materials, shall be 
provided and used for the disposal of waste food. The number, size, and 
location of such receptacles shall encourage their use and not result in 
overfilling. They shall be emptied not less frequently than once each 
working day, unless unused, and shall be maintained in a clean and 
sanitary condition. Receptacles shall be provided with a solid tight-
fitting cover unless sanitary conditions can be maintained without use 
of a cover.
    (4) Sanitary storage. No food or beverages shall be stored in toilet 
rooms or in an area exposed to a toxic material.
    (h) Food handling. All employee food service facilities and 
operations shall be carried out in accordance with sound hygienic 
principles. In all places of employment where all or part of the food 
service is provided, the food dispensed shall be wholesome, free from 
spoilage, and shall be processed, prepared, handled, and stored in such 
a manner as to be protected against contamination.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 18446, April 28, 1975; 
40 FR 23073, May 28, 1975; 43 FR 49748, Oct. 24, 1978]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.141 
was amended by removing paragraph (a)(2)(i) and by removing the 
paragraph designations for paragraphs (a)(2)(ii) through (a)(2)(xi), 
effective Aug. 17, 1998.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.142  Temporary labor camps.

    (a) Site. (1) All sites used for camps shall be adequately drained. 
They shall not be subject to periodic flooding, nor located within 200 
feet of swamps, pools, sink holes, or other surface collections of water 
unless such quiescent water surfaces can be subjected to mosquito 
control measures. The camp shall be located so the drainage from and 
through the camp will not endanger any domestic or public water supply. 
All sites shall be graded, ditched, and rendered free from depressions 
in which water may become a nuisance.
    (2) All sites shall be adequate in size to prevent overcrowding of 
necessary structures. The principal camp area in which food is prepared 
and served and where sleeping quarters are located shall be at least 500 
feet from any area in which livestock is kept.
    (3) The grounds and open areas surrounding the shelters shall be 
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from rubbish, debris, 
waste paper, garbage, or other refuse.
    (4) Whenever the camp is closed for the season or permanently, all 
garbage, manure, and other refuse shall be collected and so disposed of 
as to prevent nuisance. All abandoned privy pits shall be filled with 
earth and the grounds and buildings left in a clean and sanitary 
condition. If privy buildings remain, they shall be locked or otherwise 
secured to prevent entrance.
    (b) Shelter. (1) Every shelter in the camp shall be constructed in a 
manner which will provide protection against the elements.
    (2) Each room used for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 50 
square feet of floor space for each occupant. At least a 7-foot ceiling 
shall be provided.
    (3) Beds, cots, or bunks, and suitable storage facilities such as 
wall lockers for clothing and personal articles shall be provided in 
every room used for sleeping purposes. Such beds or similar facilities 
shall be spaced not closer than 36 inches both laterally and end to end, 
and shall be elevated at least 12 inches from the floor. If double-deck 
bunks are used, they shall be spaced not less than 48 inches both 
laterally and end to end. The minimum clear space between the lower and 
upper

[[Page 453]]

bunk shall be not less than 27 inches. Triple-deck bunks are prohibited.
    (4) The floors of each shelter shall be constructed of wood, 
asphalt, or concrete. Wooden floors shall be of smooth and tight 
construction. The floors shall be kept in good repair.
    (5) All wooden floors shall be elevated not less than 1 foot above 
the ground level at all points to prevent dampness and to permit free 
circulation of air beneath.
    (6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit 
``banking'' with earth or other suitable material around the outside 
walls in areas subject to extreme low temperatures.
    (7) All living quarters shall be provided with windows the total of 
which shall be not less than one-tenth of the floor area. At least one-
half of each window shall be so constructed that it can be opened for 
purposes of ventilation.
    (8) All exterior openings shall be effectively screened with 16-mesh 
material. All screen doors shall be equipped with self-closing devices.
    (9) In a room where workers cook, live, and sleep a minimum of 100 
square feet per person shall be provided. Sanitary facilities shall be 
provided for storing and preparing food.
    (10) In camps where cooking facilities are used in common, stoves 
(in ratio of one stove to 10 persons or one stove to two families) shall 
be provided in an enclosed and screened shelter. Sanitary facilities 
shall be provided for storing and preparing food.
    (11) All heating, cooking, and water heating equipment shall be 
installed in accordance with State and local ordinances, codes, and 
regulations governing such installations. If a camp is used during cold 
weather, adequate heating equipment shall be provided.
    (c) Water supply. (1) An adequate and convenient water supply, 
approved by the appropriate health authority, shall be provided in each 
camp for drinking, cooking, bathing, and laundry purposes.
    (2) A water supply shall be deemed adequate if it is capable of 
delivering 35 gallons per person per day to the campsite at a peak rate 
of 2\1/2\ times the average hourly demand.
    (3) The distribution lines shall be capable of supplying water at 
normal operating pressures to all fixtures for simultaneous operation. 
Water outlets shall be distributed throughout the camp in such a manner 
that no shelter is more than 100 feet from a yard hydrant if water is 
not piped to the shelters.
    (4) Where water under pressure is available, one or more drinking 
fountains shall be provided for each 100 occupants or fraction thereof. 
The construction of drinking fountains shall comply with ANSI Standard 
Specifications for Drinking Fountains, Z4.2-1942, which is incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. Common drinking cups are 
prohibited.
    (d) Toilet facilities. (1) Toilet facilities adequate for the 
capacity of the camp shall be provided.
    (2) Each toilet room shall be located so as to be accessible without 
any individual passing through any sleeping room. Toilet rooms shall 
have a window not less than 6 square feet in area opening directly to 
the outside area or otherwise be satisfactorily ventilated. All outside 
openings shall be screened with 16-mesh material. No fixture, water 
closet, chemical toilet, or urinal shall be located in a room used for 
other than toilet purposes.
    (3) A toilet room shall be located within 200 feet of the door of 
each sleeping room. No privy shall be closer than 100 feet to any 
sleeping room, dining room, lunch area, or kitchen.
    (4) Where the toilet rooms are shared, such as in multifamily 
shelters and in barracks type facilities, separate toilet rooms shall be 
provided for each sex. These rooms shall be distinctly marked ``for 
men'' and ``for women'' by signs printed in English and in the native 
language of the persons occupying the camp, or marked with easily 
understood pictures or symbols. If the facilities for each sex are in 
the same building, they shall be separated by solid walls or partitions 
extending from the floor to the roof or ceiling.
    (5) Where toilet facilities are shared, the number of water closets 
or privy seats provided for each sex shall be based on the maximum 
number of persons of that sex which the camp is designed to house at any 
one time, in the

[[Page 454]]

ratio of one such unit to each 15 persons, with a minimum of two units 
for any shared facility.
    (6) Urinals shall be provided on the basis of one unit or 2 linear 
feet of urinal trough for each 25 men. The floor from the wall and for a 
distance not less than 15 inches measured from the outward edge of the 
urinals shall be constructed of materials impervious to moisture. Where 
water under pressure is available, urinals shall be provided with an 
adequate water flush. Urinal troughs in privies shall drain freely into 
the pit or vault and the construction of this drain shall be such as to 
exclude flies and rodents from the pit.
    (7) Every water closet installed on or after August 31, 1971, shall 
be located in a toilet room.
    (8) Each toilet room shall be lighted naturally, or artificially by 
a safe type of lighting at all hours of the day and night.
    (9) An adequate supply of toilet paper shall be provided in each 
privy, water closet, or chemical toilet compartment.
    (10) Privies and toilet rooms shall be kept in a sanitary condition. 
They shall be cleaned at least daily.
    (e) Sewage disposal facilities. In camps where public sewers are 
available, all sewer lines and floor drains from buildings shall be 
connected thereto.
    (f) Laundry, handwashing, and bathing facilities. (1) Laundry, 
handwashing, and bathing facilities shall be provided in the following 
ratio:
    (i) Handwash basin per family shelter or per six persons in shared 
facilities.
    (ii) Shower head for every 10 persons.
    (iii) Laundry tray or tub for every 30 persons.
    (iv) Slop sink in each building used for laundry, hand washing, and 
bathing.
    (2) Floors shall be of smooth finish but not slippery materials; 
they shall be impervious to moisture. Floor drains shall be provided in 
all shower baths, shower rooms, or laundry rooms to remove waste water 
and facilitate cleaning. All junctions of the curbing and the floor 
shall be coved. The walls and partitions of shower rooms shall be smooth 
and impervious to the height of splash.
    (3) An adequate supply of hot and cold running water shall be 
provided for bathing and laundry purposes. Facilities for heating water 
shall be provided.
    (4) Every service building shall be provided with equipment capable 
of maintaining a temperature of at least 70 deg. F. during cold weather.
    (5) Facilities for drying clothes shall be provided.
    (6) All service buildings shall be kept clean.
    (g) Lighting. Where electric service is available, each habitable 
room in a camp shall be provided with at least one ceiling-type light 
fixture and at least one separate floor- or wall-type convenience 
outlet. Laundry and toilet rooms and rooms where people congregate shall 
contain at least one ceiling- or wall-type fixture. Light levels in 
toilet and storage rooms shall be at least 20 foot-candles 30 inches 
from the floor. Other rooms, including kitchens and living quarters, 
shall be at least 30 foot-candles 30 inches from the floor.
    (h) Refuse disposal. (1) Fly-tight, rodent-tight, impervious, 
cleanable or single service containers, approved by the appropriate 
health authority shall be provided for the storage of garbage. At least 
one such container shall be provided for each family shelter and shall 
be located within 100 feet of each shelter on a wooden, metal, or 
concrete stand.
    (2) Garbage containers shall be kept clean.
    (3) Garbage containers shall be emptied when full, but not less than 
twice a week.
    (i) Construction and operation of kitchens, dining hall, and feeding 
facilities. (1) In all camps where central dining or multiple family 
feeding operations are permitted or provided, the food handling 
facilities shall comply with the requirements of the ``Food Service 
Sanitation Ordinance and Code,'' Part V of the ``Food Service Sanitation 
Manual,'' U.S. Public Health Service Publication 934 (1965), which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) A properly constructed kitchen and dining hall adequate in size, 
separate from the sleeping quarters of any

[[Page 455]]

of the workers or their families, shall be provided in connection with 
all food handling facilities. There shall be no direct opening from 
living or sleeping quarters into a kitchen or dining hall.
    (3) No person with any communicable disease shall be employed or 
permitted to work in the preparation, cooking, serving, or other 
handling of food, foodstuffs, or materials used therein, in any kitchen 
or dining room operated in connection with a camp or regularly used by 
persons living in a camp.
    (j) Insect and rodent control. Effective measures shall be taken to 
prevent infestation by and harborage of animal or insect vectors or 
pests.
    (k) First aid. (1) Adequate first aid facilities approved by a 
health authority shall be maintained and made available in every labor 
camp for the emergency treatment of injured persons.
    (2) Such facilities shall be in charge of a person trained to 
administer first aid and shall be readily accessible for use at all 
times.
    (l) Reporting communicable disease. (1) It shall be the duty of the 
camp superintendent to report immediately to the local health officer 
the name and address of any individual in the camp known to have or 
suspected of having a communicable disease.
    (2) Whenever there shall occur in any camp a case of suspected food 
poisoning or an unusual prevalence of any illness in which fever, 
diarrhea, sore throat, vomiting, or jaundice is a prominent symptom, it 
shall be the duty of the camp superintendent to report immediately the 
existence of the outbreak to the health authority by telegram or 
telephone.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 47 FR 14696, Apr. 6, 1982; 49 
FR 18295, Apr. 30, 1984; 61 FR 9238, Mar. 7, 1996]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.142 
was amended by removing paragraph (a)(4), effective Aug. 17, 1998.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.143  Nonwater carriage disposal systems. [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.144  Safety color code for marking physical hazards.

    (a) Color identification--(1) Red. Red shall be the basic color for 
the identification of:
    (i) Fire protection equipment and apparatus. [Reserved]
    (ii) Danger. Safety cans or other portable containers of flammable 
liquids having a flash point at or below 80 deg. F, table containers of 
flammable liquids (open cup tester), excluding shipping containers, 
shall be painted red with some additional clearly visible identification 
either in the form of a yellow band around the can or the name of the 
contents conspicuously stenciled or painted on the can in yellow. Red 
lights shall be provided at barricades and at temporary obstructions, as 
specified in ANSI Safety Code for Building Construction, A10.2-1944, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. Danger 
signs shall be painted red.
    (iii) Stop. Emergency stop bars on hazardous machines such as rubber 
mills, wire blocks, flat work ironers, etc., shall be red. Stop buttons 
or electrical switches which letters or other markings appear, used for 
emergency stopping of machinery shall be red.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Yellow. Yellow shall be the basic color for designating caution 
and for marking physical hazards such as: Striking against, stumbling, 
falling, tripping, and ``caught in between.''
    (b) [Reserved]
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49748, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.145  Specifications for accident prevention signs and tags.

    (a) Scope. (1) These specifications apply to the design, 
application, and use of signs or symbols (as included in paragraphs (c) 
through (e) of this section) intended to indicate and, insofar as 
possible, to define specific hazards of a nature such that failure to 
designate them may lead to accidental injury to workers or the public, 
or both, or to property damage. These specifications are intended to 
cover all safety signs except those designed for streets, highways, 
railroads, and marine regulations. These specifications do not apply to 
plant bulletin boards or to safety posters.
    (2) All new signs and replacements of old signs shall be in 
accordance with these specifications.

[[Page 456]]

    (b) Definitions. As used in this section, the word sign refers to a 
surface on prepared for the warning of, or safety instructions of, 
industrial workers or members of the public who may be exposed to 
hazards. Excluded from this definition, however, are news releases, 
displays commonly known as safety posters, and bulletins used for 
employee education.
    (c) Classification of signs according to use--(1) Danger signs. (i) 
There shall be no variation in the type of design of signs posted to 
warn of specific dangers and radiation hazards.
    (ii) All employees shall be instructed that danger signs indicate 
immediate danger and that special precautions are necessary.
    (2) Caution signs. (i) Caution signs shall be used only to warn 
against potential hazards or to caution against unsafe practices.
    (ii) All employees shall be instructed that caution signs indicate a 
possible hazard against which proper precaution should be taken.
    (3) Safety instruction signs. Safety instruction signs shall be used 
where there is a need for general instructions and suggestions relative 
to safety measures.
    (d) Sign design--(1) Design features. All signs shall be furnished 
with rounded or blunt corners and shall be free from sharp edges, burrs, 
splinters, or other sharp projections. The ends or heads of bolts or 
other fastening devices shall be located in such a way that they do not 
constitute a hazard.
    (2) Danger signs. The colors red, black, and white shall be those of 
opaque glossy samples as specified in Table 1 of Fundamental 
Specification of Safety Colors for CIE Standard Source ``C'', American 
National Standard Z53.1-1967, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Caution signs. Standard color of the background shall be yellow; 
and the panel, black with yellow letters. Any letters used against the 
yellow background shall be black. The colors shall be those of opaque 
glossy samples as specified in Table 1 of American National Standard 
Z53.1-1967.
    (5) [Reserved]
    (6) Safety instruction signs. Standard color of the background shall 
be white; and the panel, green with white letters. Any letters used 
against the white background shall be black. The colors shall be those 
of opaque glossy samples as specified in Table 1 of American National 
Standard, Z53.1-1967.
    (7)-(9) [Reserved]
    (10) Slow-moving vehicle emblem. This emblem (see fig. J-7) consists 
of a fluorescent yellow-orange triangle with a dark red reflective 
border. The yellow-orange fluorescent triangle is a highly visible color 
for daylight exposure. The reflective border defines the shape of the 
fluorescent color in daylight and creates a hollow red triangle in the 
path of motor vehicle headlights at night. The emblem is intended as a 
unique identification for, and it shall be used only on, vehicles which 
by design move slowly (25 m.p.h. or less) on the public roads. The 
emblem is not a clearance marker for wide machinery nor is it intended 
to replace required lighting or marking of slow-moving vehicles. Neither 
the color film pattern and its dimensions nor the backing shall be 
altered to permit use of advertising or other markings. The material, 
location, mounting, etc., of the emblem shall be in accordance with the 
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Emblem for Identifying Slow-
Moving Vehicles, ASAE R276, 1967, or ASAE S276.2 (ANSI B114.1-1971), 
which are incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.028

                 Figure J-7.--Slow-Moving Vehicle Emblem


[[Page 457]]


    Note: All dimensions are in inches.

    (e) Sign wordings.
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) Nature of wording. The wording of any sign should be easily read 
and concise. The sign should contain sufficient information to be easily 
understood. The wording should make a positive, rather than negative 
suggestion and should be accurate in fact.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Biological hazard signs. The biological hazard warning shall be 
used to signify the actual or potential presence of a biohazard and to 
identify equipment, containers, rooms, materials, experimental animals, 
or combinations thereof, which contain, or are contaminated with, viable 
hazardous agents. For the purpose of this subparagraph the term 
``biological hazard,'' or ``biohazard,'' shall include only those 
infectious agents presenting a risk or potential risk to the well-being 
of man.
    (f) Accident prevention tags--(1) Scope and application. (i) This 
paragraph (f) applies to all accident prevention tags used to identify 
hazardous conditions and provide a message to employees with respect to 
hazardous conditions as set forth in paragraph (f)(3) of this section, 
or to meet the specific tagging requirements of other OSHA standards.
    (ii) This paragraph (f) does not apply to construction, maritime or 
agriculture.
    (2) Definitions. Biological hazard or BIOHAZARD means those 
infectious agents presenting a risk of death, injury or illness to 
employees.
    Major message means that portion of a tag's inscription that is more 
specific than the signal word and that indicates the specific hazardous 
condition or the instruction to be communicated to the employee. 
Examples include: ``High Voltage,'' ``Close Clearance,'' ``Do Not 
Start,'' or ``Do Not Use'' or a corresponding pictograph used with a 
written text or alone.
    Pictograph means a pictorial representation used to identify a 
hazardous condition or to convey a safety instruction.
    Signal word means that portion of a tag's inscription that contains 
the word or words that are intended to capture the employee's immediate 
attention.
    Tag means a device usually made of card, paper, pasteboard, plastic 
or other material used to identify a hazardous condition.
    (3) Use. Tags shall be used as a means to prevent accidental injury 
or illness to employees who are exposed to hazardous or potentially 
hazardous conditions, equipment or operations which are out of the 
ordinary, unexpected or not readily apparent. Tags shall be used until 
such time as the identified hazard is eliminated or the hazardous 
operation is completed. Tags need not be used where signs, guarding or 
other positive means of protection are being used.
    (4) General tag criteria. All required tags shall meet the following 
criteria:
    (i) Tags shall contain a signal word and a major message.
    (A) The signal word shall be either ``Danger,'' ``Caution,'' or 
``Biological Hazard,'' ``BIOHAZARD,'' or the biological hazard symbol.
    (B) The major message shall indicate the specific hazardous 
condition or the instruction to be communicated to the employee.
    (ii) The signal word shall be readable at a minimum distance of five 
feet (1.52 m) or such greater distance as warranted by the hazard.
    (iii) The tag's major message shall be presented in either 
pictographs, written text or both.
    (iv) The signal word and the major message shall be understandable 
to all employees who may be exposed to the identified hazard.
    (v) All employees shall be informed as to the meaning of the various 
tags used throughout the workplace and what special precautions are 
necessary.
    (vi) Tags shall be affixed as close as safely possible to their 
respective hazards by a positive means such as string, wire, or adhesive 
that prevents their loss or unintentional removal.
    (5) Danger tags. Danger tags shall be used in major hazard 
situations where an immediate hazard presents a threat of death or 
serious injury to employees. Danger tags shall be used only in these 
situations.
    (6) Caution tags. Caution tags shall be used in minor hazard 
situations where a non-immediate or potential hazard or unsafe practice 
presents a lesser threat

[[Page 458]]

of employee injury. Caution tags shall be used only in these situations.
    (7) Warning tags. Warning tags may be used to represent a hazard 
level between ``Caution'' and ``Danger,'' instead of the required 
``Caution'' tag, provided that they have a signal word of ``Warning,'' 
an appropriate major message, and otherwise meet the general tag 
criteria of paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
    (8) Biological hazard tags. (i) Biological hazard tags shall be used 
to identify the actual or potential presence of a biological hazard and 
to identify equipment, containers, rooms, experimental animals, or 
combinations thereof, that contain or are contaminated with hazardous 
biological agents.
    (ii) The symbol design for biological hazard tags shall conform to 
the design shown below:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.086

                 Biological Hazard Symbol Configuration.
    (9) Other tags. Other tags may be used in addition to those required 
by this paragraph (f), or in other situations where this paragraph (f) 
does not require tags, provided that they do not detract from the impact 
or visibility of the signal word and major message of any required tag.

        APPENDICES TO Sec. 1910.145(f), ACCIDENT PREVENTION TAGS

        Appendix A to Sec. 1910.145(f)--Recommended Color Coding

    While the standard does not specifically mandate colors to be used 
on accident prevention tags, the following color scheme is recommended 
by OSHA for meeting the requirements of this section:
    ``DANGER''--Red, or predominantly red, with lettering or symbols in 
a contrasting color.
    ``CAUTION''--Yellow, or predominantly yellow, with lettering or 
symbols in a contrasting color.
    ``WARNING''--Orange, or predominantly orange, with lettering or 
symbols in a contrasting color.
    ``BIOLOGICAL HAZARD''--Fluorescent orange or orange-red, or 
predominantly so, with lettering or symbols in a contrasting color.

   Appendix B to Sec. 1910.145(f)--References for Further Information

    The following references provide information which can be helpful in 
understanding the requirements contained in various sections of the 
standard:

    1. Bresnahan, Thomas F., and Bryk, Joseph, ``The Hazard Association 
Values of Accident Prevention Signs'', Journal of American Society of 
Safety Engineers; January 1975.
    2. Dreyfuss, H., Symbol Sourcebook, McGraw Hill; New York, NY, 1972.
    3. Glass, R.A. and others, Some Criteria for Colors and Signs in 
Workplaces, National Bureau of Standards, Washington DC, 1983.
    4. Graphic Symbols for Public Areas and Occupational Environments, 
Treasury Board of Canada, Ottawa, Canada, July 1980.
    5. Howett, G.L., Size of Letters Required for Visibility as a 
Function of Viewing Distance and Observer Acuity, National Bureau of 
Standards, Washington DC, July 1983.
    6. Lerner, N.D. and Collins, B.L., The Assessment of Safety Symbol 
Understandability by Different Testing Methods, National Bureau of 
Standards, Washington DC, 1980.
    7. Lerner, N.D. and Collins, B.L., Workplace Safety Symbols, 
National Bureau of Standards, Washington DC, 1980.
    8. Modley, R. and Meyers, W.R., Handbook of Pictorial Symbols, Dover 
Publication, New York, NY, 1976.
    9. Product Safety Signs and Labels, FMC Corporation, Santa Clara, 
CA, 1978.
    10. Safety Color Coding for Marking Physical Hazards, Z53.1, 
American National Standards Institute, New York, NY, 1979.
    11. Signs and Symbols for the Occupational Environment, Can. 3-Z-
321-77, Canadian Standards Association, Ottawa, September 1977.

[[Page 459]]

    12. Symbols for Industrial Safety, National Bureau of Standards, 
Washington DC, April 1982.
    13. Symbol Signs, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington DC, 
November 1974.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49749, Oct. 24, 1978; 
43 FR 51759, Nov. 7, 1978; 49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 51 FR 33260, Sept. 
19, 1986; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.146  Permit-required confined spaces.

    (a) Scope and application. This section contains requirements for 
practices and procedures to protect employees in general industry from 
the hazards of entry into permit-required confined spaces. This section 
does not apply to agriculture, to construction, or to shipyard 
employment (Parts 1928, 1926, and 1915 of this chapter, respectively).
    (b) Definitions.
    Acceptable entry conditions means the conditions that must exist in 
a permit space to allow entry and to ensure that employees involved with 
a permit-required confined space entry can safely enter into and work 
within the space.
    Attendant means an individual stationed outside one or more permit 
spaces who monitors the authorized entrants and who performs all 
attendant's duties assigned in the employer's permit space program.
    Authorized entrant means an employee who is authorized by the 
employer to enter a permit space.
    Blanking or blinding means the absolute closure of a pipe, line, or 
duct by the fastening of a solid plate (such as a spectacle blind or a 
skillet blind) that completely covers the bore and that is capable of 
withstanding the maximum pressure of the pipe, line, or duct with no 
leakage beyond the plate.
    Confined space means a space that:
    (1) Is large enough and so configured that an employee can bodily 
enter and perform assigned work; and
    (2) Has limited or restricted means for entry or exit (for example, 
tanks, vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults, and pits are 
spaces that may have limited means of entry.); and
    (3) Is not designed for continuous employee occupancy.
    Double block and bleed means the closure of a line, duct, or pipe by 
closing and locking or tagging two in-line valves and by opening and 
locking or tagging a drain or vent valve in the line between the two 
closed valves.
    Emergency means any occurrence (including any failure of hazard 
control or monitoring equipment) or event internal or external to the 
permit space that could endanger entrants.
    Engulfment means the surrounding and effective capture of a person 
by a liquid or finely divided (flowable) solid substance that can be 
aspirated to cause death by filling or plugging the respiratory system 
or that can exert enough force on the body to cause death by 
strangulation, constriction, or crushing.
    Entry means the action by which a person passes through an opening 
into a permit-required confined space. Entry includes ensuing work 
activities in that space and is considered to have occurred as soon as 
any part of the entrant's body breaks the plane of an opening into the 
space.
    Entry permit (permit) means the written or printed document that is 
provided by the employer to allow and control entry into a permit space 
and that contains the information specified in paragraph (f) of this 
section.
    Entry supervisor means the person (such as the employer, foreman, or 
crew chief) responsible for determining if acceptable entry conditions 
are present at a permit space where entry is planned, for authorizing 
entry and overseeing entry operations, and for terminating entry as 
required by this section.

    Note: An entry supervisor also may serve as an attendant or as an 
authorized entrant, as long as that person is trained and equipped as 
required by this section for each role he or she fills. Also, the duties 
of entry supervisor may be passed from one individual to another during 
the course of an entry operation.

    Hazardous atmosphere means an atmosphere that may expose employees 
to the risk of death, incapacitation, impairment of ability to self-
rescue (that is, escape unaided from a permit space), injury, or acute 
illness from one or more of the following causes:
    (1) Flammable gas, vapor, or mist in excess of 10 percent of its 
lower flammable limit (LFL);
    (2) Airborne combustible dust at a concentration that meets or 
exceeds its LFL;


[[Page 460]]


    Note: This concentration may be approximated as a condition in which 
the dust obscures vision at a distance of 5 feet (1.52 m) or less.

    (3) Atmospheric oxygen concentration below 19.5 percent or above 
23.5 percent;
    (4) Atmospheric concentration of any substance for which a dose or a 
permissible exposure limit is published in Subpart G, Occupational 
Health and Environmental Control, or in Subpart Z, Toxic and Hazardous 
Substances, of this part and which could result in employee exposure in 
excess of its dose or permissible exposure limit;

    Note: An atmospheric concentration of any substance that is not 
capable of causing death, incapacitation, impairment of ability to self-
rescue, injury, or acute illness due to its health effects is not 
covered by this provision.

    (5) Any other atmospheric condition that is immediately dangerous to 
life or health.


    Note: For air contaminants for which OSHA has not determined a dose 
or permissible exposure limit, other sources of information, such as 
Material Safety Data Sheets that comply with the Hazard Communication 
Standard, Sec. 1910.1200 of this part, published information, and 
internal documents can provide guidance in establishing acceptable 
atmospheric conditions.

    Hot work permit means the employer's written authorization to 
perform operations (for example, riveting, welding, cutting, burning, 
and heating) capable of providing a source of ignition.
    Immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH) means any condition 
that poses an immediate or delayed threat to life or that would cause 
irreversible adverse health effects or that would interfere with an 
individual's ability to escape unaided from a permit space.

    Note: Some materials--hydrogen fluoride gas and cadmium vapor, for 
example--may produce immediate transient effects that, even if severe, 
may pass without medical attention, but are followed by sudden, possibly 
fatal collapse 12-72 hours after exposure. The victim ``feels normal'' 
from recovery from transient effects until collapse. Such materials in 
hazardous quantities are considered to be ``immediately'' dangerous to 
life or health.

    Inerting means the displacement of the atmosphere in a permit space 
by a noncombustible gas (such as nitrogen) to such an extent that the 
resulting atmosphere is noncombustible.

    Note: This procedure produces an IDLH oxygen-deficient atmosphere.

    Isolation means the process by which a permit space is removed from 
service and completely protected against the release of energy and 
material into the space by such means as: blanking or blinding; 
misaligning or removing sections of lines, pipes, or ducts; a double 
block and bleed system; lockout or tagout of all sources of energy; or 
blocking or disconnecting all mechanical linkages.
    Line breaking means the intentional opening of a pipe, line, or duct 
that is or has been carrying flammable, corrosive, or toxic material, an 
inert gas, or any fluid at a volume, pressure, or temperature capable of 
causing injury.
    Non-permit confined space means a confined space that does not 
contain or, with respect to atmospheric hazards, have the potential to 
contain any hazard capable of causing death or serious physical harm.
    Oxygen deficient atmosphere means an atmosphere containing less than 
19.5 percent oxygen by volume.
    Oxygen enriched atmosphere means an atmosphere containing more than 
23.5 percent oxygen by volume.
    Permit-required confined space (permit space) means a confined space 
that has one or more of the following characteristics:
    (1) Contains or has a potential to contain a hazardous atmosphere;
    (2) Contains a material that has the potential for engulfing an 
entrant;
    (3) Has an internal configuration such that an entrant could be 
trapped or asphyxiated by inwardly converging walls or by a floor which 
slopes downward and tapers to a smaller cross- section; or
    (4) Contains any other recognized serious safety or health hazard.
    Permit-required confined space program (permit space program) means 
the employer's overall program for controlling, and, where appropriate, 
for protecting employees from, permit space hazards and for regulating 
employee entry into permit spaces.
    Permit system means the employer's written procedure for preparing 
and

[[Page 461]]

issuing permits for entry and for returning the permit space to service 
following termination of entry.
    Prohibited condition means any condition in a permit space that is 
not allowed by the permit during the period when entry is authorized.
    Rescue service means the personnel designated to rescue employees 
from permit spaces.
    Retrieval system means the equipment (including a retrieval line, 
chest or full-body harness, wristlets, if appropriate, and a lifting 
device or anchor) used for non-entry rescue of persons from permit 
spaces.
    Testing means the process by which the hazards that may confront 
entrants of a permit space are identified and evaluated. Testing 
includes specifying the tests that are to be performed in the permit 
space.

    Note: Testing enables employers both to devise and implement 
adequate control measures for the protection of authorized entrants and 
to determine if acceptable entry conditions are present immediately 
prior to, and during, entry.

    (c) General requirements. (1) The employer shall evaluate the 
workplace to determine if any spaces are permit- required confined 
spaces.

    Note: Proper application of the decision flow chart in appendix A to 
Sec. 1910.146 would facilitate compliance with this requirement.

    (2) If the workplace contains permit spaces, the employer shall 
inform exposed employees, by posting danger signs or by any other 
equally effective means, of the existence and location of and the danger 
posed by the permit spaces.

    Note: A sign reading ``DANGER--PERMIT-REQUIRED CONFINED SPACE, DO 
NOT ENTER'' or using other similar language would satisfy the 
requirement for a sign.

    (3) If the employer decides that its employees will not enter permit 
spaces, the employer shall take effective measures to prevent its 
employees from entering the permit spaces and shall comply with 
paragraphs (c)(1), (c)(2), (c)(6), and (c)(8) of this section.
    (4) If the employer decides that its employees will enter permit 
spaces, the employer shall develop and implement a written permit space 
program that complies with this section. The written program shall be 
available for inspection by employees and their authorized 
representatives.
    (5) An employer may use the alternate procedures specified in 
paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section for entering a permit space under 
the conditions set forth in paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section.
    (i) An employer whose employees enter a permit space need not comply 
with paragraphs (d) through (f) and (h) through (k) of this section, 
provided that:
    (A) The employer can demonstrate that the only hazard posed by the 
permit space is an actual or potential hazardous atmosphere;
    (B) The employer can demonstrate that continuous forced air 
ventilation alone is sufficient to maintain that permit space safe for 
entry;
    (C) The employer develops monitoring and inspection data that 
supports the demonstrations required by paragraphs (c)(5)(i)(A) and 
(c)(5)(i)(B) of this section;
    (D) If an initial entry of the permit space is necessary to obtain 
the data required by paragraph (c)(5)(i)(C) of this section, the entry 
is performed in compliance with paragraphs (d) through (k) of this 
section;
    (E) The determinations and supporting data required by paragraphs 
(c)(5)(i)(A), (c)(5)(i)(B), and (c)(5)(i)(C) of this section are 
documented by the employer and are made available to each employee who 
enters the permit space under the terms of paragraph (c)(5) of this 
section; and
    (F) Entry into the permit space under the terms of paragraph 
(c)(5)(i) of this section is performed in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section.

    Note: See paragraph (c)(7) of this section for reclassification of a 
permit space after all hazards within the space have been eliminated.

    (ii) The following requirements apply to entry into permit spaces 
that meet the conditions set forth in paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this 
section.
    (A) Any conditions making it unsafe to remove an entrance cover 
shall be eliminated before the cover is removed.
    (B) When entrance covers are removed, the opening shall be promptly

[[Page 462]]

guarded by a railing, temporary cover, or other temporary barrier that 
will prevent an accidental fall through the opening and that will 
protect each employee working in the space from foreign objects entering 
the space.
    (C) Before an employee enters the space, the internal atmosphere 
shall be tested, with a calibrated direct-reading instrument, for the 
following conditions in the order given:
    (1) Oxygen content,
    (2) Flammable gases and vapors, and
    (3) Potential toxic air contaminants.
    (D) There may be no hazardous atmosphere within the space whenever 
any employee is inside the space.
    (E) Continuous forced air ventilation shall be used, as follows:
    (1) An employee may not enter the space until the forced air 
ventilation has eliminated any hazardous atmosphere;
    (2) The forced air ventilation shall be so directed as to ventilate 
the immediate areas where an employee is or will be present within the 
space and shall continue until all employees have left the space;
    (3) The air supply for the forced air ventilation shall be from a 
clean source and may not increase the hazards in the space.
    (F) The atmosphere within the space shall be periodically tested as 
necessary to ensure that the continuous forced air ventilation is 
preventing the accumulation of a hazardous atmosphere.
    (G) If a hazardous atmosphere is detected during entry:
    (1) Each employee shall leave the space immediately;
    (2) The space shall be evaluated to determine how the hazardous 
atmosphere developed; and
    (3) Measures shall be implemented to protect employees from the 
hazardous atmosphere before any subsequent entry takes place.
    (H) The employer shall verify that the space is safe for entry and 
that the pre-entry measures required by paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this 
section have been taken, through a written certification that contains 
the date, the location of the space, and the signature of the person 
providing the certification. The certification shall be made before 
entry and shall be made available to each employee entering the space.
    (6) When there are changes in the use or configuration of a non-
permit confined space that might increase the hazards to entrants, the 
employer shall reevaluate that space and, if necessary, reclassify it as 
a permit-required confined space.
    (7) A space classified by the employer as a permit-required confined 
space may be reclassified as a non-permit confined space under the 
following procedures:
    (i) If the permit space poses no actual or potential atmospheric 
hazards and if all hazards within the space are eliminated without entry 
into the space, the permit space may be reclassified as a non-permit 
confined space for as long as the non-atmospheric hazards remain 
eliminated.
    (ii) If it is necessary to enter the permit space to eliminate 
hazards, such entry shall be performed under paragraphs (d) through (k) 
of this section. If testing and inspection during that entry demonstrate 
that the hazards within the permit space have been eliminated, the 
permit space may be reclassified as a non-permit confined space for as 
long as the hazards remain eliminated.

    Note: Control of atmospheric hazards through forced air ventilation 
does not constitute elimination of the hazards. Paragraph (c)(5) covers 
permit space entry where the employer can demonstrate that forced air 
ventilation alone will control all hazards in the space.

    (iii) The employer shall document the basis for determining that all 
hazards in a permit space have been eliminated, through a certification 
that contains the date, the location of the space, and the signature of 
the person making the determination. The certification shall be made 
available to each employee entering the space.
    (iv) If hazards arise within a permit space that has been 
declassified to a non-permit space under paragraph (c)(7) of this 
section, each employee in the space shall exit the space. The employer 
shall then reevaluate the space and determine whether it must be 
reclassified as a permit space, in accordance with other applicable 
provisions of this section.

[[Page 463]]

    (8) When an employer (host employer) arranges to have employees of 
another employer (contractor) perform work that involves permit space 
entry, the host employer shall:
    (i) Inform the contractor that the workplace contains permit spaces 
and that permit space entry is allowed only through compliance with a 
permit space program meeting the requirements of this section;
    (ii) Apprise the contractor of the elements, including the hazards 
identified and the host employer's experience with the space, that make 
the space in question a permit space;
    (iii) Apprise the contractor of any precautions or procedures that 
the host employer has implemented for the protection of employees in or 
near permit spaces where contractor personnel will be working;
    (iv) Coordinate entry operations with the contractor, when both host 
employer personnel and contractor personnel will be working in or near 
permit spaces, as required by paragraph (d)(11) of this section; and
    (v) Debrief the contractor at the conclusion of the entry operations 
regarding the permit space program followed and regarding any hazards 
confronted or created in permit spaces during entry operations.
    (9) In addition to complying with the permit space requirements that 
apply to all employers, each contractor who is retained to perform 
permit space entry operations shall:
    (i) Obtain any available information regarding permit space hazards 
and entry operations from the host employer;
    (ii) Coordinate entry operations with the host employer, when both 
host employer personnel and contractor personnel will be working in or 
near permit spaces, as required by paragraph (d)(11) of this section; 
and
    (iii) Inform the host employer of the permit space program that the 
contractor will follow and of any hazards confronted or created in 
permit spaces, either through a debriefing or during the entry 
operation.
    (d) Permit-required confined space program (permit space program). 
Under the permit space program required by paragraph (c)(4) of this 
section, the employer shall:
    (1) Implement the measures necessary to prevent unauthorized entry;
    (2) Identify and evaluate the hazards of permit spaces before 
employees enter them;
    (3) Develop and implement the means, procedures, and practices 
necessary for safe permit space entry operations, including, but not 
limited to, the following:
    (i) Specifying acceptable entry conditions;
    (ii) Isolating the permit space;
    (iii) Purging, inerting, flushing, or ventilating the permit space 
as necessary to eliminate or control atmospheric hazards;
    (iv) Providing pedestrian, vehicle, or other barriers as necessary 
to protect entrants from external hazards; and
    (v) Verifying that conditions in the permit space are acceptable for 
entry throughout the duration of an authorized entry.
    (4) Provide the following equipment (specified in paragraphs 
(d)(4)(i) through (d)(4)(ix) of this section) at no cost to employees, 
maintain that equipment properly, and ensure that employees use that 
equipment properly:
    (i) Testing and monitoring equipment needed to comply with paragraph 
(d)(5) of this section;
    (ii) Ventilating equipment needed to obtain acceptable entry 
conditions;
    (iii) Communications equipment necessary for compliance with 
paragraphs (h)(3) and (i)(5) of this section;
    (iv) Personal protective equipment insofar as feasible engineering 
and work practice controls do not adequately protect employees;
    (v) Lighting equipment needed to enable employees to see well enough 
to work safely and to exit the space quickly in an emergency;
    (vi) Barriers and shields as required by paragraph (d)(3)(iv) of 
this section;
    (vii) Equipment, such as ladders, needed for safe ingress and egress 
by authorized entrants;
    (viii) Rescue and emergency equipment needed to comply with 
paragraph (d)(9) of this section, except to the extent that the 
equipment is provided by rescue services; and

[[Page 464]]

    (ix) Any other equipment necessary for safe entry into and rescue 
from permit spaces.
    (5) Evaluate permit space conditions as follows when entry 
operations are conducted:
    (i) Test conditions in the permit space to determine if acceptable 
entry conditions exist before entry is authorized to begin, except that, 
if isolation of the space is infeasible because the space is large or is 
part of a continuous system (such as a sewer), pre-entry testing shall 
be performed to the extent feasible before entry is authorized and, if 
entry is authorized, entry conditions shall be continuously monitored in 
the areas where authorized entrants are working;
    (ii) Test or monitor the permit space as necessary to determine if 
acceptable entry conditions are being maintained during the course of 
entry operations; and
    (iii) When testing for atmospheric hazards, test first for oxygen, 
then for combustible gases and vapors, and then for toxic gases and 
vapors.

    Note: Atmospheric testing conducted in accordance with appendix B to 
Sec. 1910.146 would be considered as satisfying the requirements of this 
paragraph. For permit space operations in sewers, atmospheric testing 
conducted in accordance with appendix B, as supplemented by appendix E 
to Sec. 1910.146, would be considered as satisfying the requirements of 
this paragraph.

    (6) Provide at least one attendant outside the permit space into 
which entry is authorized for the duration of entry operations;

    Note: Attendants may be assigned to monitor more than one permit 
space provided the duties described in paragraph (i) of this section can 
be effectively performed for each permit space that is monitored. 
Likewise, attendants may be stationed at any location outside the permit 
space to be monitored as long as the duties described in paragraph (i) 
of this section can be effectively performed for each permit space that 
is monitored.

    (7) If multiple spaces are to be monitored by a single attendant, 
include in the permit program the means and procedures to enable the 
attendant to respond to an emergency affecting one or more of the permit 
spaces being monitored without distraction from the attendant's 
responsibilities under paragraph (i) of this section;
    (8) Designate the persons who are to have active roles (as, for 
example, authorized entrants, attendants, entry supervisors, or persons 
who test or monitor the atmosphere in a permit space) in entry 
operations, identify the duties of each such employee, and provide each 
such employee with the training required by paragraph (g) of this 
section;
    (9) Develop and implement procedures for summoning rescue and 
emergency services, for rescuing entrants from permit spaces, for 
providing necessary emergency services to rescued employees, and for 
preventing unauthorized personnel from attempting a rescue;
    (10) Develop and implement a system for the preparation, issuance, 
use, and cancellation of entry permits as required by this section;
    (11) Develop and implement procedures to coordinate entry operations 
when employees of more than one employer are working simultaneously as 
authorized entrants in a permit space, so that employees of one employer 
do not endanger the employees of any other employer;
    (12) Develop and implement procedures (such as closing off a permit 
space and canceling the permit) necessary for concluding the entry after 
entry operations have been completed;
    (13) Review entry operations when the employer has reason to believe 
that the measures taken under the permit space program may not protect 
employees and revise the program to correct deficiencies found to exist 
before subsequent entries are authorized; and

    Note: Examples of circumstances requiring the review of the permit 
space program are: any unauthorized entry of a permit space, the 
detection of a permit space hazard not covered by the permit, the 
detection of a condition prohibited by the permit, the occurrence of an 
injury or near-miss during entry, a change in the use or configuration 
of a permit space, and employee complaints about the effectiveness of 
the program.

    (14) Review the permit space program, using the canceled permits 
retained under paragraph (e)(6) of this section within 1 year after each 
entry and revise the program as necessary, to

[[Page 465]]

ensure that employees participating in entry operations are protected 
from permit space hazards.

    Note: Employers may perform a single annual review covering all 
entries performed during a 12-month period. If no entry is performed 
during a 12-month period, no review is necessary.


Appendix C to Sec. 1910.146 presents examples of permit space programs 
that are considered to comply with the requirements of paragraph (d) of 
this section.
    (e) Permit system. (1) Before entry is authorized, the employer 
shall document the completion of measures required by paragraph (d)(3) 
of this section by preparing an entry permit.

    Note: Appendix D to Sec. 1910.146 presents examples of permits whose 
elements are considered to comply with the requirements of this section.

    (2) Before entry begins, the entry supervisor identified on the 
permit shall sign the entry permit to authorize entry.
    (3) The completed permit shall be made available at the time of 
entry to all authorized entrants, by posting it at the entry portal or 
by any other equally effective means, so that the entrants can confirm 
that pre-entry preparations have been completed.
    (4) The duration of the permit may not exceed the time required to 
complete the assigned task or job identified on the permit in accordance 
with paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
    (5) The entry supervisor shall terminate entry and cancel the entry 
permit when:
    (i) The entry operations covered by the entry permit have been 
completed; or
    (ii) A condition that is not allowed under the entry permit arises 
in or near the permit space.
    (6) The employer shall retain each canceled entry permit for at 
least 1 year to facilitate the review of the permit-required confined 
space program required by paragraph (d)(14) of this section. Any 
problems encountered during an entry operation shall be noted on the 
pertinent permit so that appropriate revisions to the permit space 
program can be made.
    (f) Entry permit. The entry permit that documents compliance with 
this section and authorizes entry to a permit space shall identify:
    (1) The permit space to be entered;
    (2) The purpose of the entry;
    (3) The date and the authorized duration of the entry permit;
    (4) The authorized entrants within the permit space, by name or by 
such other means (for example, through the use of rosters or tracking 
systems) as will enable the attendant to determine quickly and 
accurately, for the duration of the permit, which authorized entrants 
are inside the permit space;

    Note: This requirement may be met by inserting a reference on the 
entry permit as to the means used, such as a roster or tracking system, 
to keep track of the authorized entrants within the permit space.

    (5) The personnel, by name, currently serving as attendants;
    (6) The individual, by name, currently serving as entry supervisor, 
with a space for the signature or initials of the entry supervisor who 
originally authorized entry;
    (7) The hazards of the permit space to be entered;
    (8) The measures used to isolate the permit space and to eliminate 
or control permit space hazards before entry;

    Note: Those measures can include the lockout or tagging of equipment 
and procedures for purging, inerting, ventilating, and flushing permit 
spaces.

    (9) The acceptable entry conditions;
    (10) The results of initial and periodic tests performed under 
paragraph (d)(5) of this section, accompanied by the names or initials 
of the testers and by an indication of when the tests were performed;
    (11) The rescue and emergency services that can be summoned and the 
means (such as the equipment to use and the numbers to call) for 
summoning those services;
    (12) The communication procedures used by authorized entrants and 
attendants to maintain contact during the entry;
    (13) Equipment, such as personal protective equipment, testing 
equipment, communications equipment, alarm systems, and rescue 
equipment, to be provided for compliance with this section;

[[Page 466]]

    (14) Any other information whose inclusion is necessary, given the 
circumstances of the particular confined space, in order to ensure 
employee safety; and
    (15) Any additional permits, such as for hot work, that have been 
issued to authorize work in the permit space.
    (g) Training. (1) The employer shall provide training so that all 
employees whose work is regulated by this section acquire the 
understanding, knowledge, and skills necessary for the safe performance 
of the duties assigned under this section.
    (2) Training shall be provided to each affected employee:
    (i) Before the employee is first assigned duties under this section;
    (ii) Before there is a change in assigned duties;
    (iii) Whenever there is a change in permit space operations that 
presents a hazard about which an employee has not previously been 
trained;
    (iv) Whenever the employer has reason to believe either that there 
are deviations from the permit space entry procedures required by 
paragraph (d)(3) of this section or that there are inadequacies in the 
employee's knowledge or use of these procedures.
    (3) The training shall establish employee proficiency in the duties 
required by this section and shall introduce new or revised procedures, 
as necessary, for compliance with this section.
    (4) The employer shall certify that the training required by 
paragraphs (g)(1) through (g)(3) of this section has been accomplished. 
The certification shall contain each employee's name, the signatures or 
initials of the trainers, and the dates of training. The certification 
shall be available for inspection by employees and their authorized 
representatives.
    (h) Duties of authorized entrants. The employer shall ensure that 
all authorized entrants:
    (1) Know the hazards that may be faced during entry, including 
information on the mode, signs or symptoms, and consequences of the 
exposure;
    (2) Properly use equipment as required by paragraph (d)(4) of this 
section;
    (3) Communicate with the attendant as necessary to enable the 
attendant to monitor entrant status and to enable the attendant to alert 
entrants of the need to evacuate the space as required by paragraph 
(i)(6) of this section;
    (4) Alert the attendant whenever:
    (i) The entrant recognizes any warning sign or symptom of exposure 
to a dangerous situation, or
    (ii) The entrant detects a prohibited condition; and
    (5) Exit from the permit space as quickly as possible whenever:
    (i) An order to evacuate is given by the attendant or the entry 
supervisor,
    (ii) The entrant recognizes any warning sign or symptom of exposure 
to a dangerous situation,
    (iii) The entrant detects a prohibited condition, or
    (iv) An evacuation alarm is activated.
    (i) Duties of attendants. The employer shall ensure that each 
attendant:
    (1) Knows the hazards that may be faced during entry, including 
information on the mode, signs or symptoms, and consequences of the 
exposure;
    (2) Is aware of possible behavioral effects of hazard exposure in 
authorized entrants;
    (3) Continuously maintains an accurate count of authorized entrants 
in the permit space and ensures that the means used to identify 
authorized entrants under paragraph (f)(4) of this section accurately 
identifies who is in the permit space;
    (4) Remains outside the permit space during entry operations until 
relieved by another attendant;

    Note: When the employer's permit entry program allows attendant 
entry for rescue, attendants may enter a permit space to attempt a 
rescue if they have been trained and equipped for rescue operations as 
required by paragraph (k)(1) of this section and if they have been 
relieved as required by paragraph (i)(4) of this section.

    (5) Communicates with authorized entrants as necessary to monitor 
entrant status and to alert entrants of the need to evacuate the space 
under paragraph (i)(6) of this section;
    (6) Monitors activities inside and outside the space to determine if 
it is safe for entrants to remain in the space and

[[Page 467]]

orders the authorized entrants to evacuate the permit space immediately 
under any of the following conditions;
    (i) If the attendant detects a prohibited condition;
    (ii) If the attendant detects the behavioral effects of hazard 
exposure in an authorized entrant;
    (iii) If the attendant detects a situation outside the space that 
could endanger the authorized entrants; or
    (iv) If the attendant cannot effectively and safely perform all the 
duties required under paragraph (i) of this section;
    (7) Summon rescue and other emergency services as soon as the 
attendant determines that authorized entrants may need assistance to 
escape from permit space hazards;
    (8) Takes the following actions when unauthorized persons approach 
or enter a permit space while entry is underway:
    (i) Warn the unauthorized persons that they must stay away from the 
permit space;
    (ii) Advise the unauthorized persons that they must exit immediately 
if they have entered the permit space; and
    (iii) Inform the authorized entrants and the entry supervisor if 
unauthorized persons have entered the permit space;
    (9) Performs non-entry rescues as specified by the employer's rescue 
procedure; and
    (10) Performs no duties that might interfere with the attendant's 
primary duty to monitor and protect the authorized entrants.
    (j) Duties of entry supervisors. The employer shall ensure that each 
entry supervisor:
    (1) Knows the hazards that may be faced during entry, including 
information on the mode, signs or symptoms, and consequences of the 
exposure;
    (2) Verifies, by checking that the appropriate entries have been 
made on the permit, that all tests specified by the permit have been 
conducted and that all procedures and equipment specified by the permit 
are in place before endorsing the permit and allowing entry to begin;
    (3) Terminates the entry and cancels the permit as required by 
paragraph (e)(5) of this section;
    (4) Verifies that rescue services are available and that the means 
for summoning them are operable;
    (5) Removes unauthorized individuals who enter or who attempt to 
enter the permit space during entry operations; and
    (6) Determines, whenever responsibility for a permit space entry 
operation is transferred and at intervals dictated by the hazards and 
operations performed within the space, that entry operations remain 
consistent with terms of the entry permit and that acceptable entry 
conditions are maintained.
    (k) Rescue and emergency services. (1) The following requirements 
apply to employers who have employees enter permit spaces to perform 
rescue services.
    (i) The employer shall ensure that each member of the rescue service 
is provided with, and is trained to use properly, the personal 
protective equipment and rescue equipment necessary for making rescues 
from permit spaces.
    (ii) Each member of the rescue service shall be trained to perform 
the assigned rescue duties. Each member of the rescue service shall also 
receive the training required of authorized entrants under paragraph (g) 
of this section.
    (iii) Each member of the rescue service shall practice making permit 
space rescues at least once every 12 months, by means of simulated 
rescue operations in which they remove dummies, manikins, or actual 
persons from the actual permit spaces or from representative permit 
spaces. Representative permit spaces shall, with respect to opening 
size, configuration, and accessibility, simulate the types of permit 
spaces from which rescue is to be performed.
    (iv) Each member of the rescue service shall be trained in basic 
first-aid and in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). At least one 
member of the rescue service holding current certification in first aid 
and in CPR shall be available.
    (2) When an employer (host employer) arranges to have persons other

[[Page 468]]

than the host employer's employees perform permit space rescue, the host 
employer shall:
    (i) Inform the rescue service of the hazards they may confront when 
called on to perform rescue at the host employer's facility, and
    (ii) Provide the rescue service with access to all permit spaces 
from which rescue may be necessary so that the rescue service can 
develop appropriate rescue plans and practice rescue operations.
    (3) To facilitate non-entry rescue, retrieval systems or methods 
shall be used whenever an authorized entrant enters a permit space, 
unless the retrieval equipment would increase the overall risk of entry 
or would not contribute to the rescue of the entrant. Retrieval systems 
shall meet the following requirements.
    (i) Each authorized entrant shall use a chest or full body harness, 
with a retrieval line attached at the center of the entrant's back near 
shoulder level, or above the entrant's head. Wristlets may be used in 
lieu of the chest or full body harness if the employer can demonstrate 
that the use of a chest or full body harness is infeasible or creates a 
greater hazard and that the use of wristlets is the safest and most 
effective alternative.
    (ii) The other end of the retrieval line shall be attached to a 
mechanical device or fixed point outside the permit space in such a 
manner that rescue can begin as soon as the rescuer becomes aware that 
rescue is necessary. A mechanical device shall be available to retrieve 
personnel from vertical type permit spaces more than 5 feet (1.52 m) 
deep.
    (4) If an injured entrant is exposed to a substance for which a 
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) or other similar written information 
is required to be kept at the worksite, that MSDS or written information 
shall be made available to the medical facility treating the exposed 
entrant.
[58 FR 4549, Jan. 14, 1993; 58 FR 34885, June 29, 1993, as amended at 59 
FR 26114, May 19, 1994]

      APPENDICES TO Sec. 1910.146--PERMIT-REQUIRED CONFINED SPACES

    Note: Appendices A through E serve to provide information and non-
mandatory guidelines to assist employers and employees in complying with 
the appropriate requirements of this section.


[[Page 469]]



  Appendix A to Sec. 1910.146--Permit-Required Confined Space Decision 
                               Flow Chart
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.029

[58 FR 4549, Jan. 14, 1993; 58 FR 34846, June 29, 1993]

[[Page 470]]

     Appendix B to Sec. 1910.146--Procedures for Atmospheric Testing

    Atmospheric testing is required for two distinct purposes: 
evaluation of the hazards of the permit space and verification that 
acceptable entry conditions for entry into that space exist.
    (1) Evaluation testing. The atmosphere of a confined space should be 
analyzed using equipment of sufficient sensitivity and specificity to 
identify and evaluate any hazardous atmospheres that may exist or arise, 
so that appropriate permit entry procedures can be developed and 
acceptable entry conditions stipulated for that space. Evaluation and 
interpretation of these data, and development of the entry procedure, 
should be done by, or reviewed by, a technically qualified professional 
(e.g., OSHA consultation service, or certified industrial hygienist, 
registered safety engineer, certified safety professional, certified 
marine chemist, etc.) based on evaluation of all serious hazards.
    (2) Verification testing. The atmosphere of a permit space which may 
contain a hazardous atmosphere should be tested for residues of all 
contaminants identified by evaluation testing using permit specified 
equipment to determine that residual concentrations at the time of 
testing and entry are within the range of acceptable entry conditions. 
Results of testing (i.e., actual concentration, etc.) should be recorded 
on the permit in the space provided adjacent to the stipulated 
acceptable entry condition.
    (3) Duration of testing. Measurement of values for each atmospheric 
parameter should be made for at least the minimum response time of the 
test instrument specified by the manufacturer.
    (4) Testing stratified atmospheres. When monitoring for entries 
involving a descent into atmospheres that may be stratified, the 
atmospheric envelope should be tested a distance of approximately 4 feet 
(1.22 m) in the direction of travel and to each side. If a sampling 
probe is used, the entrant's rate of progress should be slowed to 
accommodate the sampling speed and detector response.
    (5) Order of testing. A test for oxygen is performed first because 
most combustible gas meters are oxygen dependent and will not provide 
reliable readings in an oxygen deficient atmosphere. Combustible gasses 
are tested for next because the threat of fire or explosion is both more 
immediate and more life threatening, in most cases, than exposure to 
toxic gasses and vapors. If tests for toxic gasses and vapors are 
necessary, they are performed last.

Appendix C to Sec. 1910.146--Examples of Permit-required Confined Space 
                                Programs

                               Example 1.

Workplace. Sewer entry.

Potential hazards. The employees could be exposed to the following:

Engulfment.

Presence of toxic gases. Equal to or more than 10 ppm hydrogen sulfide 
measured as an 8-hour time-weighted average. If the presence of other 
toxic contaminants is suspected, specific monitoring programs will be 
developed.

Presence of explosive/flammable gases. Equal to or greater than 10% of 
the lower flammable limit (LFL).

Oxygen Deficiency. A concentration of oxygen in the atmosphere equal to 
or less than 19.5% by volume.

A. Entry Without Permit/Attendant

Certification. Confined spaces may be entered without the need for a 
written permit or attendant provided that the space can be maintained in 
a safe condition for entry by mechanical ventilation alone, as provided 
in Sec. 1910.146(c)(5). All spaces shall be considered permit-required 
confined spaces until the pre-entry procedures demonstrate otherwise. 
Any employee required or permitted to pre-check or enter an enclosed/
confined space shall have successfully completed, -as a minimum, the 
training as required by the following sections of these procedures. A 
written copy of operating and rescue procedures as required by these 
procedures shall be at the work site for the duration of the job. The 
Confined Space Pre-Entry Check List must be completed by the LEAD WORKER 
before entry into a confined space. This list verifies completion of 
items listed below. This check list shall be kept at the job site for 
duration of the job. If circumstances dictate an interruption in the 
work, the permit space must be re-evaluated and a new check list must be 
completed.

Control of atmospheric and engulfment hazards.

Pumps and Lines. All pumps and lines which may reasonably cause 
contaminants to flow into the space shall be disconnected, blinded and 
locked out, or effectively isolated by other means to prevent 
development of dangerous air contamination or engulfment. Not all 
laterals to sewers or storm drains require blocking. However, where 
experience or knowledge of industrial use indicates there is a 
reasonable potential for contamination of air or engulfment into an 
occupied sewer, then all affected laterals shall be blocked. If blocking 
and/or isolation requires entry into the space the provisions for entry 
into a

[[Page 471]]

permit- required confined space must be implemented.

Surveillance. The surrounding area shall be surveyed to avoid hazards 
such as drifting vapors from the tanks, piping, or sewers.

Testing. The atmosphere within the space will be tested to determine 
whether dangerous air contamination and/or oxygen deficiency exists. 
Detector tubes, alarm only gas monitors and explosion meters are 
examples of monitoring equipment that may be used to test permit space 
atmospheres. Testing shall be performed by the LEAD WORKER who has 
successfully completed the Gas Detector training for the monitor he will 
use. The minimum parameters to be monitored are oxygen deficiency, LFL, 
and hydrogen sulfide concentration. A written record of the pre-entry 
test results shall be made and kept at the work site for the duration of 
the job. The supervisor will certify in writing, based upon the results 
of the pre-entry testing, that all hazards have been eliminated. 
Affected employees shall be able to review the testing results. The most 
hazardous conditions shall govern when work is being performed in two 
adjoining, connecting spaces.

Entry Procedures. If there are no non-atmospheric hazards present and if 
the pre-entry tests show there is no dangerous air contamination and/or 
oxygen deficiency within the space and there is no reason to believe 
that any is likely to develop, entry into and work within may proceed. 
Continuous testing of the atmosphere in the immediate vicinity of the 
workers within the space shall be accomplished. The workers will 
immediately leave the permit space when any of the gas monitor alarm set 
points are reached as defined. Workers will not return to the area until 
a SUPERVISOR who has completed the gas detector training has used a 
direct reading gas detector to evaluate the situation and has determined 
that it is safe to enter.

Rescue. Arrangements for rescue services are not required where there is 
no attendant. See the rescue portion of section B., below, for 
instructions regarding rescue planning where an entry permit is 
required.

B. Entry Permit Required

Permits. Confined Space Entry Permit. All spaces shall be considered 
permit-required confined spaces until the pre-entry procedures 
demonstrate otherwise. Any employee required or permitted to pre-check 
or enter a permit-required confined space shall have successfully 
completed, as a minimum, the training as required by the following 
sections of these procedures. A written copy of operating and rescue 
procedures as required by these procedures shall be at the work site for 
the duration of the job. The Confined Space Entry Permit must be 
completed before approval can be given to enter a permit-required 
confined space. This permit verifies completion of items listed below. 
This permit shall be kept at the job site for the duration of the job. 
If circumstances cause an interruption in the work or a change in the 
alarm conditions for which entry was approved, a new Confined Space 
Entry Permit must be completed.

Control of atmospheric and engulfment hazards.

Surveillance. The surrounding area shall be surveyed to avoid hazards 
such as drifting vapors from tanks, piping or sewers.

Testing. The confined space atmosphere shall be tested to determine 
whether dangerous air contamination and/or oxygen deficiency exists. A 
direct reading gas monitor shall be used. Testing shall be performed by 
the SUPERVISOR who has successfully completed the gas detector training 
for the monitor he will use. The minimum parameters to be monitored are 
oxygen deficiency, LFL and hydrogen sulfide concentration. A written 
record of the pre- entry test results shall be made and kept at the work 
site for the duration of the job. Affected employees shall be able to 
review the testing results. The most hazardous conditions shall govern 
when work is being performed in two adjoining, connected spaces.

Space Ventilation. Mechanical ventilation systems, where applicable, 
shall be set at 100% outside air. Where possible, open additional 
manholes to increase air circulation. Use portable blowers to augment 
natural circulation if needed. After a suitable ventilating period, 
repeat the testing. Entry may not begin until testing has demonstrated 
that the hazardous atmosphere has been eliminated.

Entry Procedures. The following procedure shall be observed under any of 
the following conditions: 1.) Testing demonstrates the existence of 
dangerous or deficient conditions and additional ventilation cannot 
reduce concentrations to safe levels; 2.) The atmosphere tests as safe 
but unsafe conditions can reasonably be expected to develop; 3.) It is 
not feasible to provide for ready exit from spaces equipped with 
automatic fire suppression systems and it is not practical or safe to 
deactivate such systems; or 4.) An emergency exists and it is not 
feasible to wait for pre-entry procedures to take effect.
    All personnel must be trained. A self contained breathing apparatus 
shall be worn by any person entering the space. At least one worker 
shall stand by the outside of the space ready to give assistance in case 
of emergency. The standby worker shall have a self contained breathing 
apparatus available for immediate use. There shall be at least one 
additional worker within sight or call of the standby worker. Continuous 
powered communications shall be maintained between the worker within the 
confined space and standby personnel.

[[Page 472]]

    If at any time there is any questionable action or non- movement by 
the worker inside, a verbal check will be made. If there is no response, 
the worker will be moved immediately. Exception: If the worker is 
disabled due to falling or impact, he/she shall not be removed from the 
confined space unless there is immediate danger to his/her life. Local 
fire department rescue personnel shall be notified immediately. The 
standby worker may only enter the confined space in case of an emergency 
(wearing the self contained breathing apparatus) and only after being 
relieved by another worker. Safety belt or harness with attached 
lifeline shall be used by all workers entering the space with the free 
end of the line secured outside the entry opening. The standby worker 
shall attempt to remove a disabled worker via his lifeline before 
entering the space.
    When practical, these spaces shall be entered through side 
openings--those within 3 1/2 feet (1.07 m) of the bottom. When entry 
must be through a top opening, the safety belt shall be of the harness 
type that suspends a person upright and a hoisting device or similar 
apparatus shall be available for lifting workers out of the space.
    In any situation where their use may endanger the worker, use of a 
hoisting device or safety belt and attached lifeline may be 
discontinued.
    When dangerous air contamination is attributable to flammable and/or 
explosive substances, lighting and electrical equipment shall be Class 
1, Division 1 rated per National Electrical Code and no ignition sources 
shall be introduced into the area.
    Continuous gas monitoring shall be performed during all confined 
space operations. If alarm conditions change adversely, entry personnel 
shall exit the confined space and a new confined space permit issued.

Rescue. Call the fire department services for rescue. Where immediate 
hazards to injured personnel are present, workers at the site shall 
implement emergency procedures to fit the situation.

                               Example 2.

Workplace. Meat and poultry rendering plants.
    Cookers and dryers are either batch or continuous in their 
operation. Multiple batch cookers are operated in parallel. When one 
unit of a multiple set is shut down for repairs, means are available to 
isolate that unit from the others which remain in operation.
    Cookers and dryers are horizontal, cylindrical vessels equipped with 
a center, rotating shaft and agitator paddles or discs. If the inner 
shell is jacketed, it is usually heated with steam at pressures up to 
150 psig (1034.25 kPa). The rotating shaft assembly of the continuous 
cooker or dryer is also steam heated.
Potential Hazards. The recognized hazards associated with cookers and 
dryers are the risk that employees could be:

1. Struck or caught by rotating agitator;
2. Engulfed in raw material or hot, recycled fat;
3. Burned by steam from leaks into the cooker/dryer steam jacket or the 
condenser duct system if steam valves are not properly closed and locked 
out;
4. Burned by contact with hot metal surfaces, such as the agitator shaft 
assembly, or inner shell of the cooker/dryer;
5. Heat stress caused by warm atmosphere inside cooker/dryer;
6. Slipping and falling on grease in the cooker/dryer;
7. Electrically shocked by faulty equipment taken into the cooker/dryer;
8. Burned or overcome by fire or products of combustion; or
9. Overcome by fumes generated by welding or cutting done on grease 
covered surfaces.

Permits. The supervisor in this case is always present at the cooker/
dryer or other permit entry confined space when entry is made. The 
supervisor must follow the pre-entry isolation procedures described in 
the entry permit in preparing for entry, and ensure that the protective 
clothing, ventilating equipment and any other equipment required by the 
permit are at the entry site.

Control of hazards. Mechanical. Lock out main power switch to agitator 
motor at main power panel. Affix tag to the lock to inform others that a 
permit entry confined space entry is in progress.

Engulfment. Close all valves in the raw material blow line. Secure each 
valve in its closed position using chain and lock. Attach a tag to the 
valve and chain warning that a permit entry confined space entry is in 
progress. The same procedure shall be used for securing the fat recycle 
valve.

Burns and heat stress. Close steam supply valves to jacket and secure 
with chains and tags. Insert solid blank at flange in cooker vent line 
to condenser manifold duct system. Vent cooker/dryer by opening access 
door at discharge end and top center door to allow natural ventilation 
throughout the entry. If faster cooling is needed, use an portable 
ventilation fan to increase ventilation. Cooling water may be circulated 
through the jacket to reduce both outer and inner surface temperatures 
of cooker/dryers faster. Check air and inner surface temperatures in 
cooker/dryer to assure they are within acceptable limits before 
entering, or use proper protective clothing.

Fire and fume hazards. Careful site preparation, such as cleaning the 
area within 4

[[Page 473]]

inches (10.16 cm) of all welding or torch cutting operations, and proper 
ventilation are the preferred controls. All welding and cutting 
operations shall be done in accordance with the requirements of 29 CFR 
Part 1910, Subpart Q, OSHA's welding standard. Proper ventilation may be 
achieved by local exhaust ventilation, or the use of portable 
ventilation fans, or a combination of the two practices.

Electrical shock. Electrical equipment used in cooker/dryers shall be in 
serviceable condition.

Slips and falls. Remove residual grease before entering cooker/dryer.

Attendant. The supervisor shall be the attendant for employees entering 
cooker/dryers.

Permit. The permit shall specify how isolation shall be done and any 
other preparations needed before making entry. This is especially 
important in parallel arrangements of cooker/dryers so that the entire 
operation need not be shut down to allow safe entry into one unit.

Rescue. When necessary, the attendant shall call the fire department as 
previously arranged.

                               Example 3.

Workplace. Workplaces where tank cars, trucks, and trailers, dry bulk 
tanks and trailers, railroad tank cars, and similar portable tanks are 
fabricated or serviced.

A. During fabrication. These tanks and dry-bulk carriers are entered 
repeatedly throughout the fabrication process. These products are not 
configured identically, but the manufacturing processes by which they 
are made are very similar.

Sources of hazards. In addition to the mechanical hazards arising from 
the risks that an entrant would be injured due to contact with 
components of the tank or the tools being used, there is also the risk 
that a worker could be injured by breathing fumes from welding materials 
or mists or vapors from materials used to coat the tank interior. In 
addition, many of these vapors and mists are flammable, so the failure 
to properly ventilate a tank could lead to a fire or explosion.

Control of hazards.

Welding. Local exhaust ventilation shall be used to remove welding fumes 
once the tank or carrier is completed to the point that workers may 
enter and exit only through a manhole. (Follow the requirements of 29 
CFR 1910, Subpart Q, OSHA's welding standard, at all times.) Welding gas 
tanks may never be brought into a tank or carrier that is a permit entry 
confined space.

    Application of interior coatings/linings. Atmospheric hazards shall 
be controlled by forced air ventilation sufficient to keep the 
atmospheric concentration of flammable materials below 10% of the lower 
flammable limit (LFL) (or lower explosive limit (LEL), whichever term is 
used locally). The appropriate respirators are provided and shall be 
used in addition to providing forced ventilation if the forced 
ventilation does not maintain acceptable respiratory conditions.

Permits. Because of the repetitive nature of the entries in these 
operations, an ``Area Entry Permit'' will be issued for a 1 month period 
to cover those production areas where tanks are fabricated to the point 
that entry and exit are made using manholes.

Authorization. Only the area supervisor may authorize an employee to 
enter a tank within the permit area. The area supervisor must determine 
that conditions in the tank trailer, dry bulk trailer or truck, etc. 
meet permit requirements before authorizing entry.

Attendant. The area supervisor shall designate an employee to maintain 
communication by employer specified means with employees working in 
tanks to ensure their safety. The attendant may not enter any permit 
entry confined space to rescue an entrant or for any other reason, 
unless authorized by the rescue procedure and, and even then, only after 
calling the rescue team and being relieved by as attendant by another 
worker.

Communications and observation. Communications between attendant and 
entrant(s) shall be maintained throughout entry. Methods of 
communication that may be specified by the permit include voice, voice 
powered radio, tapping or rapping codes on tank walls, signalling tugs 
on a rope, and the attendant's observation that work activities such as 
chipping, grinding, welding, spraying, etc., which require deliberate 
operator control continue normally. These activities often generate so 
much noise that the necessary hearing protection makes communication by 
voice difficult.

Rescue procedures. Acceptable rescue procedures include entry by a team 
of employee-rescuers, use of public emergency services, and procedures 
for breaching the tank. The area permit specifies which procedures are 
available, but the area supervisor makes the final decision based on 
circumstances. (Certain injuries may make it necessary to breach the 
tank to remove a person rather than risk additional injury by removal 
through an existing manhole. However, the supervisor must ensure that no 
breaching procedure used for rescue would violate terms of the entry 
permit. For instance, if the tank must be breached by cutting with a 
torch, the tank surfaces to be cut must be free of volatile or 
combustible coatings within 4 inches (10.16 cm) of the cutting line and 
the atmosphere within the tank must be below the LFL.


[[Page 474]]


Retrieval line and harnesses. The retrieval lines and harnesses 
generally required under this standard are usually impractical for use 
in tanks because the internal configuration of the tanks and their 
interior baffles and other structures would prevent rescuers from 
hauling out injured entrants. However, unless the rescue procedure calls 
for breaching the tank for rescue, the rescue team shall be trained in 
the use of retrieval lines and harnesses for removing injured employees 
through manholes.

B. Repair or service of ``used'' tanks and bulk trailers.

Sources of hazards. In addition to facing the potential hazards 
encountered in fabrication or manufacturing, tanks or trailers which 
have been in service may contain residues of dangerous materials, 
whether left over from the transportation of hazardous cargoes or 
generated by chemical or bacterial action on residues of non-hazardous 
cargoes.

Control of atmospheric hazards. A ``used'' tank shall be brought into 
areas where tank entry is authorized only after the tank has been 
emptied, cleansed (without employee entry) of any residues, and purged 
of any potential atmospheric hazards.

Welding. In addition to tank cleaning for control of atmospheric 
hazards, coating and surface materials shall be removed 4 inches (10.16 
cm) or more from any surface area where welding or other torch work will 
be done and care taken that the atmosphere within the tank remains well 
below the LFL. (Follow the requirements of 29 CFR 1910, Subpart Q, 
OSHA's welding standard, at all times.)

Permits. An entry permit valid for up to 1 year shall be issued prior to 
authorization of entry into used tank trailers, dry bulk trailers or 
trucks. In addition to the pre-entry cleaning requirement, this permit 
shall require the employee safeguards specified for new tank fabrication 
or construction permit areas.

Authorization. Only the area supervisor may authorize an employee to 
enter a tank trailer, dry bulk trailer or truck within the permit area. 
The area supervisor must determine that the entry permit requirements 
have been met before authorizing entry.

[[Page 475]]

               Appendix D to Sec. 1910.146--Sample Permits
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.030


[[Page 476]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.031



[[Page 477]]

             Appendix E to Sec. 1910.146--Sewer System Entry

    Sewer entry differs in three vital respects from other permit 
entries; first, there rarely exists any way to completely isolate the 
space (a section of a continuous system) to be entered; second, because 
isolation is not complete, the atmosphere may suddenly and unpredictably 
become lethally hazardous (toxic, flammable or explosive) from causes 
beyond the control of the entrant or employer, and third, experienced 
sewer workers are especially knowledgeable in entry and work in their 
permit spaces because of their frequent entries. Unlike other 
employments where permit space entry is a rare and exceptional event, 
sewer workers' usual work environment is a permit space.
    (1) Adherence to procedure. The employer should designate as 
entrants only employees who are thoroughly trained in the employer's 
sewer entry procedures and who demonstrate that they follow these entry 
procedures exactly as prescribed when performing sewer entries.
    (2) Atmospheric monitoring. Entrants should be trained in the use 
of, and be equipped with, atmospheric monitoring equipment which sounds 
an audible alarm, in addition to its visual readout, whenever one of the 
following conditions are encountered: Oxygen concentration less than 
19.5 percent; flammable gas or vapor at 10 percent or more of the lower 
flammable limit (LFL); or hydrogen sulfide or carbon monoxide at or 
above 10 ppm or 35 ppm, respectively, measured as an 8-hour time-
weighted average. Atmospheric monitoring equipment needs to be 
calibrated according to the manufacturer's instructions. The oxygen 
sensor/broad range sensor is best suited for initial use in situations 
where the actual or potential contaminants have not been identified, 
because broad range sensors, unlike substance-specific sensors, enable 
employers to obtain an overall reading of the hydrocarbons (flammables) 
present in the space. However, such sensors only indicate that a 
hazardous threshold of a class of chemicals has been exceeded. They do 
not measure the levels of contamination of specific substances. 
Therefore, substance-specific devices, which measure the actual levels 
of specific substances, are best suited for use where actual and 
potential contaminants have been identified. The measurements obtained 
with substance-specific devices are of vital importance to the employer 
when decisions are made concerning the measures necessary to protect 
entrants (such as ventilation or personal protective equipment) and the 
setting and attainment of appropriate entry conditions. However, the 
sewer environment may suddenly and unpredictably change, and the 
substance-specific devices may not detect the potentially lethal 
atmospheric hazards which may enter the sewer environment.
    Although OSHA considers the information and guidance provided above 
to be appropriate and useful in most sewer entry situations, the Agency 
emphasizes that each employer must consider the unique circumstances, 
including the predictability of the atmosphere, of the sewer permit 
spaces in the employer's workplace in preparing for entry. Only the 
employer can decide, based upon his or her knowledge of, and experience 
with permit spaces in sewer systems, what the best type of testing 
instrument may be for any specific entry operation.
    The selected testing instrument should be carried and used by the 
entrant in sewer line work to monitor the atmosphere in the entrant's 
environment, and in advance of the entrant's direction of movement, to 
warn the entrant of any deterioration in atmospheric conditions. Where 
several entrants are working together in the same immediate location, 
one instrument, used by the lead entrant, is acceptable.
    (3) Surge flow and flooding. Sewer crews should develop and maintain 
liaison, to the extent possible, with the local weather bureau and fire 
and emergency services in their area so that sewer work may be delayed 
or interrupted and entrants withdrawn whenever sewer lines might be 
suddenly flooded by rain or fire suppression activities, or whenever 
flammable or other hazardous materials are released into sewers during 
emergencies by industrial or transportation accidents.
    (4) Special Equipment. Entry into large bore sewers may require the 
use of special equipment. Such equipment might include such items as 
atmosphere monitoring devices with automatic audible alarms, escape 
self-contained breathing apparatus (ESCBA) with at least 10 minute air 
supply (or other NIOSH approved self-rescuer), and waterproof 
flashlights, and may also include boats and rafts, radios and rope 
stand-offs for pulling around bends and corners as needed.
[58 FR 4549, Jan. 14, 1993; 58 FR 34845, June 29, 1993, as amended at 59 
FR 26114, May 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.147  The control of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout).

    (a) Scope, application and purpose--(1) Scope. (i) This standard 
covers the servicing and maintenance of machines and equipment in which 
the unexpected energization or start up of the machines or equipment, or 
release of stored energy could cause injury to employees. This standard 
establishes minimum performance requirements for the control of such 
hazardous energy.

[[Page 478]]

    (ii) This standard does not cover the following:
    (A) Construction, agriculture and maritime employment;
    (B) Installations under the exclusive control of electric utilities 
for the purpose of power generation, transmission and distribution, 
including related equipment for communication or metering; and
    (C) Exposure to electrical hazards from work on, near, or with 
conductors or equipment in electric utilization installations, which is 
covered by subpart S of this part; and
    (D) Oil and gas well drilling and servicing.
    (2) Application. (i) This standard applies to the control of energy 
during servicing and/or maintenance of machines and equipment.
    (ii) Normal production operations are not covered by this standard 
(See subpart 0 of this part). Servicing and/or maintenance which takes 
place during normal production operations is covered by this standard 
only if;:
    (A) An employee is required to remove or bypass a guard or other 
safety device; or
    (B) An employee is required to place any part of his or her body 
into an area on a machine or piece of equipment where work is actually 
performed upon the material being processed (point of operation) or 
where an associated danger zone exists during a machine operating cycle.

    Note: Exception to paragraph (a)(2)(ii): Minor tool changes and 
adjustments, and other minor servicing activities, which take place 
during normal production operations, are not covered by this standard if 
they are routine, repetitive, and integral to the use of the equipment 
for production, provided that the work is performed using alternative 
measures which provide effective protection (See subpart 0 of this 
part).

    (iii) This standard does not apply to the following.
    (A) Work on cord and plug connected electric equipment for which 
exposure to the hazards of unexpected energization or start up of the 
equipment is controlled by the unplugging of the equipment from the 
energy source and by the plug being under the exclusive control of the 
employee performing the servicing or maintenance.
    (B) Hot tap operations involving transmission and distribution 
systems for substances such as gas, steam, water or petroleum products 
when they are performed on pressurized pipelines, provided that the 
employer demonstrates that (1) continuity of service is essential; (2) 
shutdown of the system is impractical; and (3) documented procedures are 
followed, and special equipment is used which will provide proven 
effective protection for employees.
    (3) Purpose. (i) This section requires employers to establish a 
program and utilize procedures for affixing appropriate lockout devices 
or tagout devices to energy isolating devices, and to otherwise disable 
machines or equipment to prevent unexpected energization, start-up or 
release of stored energy in order to prevent injury to employees.
    (ii) When other standards in this part require the use of lockout or 
tagout, they shall be used and supplemented by the procedural and 
training requirements of this section.
    (b) Definitions applicable to this section.
    Affected employee. An employee whose job requires him/her to operate 
or use a machine or equipment on which servicing or maintenance is being 
performed under lockout or tagout, or whose job requires him/her to work 
in an area in which such servicing or maintenance is being performed.
    Authorized employee. A person who locks out or tags out machines or 
equipment in order to perform servicing or maintenance on that machine 
or equipment. An affected employee becomes an authorized employee when 
that employee's duties include performing servicing or maintenance 
covered under this section.
    Capable of being locked out. An energy isolating device is capable 
of being locked out if it has a hasp or other means of attachment to 
which, or through which, a lock can be affixed, or it has a locking 
mechanism built into it. Other energy isolating devices are capable of 
being locked out, if lockout can be achieved without the need to 
dismantle, rebuild, or replace the energy isolating device or 
permanently alter its energy control capability.

[[Page 479]]

    Energized. Connected to an energy source or containing residual or 
stored energy.
    Energy isolating device. A mechanical device that physically 
prevents the transmission or release of energy, including but not 
limited to the following: A manually operated electrical circuit 
breaker; a disconnect switch; a manually operated switch by which the 
conductors of a circuit can be disconnected from all ungrounded supply 
conductors, and, in addition, no pole can be operated independently; a 
line valve; a block; and any similar device used to block or isolate 
energy. Push buttons, selector switches and other control circuit type 
devices are not energy isolating devices.
    Energy source. Any source of electrical, mechanical, hydraulic, 
pneumatic, chemical, thermal, or other energy.
    Hot tap. A procedure used in the repair, maintenance and services 
activities which involves welding on a piece of equipment (pipelines, 
vessels or tanks) under pressure, in order to install connections or 
appurtenances. It is commonly used to replace or add sections of 
pipeline without the interruption of service for air, gas, water, steam, 
and petrochemical distribution systems.
    Lockout. The placement of a lockout device on an energy isolating 
device, in accordance with an established procedure, ensuring that the 
energy isolating device and the equipment being controlled cannot be 
operated until the lockout device is removed.
    Lockout device. A device that utilizes a positive means such as a 
lock, either key or combination type, to hold an energy isolating device 
in a safe position and prevent the energizing of a machine or equipment. 
Included are blank flanges and bolted slip blinds.
    Normal production operations. The utilization of a machine or 
equipment to perform its intended production function.
    Servicing and/or maintenance. Workplace activities such as 
constructing, installing, setting up, adjusting, inspecting, modifying, 
and maintaining and/or servicing machines or equipment. These activities 
include lubrication, cleaning or unjamming of machines or equipment and 
making adjustments or tool changes, where the employee may be exposed to 
the unexpected energization or startup of the equipment or release of 
hazardous energy.
    Setting up. Any work performed to prepare a machine or equipment to 
perform its normal production operation.
    Tagout. The placement of a tagout device on an energy isolating 
device, in accordance with an established procedure, to indicate that 
the energy isolating device and the equipment being controlled may not 
be operated until the tagout device is removed.
    Tagout device. A prominent warning device, such as a tag and a means 
of attachment, which can be securely fastened to an energy isolating 
device in accordance with an established procedure, to indicate that the 
energy isolating device and the equipment being controlled may not be 
operated until the tagout device is removed.
    (c) General--(1) Energy control program. The employer shall 
establish a program consisting of energy control procedures, employee 
training and periodic inspections to ensure that before any employee 
performs any servicing or maintenance on a machine or equipment where 
the unexpected energizing, start up or release of stored energy could 
occur and cause injury, the machine or equipment shall be isolated from 
the energy source, and rendered inoperative.
    (2) Lockout/tagout. (i) If an energy isolating device is not capable 
of being locked out, the employer's energy control program under 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section shall utilize a tagout system.
    (ii) If an energy isolating device is capable of being locked out, 
the employer's energy control program under paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section shall utilize lockout, unless the employer can demonstrate that 
the utilization of a tagout system will provide full employee protection 
as set forth in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (iii) After January 2, 1990, whenever replacement or major repair, 
renovation or modification of a machine or equipment is performed, and 
whenever new machines or equipment are installed, energy isolating 
devices for

[[Page 480]]

such machine or equipment shall be designed to accept a lockout device.
    (3) Full employee protection. (i) When a tagout device is used on an 
energy isolating device which is capable of being locked out, the tagout 
device shall be attached at the same location that the lockout device 
would have been attached, and the employer shall demonstrate that the 
tagout program will provide a level of safety equivalent to that 
obtained by using a lockout program.
    (ii) In demonstrating that a level of safety is achieved in the 
tagout program which is equivalent to the level of safety obtained by 
using a lockout program, the employer shall demonstrate full compliance 
with all tagout-related provisions of this standard together with such 
additional elements as are necessary to provide the equivalent safety 
available from the use of a lockout device. Additional means to be 
considered as part of the demonstration of full employee protection 
shall include the implementation of additional safety measures such as 
the removal of an isolating circuit element, blocking of a controlling 
switch, opening of an extra disconnecting device, or the removal of a 
valve handle to reduce the likelihood of inadvertent energization.
    (4) Energy control procedure. (i) Procedures shall be developed, 
documented and utilized for the control of potentially hazardous energy 
when employees are engaged in the activities covered by this section.

    Note: Exception: The employer need not document the required 
procedure for a particular machine or equipment, when all of the 
following elements exist: (1) The machine or equipment has no potential 
for stored or residual energy or reaccumulation of stored energy after 
shut down which could endanger employees; (2) the machine or equipment 
has a single energy source which can be readily identified and isolated; 
(3) the isolation and locking out of that energy source will completely 
deenergize and deactivate the machine or equipment; (4) the machine or 
equipment is isolated from that energy source and locked out during 
servicing or maintenance; (5) a single lockout device will achieve a 
locked-out condition; (6) the lockout device is under the exclusive 
control of the authorized employee performing the servicing or 
maintenance; (7) the servicing or maintenance does not create hazards 
for other employees; and (8) the employer, in utilizing this exception, 
has had no accidents involving the unexpected activation or 
reenergization of the machine or equipment during servicing or 
maintenance.

    (ii) The procedures shall clearly and specifically outline the 
scope, purpose, authorization, rules, and techniques to be utilized for 
the control of hazardous energy, and the means to enforce compliance 
including, but not limited to, the following:
    (A) A specific statement of the intended use of the procedure;
    (B) Specific procedural steps for shutting down, isolating, blocking 
and securing machines or equipment to control hazardous energy;
    (C) Specific procedural steps for the placement, removal and 
transfer of lockout devices or tagout devices and the responsibility for 
them; and
    (D) Specific requirements for testing a machine or equipment to 
determine and verify the effectiveness of lockout devices, tagout 
devices, and other energy control measures.
    (5) Protective materials and hardware. (i) Locks, tags, chains, 
wedges, key blocks, adapter pins, self-locking fasteners, or other 
hardware shall be provided by the employer for isolating, securing or 
blocking of machines or equipment from energy sources.
    (ii) Lockout devices and tagout devices shall be singularly 
identified; shall be the only devices(s) used for controlling energy; 
shall not be used for other purposes; and shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (A) Durable. (1) Lockout and tagout devices shall be capable of 
withstanding the environment to which they are exposed for the maximum 
period of time that exposure is expected.
    (2) Tagout devices shall be constructed and printed so that exposure 
to weather conditions or wet and damp locations will not cause the tag 
to deteriorate or the message on the tag to become illegible.
    (3) Tags shall not deteriorate when used in corrosive environments 
such as areas where acid and alkali chemicals are handled and stored.
    (B) Standardized. Lockout and tagout devices shall be standardized 
within the facility in at least one of the following criteria: Color; 
shape; or size;

[[Page 481]]

and additionally, in the case of tagout devices, print and format shall 
be standardized.
    (C) Substantial--(1) Lockout devices. Lockout devices shall be 
substantial enough to prevent removal without the use of excessive force 
or unusual techniques, such as with the use of bolt cutters or other 
metal cutting tools.
    (2) Tagout devices. Tagout devices, including and their means of 
attachment, shall be substantial enough to prevent inadvertent or 
accidental removal. Tagout device attachment means shall be of a non-
reusable type, attachable by hand, self-locking, and non-releasable with 
a minimum unlocking strength of no less than 50 pounds and having the 
general design and basic characteristics of being at least equivalent to 
a one-piece, all-environment-tolerant nylon cable tie.
    (D) Identifiable. Lockout devices and tagout devices shall indicate 
the identity of the employee applying the device(s).
    (iii) Tagout devices shall warn against hazardous conditions if the 
machine or equipment is energized and shall include a legend such as the 
following: Do Not Start, Do Not Open, Do Not Close, Do Not Energize, Do 
Not Operate.
    (6) Periodic inspection. (i) The employer shall conduct a periodic 
inspection of the energy control procedure at least annually to ensure 
that the procedure and the requirements of this standard are being 
followed.
    (A) The periodic inspection shall be perfomed by an authorized 
employee other than the ones(s) utilizing the energy control procedure 
being inspected.
    (B) The periodic inspection shall be conducted to correct any 
deviations or inadequacies identified.
    (C) Where lockout is used for energy control, the periodic 
inspection shall include a review, between the inspector and each 
authorized employee, of that employee's responsibilities under the 
energy control procedure being inspected.
    (D) Where tagout is used for energy control, the periodic inspection 
shall include a review, between the inspector and each authorized and 
affected employee, of that employee's responsibilities under the energy 
control procedure being inspected, and the elements set forth in 
paragraph (c)(7)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) The employer shall certify that the periodic inspections have 
been performed. The certification shall identify the machine or 
equipment on which the energy control procedure was being utilized, the 
date of the inspection, the employees included in the inspection, and 
the person performing the inspection.
    (7) Training and communication. (i) The employer shall provide 
training to ensure that the purpose and function of the energy control 
program are understood by employees and that the knowledge and skills 
required for the safe application, usage, and removal of the energy 
controls are acquired by employees. The training shall include the 
following:
    (A) Each authorized employee shall receive training in the 
recognition of applicable hazardous energy sources, the type and 
magnitude of the energy available in the workplace, and the methods and 
means necessary for energy isolation and control.
    (B) Each affected employee shall be instructed in the purpose and 
use of the energy control procedure.
    (C) All other employees whose work operations are or may be in an 
area where energy control procedures may be utilized, shall be 
instructed about the procedure, and about the prohibition relating to 
attempts to restart or reenergize machines or equipment which are locked 
out or tagged out.
    (ii) When tagout systems are used, employees shall also be trained 
in the following limitations of tags:
    (A) Tags are essentially warning devices affixed to energy isolating 
devices, and do not provide the physical restraint on those devices that 
is provided by a lock.
    (B) When a tag is attached to an energy isolating means, it is not 
to be removed without authorization of the authorized person responsible 
for it, and it is never to be bypassed, ignored, or otherwise defeated.
    (C) Tags must be legible and understandable by all authorized 
employees, affected employees, and all other employees whose work 
operations are or

[[Page 482]]

may be in the area, in order to be effective.
    (D) Tags and their means of attachment must be made of materials 
which will withstand the environmental conditions encountered in the 
workplace.
    (E) Tags may evoke a false sense of security, and their meaning 
needs to be understood as part of the overall energy control program.
    (F) Tags must be securely attached to energy isolating devices so 
that they cannot be inadvertently or accidentally detached during use.
    (iii) Employee retraining.
    (A) Retraining shall be provided for all authorized and affected 
employees whenever there is a change in their job assignments, a change 
in machines, equipment or processes that present a new hazard, or when 
there is a change in the energy control procedures.
    (B) Additional retraining shall also be conducted whenever a 
periodic inspection under paragraph (c)(6) of this section reveals, or 
whenever the employer has reason to believe, that there are deviations 
from or inadequacies in the employee's knowledge or use of the energy 
control procedures.
    (C) The retraining shall reestablish employee proficiency and 
introduce new or revised control methods and procedures, as necessary.
    (iv) The employer shall certify that employee training has been 
accomplished and is being kept up to date. The certification shall 
contain each employee's name and dates of training.
    (8) Energy isolation. Lockout or tagout shall be performed only 
bythe authorized employees who are performing the servicing or 
maintenance.
    (9) Notification of employees. Affected employees shall be notified 
by the employer or authorized employee of the application and removal of 
lockout devices or tagout devices. Notification shall be given before 
the controls are applied, and after they are removed from the machine or 
equipment.
    (d) Application of control. The established procedures for the 
application of energy control (the lockout or tagout procedures) shall 
cover the following elements and actions and shall be done in the 
following sequence:
    (1) Preparation for shutdown. Before an authorized or affected 
employee turns off a machine or equipment, the authorized employee shall 
have knowledge of the type and magnitude of the energy, the hazards of 
the energy to be controlled, and the method or means to control the 
energy.
    (2) Machine or equipment shutdown. The machine or equipment shall be 
turned off or shut down using the procedures established for the machine 
or equipment. An orderly shutdown must be utilized to avoid any 
additional or increased hazard(s) to employees as a result of the 
equipment stoppage.
    (3) Machine or equipment isolation. All energy isolating devices 
that are needed to control the energy to the machine or equipment shall 
be physically located and operated in such a manner as to isolate the 
machine or equipment from the energy source(s).
    (4) Lockout or tagout device application. (i) Lockout or tagout 
devices shall be affixed to each energy isolating device by authorized 
employees.
    (ii) Lockout devices, where used, shall be affixed in a manner to 
that will hold the energy isolating devices in a ``safe'' or ``off'' 
position.
    (iii) Tagout devices, where used, shall be affixed in such a manner 
as will clearly indicate that the operation or movement of energy 
isolating devices from the ``safe'' or ``off'' position is prohibited.
    (A) Where tagout devices are used with energy isolating devices 
designed with the capability of being locked, the tag attachment shall 
be fastened at the same point at which the lock would have been 
attached.
    (B) Where a tag cannot be affixed directly to the energy isolating 
device, the tag shall be located as close as safely possible to the 
device, in a position that will be immediately obvious to anyone 
attempting to operate the device.
    (5) Stored energy. (i) Following the application of lockout or 
tagout devices to energy isolating devices, all potentially hazardous 
stored or residual energy shall be relieved, disconnected, restrained, 
and otherwise rendered safe.
    (ii) If there is a possibility of reaccumulation of stored energy to 
a hazardous level, verification of isolation shall be continued until 
the servicing or maintenance is completed, or

[[Page 483]]

until the possibility of such accumulation no longer exists.
    (6) Verification of isolation. Prior to starting work on machines or 
equipment that have been locked out or tagged out, the authorized 
employee shall verify that isolation and deenergization of the machine 
or equipment have been accomplished.
    (e) Release from lockout or tagout. Before lockout or tagout devices 
are removed and energy is restored to the machine or equipment, 
procedures shall be followed and actions taken by the authorized 
employee(s) to ensure the following:
    (1) The machine or equipment. The work area shall be inspected to 
ensure that nonessential items have been removed and to ensure that 
machine or equipment components are operationally intact.
    (2) Employees. (i) The work area shall be checked to ensure that all 
employees have been safely positioned or removed.
    (ii) After lockout or tagout devices have been removed and before a 
machine or equipment is started, affected employees shall be notified 
that the lockout or tagout device(s) have been removed.
    (3) Lockout or tagout devices removal. Each lockout or tagout device 
shall be removed from each energy isolating device by the employee who 
applied the device. Exception to paragraph (e)(3): When the authorized 
employee who applied the lockout or tagout device is not available to 
remove it, that device may be removed under the direction of the 
employer, provided that specific procedures and training for such 
removal have been developed, documented and incorporated into the 
employer's energy control program. The employer shall demonstrate that 
the specific procedure provides equivalent safety to the removal of the 
device by the authorized employee who applied it. The specific procedure 
shall include at least the following elements:
    (i) Verfication by the employer that the authorized employee who 
applied the device is not at the facility;
    (ii) Making all reasonable efforts to contact the authorized 
employee to inform him/her that his/her lockout or tagout device has 
been removed; and
    (iii) Ensuring that the authorized employee has this knowledge 
before he/she resumes work at that facility.
    (f) Additional requirements--(1) Testing or positioning of machines, 
equipment or components thereof. In situations in which lockout or 
tagout devices must be temporarily removed from the energy isolating 
device and the machine or equipment energized to test or position the 
machine, equipment or component thereof, the following sequence of 
actions shall be followed:
    (i) Clear the machine or equipment of tools and materials in 
accordance with paragraph (e)(1) of this section;
    (ii) Remove employees from the machine or equipment area in 
accordance with paragraph (e)(2) of this section;
    (iii) Remove the lockout or tagout devices as specified in paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section;
    (iv) Energize and proceed with testing or positioning;
    (v) Deenergize all systems and reapply energy control measures in 
accordance with paragraph (d) of this section to continue the servicing 
and/or maintenance.
    (2) Outside personnel (contractors, etc.). (i) Whenever outside 
servicing personnel are to be engaged in activities covered by the scope 
and application of this standard, the on-site employer and the outside 
employer shall inform each other of their respective lockout or tagout 
procedures.
    (ii) The on-site employer shall ensure that his/her employees 
understand and comply with the restrictions and prohibitions of the 
outside employer's energy control program.
    (3) Group lockout or tagout. (i) When servicing and/or maintenance 
is performed by a crew, craft, department or other group, they shall 
utilize a procedure which affords the employees a level of protection 
equivalent to that provided by the implementation of a personal lockout 
or tagout device.
    (ii) Group lockout or tagout devices shall be used in accordance 
with the procedures required by paragraph (c)(4) of this section 
including, but not necessarily limited to, the following specific 
requirements:
    (A) Primary responsibility is vested in an authorized employee for a 
set number of employees working under

[[Page 484]]

the protection of a group lockout or tagout device (such as an 
operations lock);
    (B) Provision for the authorized employee to ascertain the exposure 
status of individual group members with regard to the lockout or tagout 
of the machine or equipment and
    (C) When more than one crew, craft, department, etc. is involved, 
assignment of overall job-associated lockout or tagout control 
responsibility to an authorized employee designated to coordinate 
affected work forces and ensure continuity of protection; and
    (D) Each authorized employee shall affix a personal lockout or 
tagout device to the group lockout device, group lockbox, or comparable 
mechanism when he or she begins work, and shall remove those devices 
when he or she stops working on the machine or equipment being serviced 
or maintained.
    (4) Shift or personnel changes. Specific procedures shall be 
utilized during shift or personnel changes to ensure the continuity of 
lockout or tagout protection, including provision for the orderly 
transfer of lockout or tagout device protection between off-going and 
oncoming employees, to minimize exposure to hazards from the unexpected 
energization or start-up of the machine or equipment, or the release of 
stored energy.

    Note: The following appendix to Sec. 1910.147 services as a non-
mandatory guideline to assist employers and employees in complying with 
the requirements of this section, as well as to provide other helpful 
information. Nothing in the appendix adds to or detracts from any of the 
requirements of this section.

     Appendix A to Sec. 1910.147--Typical Minimal Lockout Procedure

                                 General

    The following simple lockout procedure is provided to assist 
employers in developing their procedures so they meet the requirements 
of this standard. When the energy isolating devices are not lockable, 
tagout may be used, provided the employer complies with the provisions 
of the standard which require additional training and more rigorous 
periodic inspections. When tagout is used and the energy isolating 
devices are lockable, the employer must provide full employee protection 
(see paragraph (c)(3)) and additional training and more rigorous 
periodic inspections are required. For more complex systems, more 
comprehensive procedures may need to be developed, documented and 
utilized.

                            Lockout Procedure

Lockout procedure for

 _______________________________________________________________________

(Name of Company for single procedure or identification of equipment if 
multiple procedures are used)

                                 Purpose

    This procedure establishes the minimum requirements for the lockout 
of energy isolating devices whenever maintenance or servicing is done on 
machines or equipment. It shall be used to ensure that the machine or 
equipment is stopped, isolated from all potentially hazardous energy 
sources and locked out before employees perform any servicing or 
maintenance where the unexpected energization or start-up of the machine 
or equipment or release of stored energy could cause injury.

                      Compliance With This Program

    All employees are required to comply with the restrictions and 
limitations imposed upon them during the use of lockout. The authorized 
employees are required to perform the lockout in accordance with this 
procedure. All employees, upon observing a machine or piece of equipment 
which is locked out to perform servicing or maintenance shall not 
attempt to start, energize or use that machine or equipment.

 _______________________________________________________________________

Type of compliance enforcement to be taken for violation of the above.

                           Sequence of Lockout

    (1) Notify all affected employees that servicing or maintenance is 
required on a machine or equipment and that the machine or equipment 
must be shut down and locked out to perform the servicing or 
maintenance.

 _______________________________________________________________________

Name(s)/Job Title(s) of affected employees and how to notify.

    (2) The authorized employee shall refer to the company procedure to 
identify the type and magnitude of the energy that the machine or 
equipment utilizes, shall understand the hazards of the energy, and 
shall know the methods to control the energy.

 _______________________________________________________________________

Type(s) and magnitude(s) of energy, its hazards and the methods to 
control the energy.

    (3) If the machine or equipment is operating, shut it down by the 
normal stopping procedure (depress stop button, open switch, close 
valve, etc.).

 _______________________________________________________________________


[[Page 485]]

________________________________________________________________________
Type(s) and location(s) of machine or equipment operating controls.
    (4) De-activate the energy isolating device(s) so that the machine 
or equipment is isolated from the energy source(s).

 _______________________________________________________________________

Type(s) and location(s) of energy isolating devices.

    (5) Lock out the energy isolating device(s) with assigned individual 
lock(s).
    (6) Stored or residual energy (such as that in capacitors, springs, 
elevated machine members, rotating flywheels, hydraulic systems, and 
air, gas, steam, or water pressure, etc.) must be dissipated or 
restrained by methods such as grounding, repositioning, blocking, 
bleeding down, etc.

 _______________________________________________________________________

Type(s) of stored energy--methods to dissipate or restrain.

    (7) Ensure that the equipment is disconnected from the energy 
source(s) by first checking that no personnel are exposed, then verify 
the isolation of the equipment by operating the push button or other 
normal operating control(s) or by testing to make certain the equipment 
will not operate.

    Caution: Return operating control(s) to neutral or ``off'' position 
after verifying the isolation of the equipment.

 _______________________________________________________________________

Method of verifying the isolation of the equipment.

    (8) The machine or equipment is now locked out.
    Restoring Equipment to Service. When the servicing or maintenance is 
completed and the machine or equipment is ready to return to normal 
operating condition, the following steps shall be taken.
    (1) Check the machine or equipment and the immediate area around the 
machine or equipment to ensure that nonessential items have been removed 
and that the machine or equipment components are operationally intact.
    (2) Check the work area to ensure that all employees have been 
safely positioned or removed from the area.
    (3) Verify that the controls are in neutral.
    (4) Remove the lockout devices and reenergize the machine or 
equipment.

    Note: The removal of some forms of blocking may require 
reenergization of the machine before safe removal.

    (5) Notify affected employees that the servicing or maintenance is 
completed and the machine or equipment is ready for use.
[54 FR 36687, Sept. 1, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 42498, Oct. 17, 1989; 
55 FR 38685, 38686, Sept. 20, 1990]


<R04>
                    Subpart K--Medical and First Aid

    Authority:  Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 6-96 
(62 FR 111), as applicable, 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.151  Medical services and first aid.

    (a) The employer shall ensure the ready availability of medical 
personnel for advice and consultation on matters of plant health.
    (b) In the absence of an infirmary, clinic, or hospital in near 
proximity to the workplace which is used for the treatment of all 
injured employees, a person or persons shall be adequately trained to 
render first aid. Adequate first aid supplies shall be readily 
available.
    (c) Where the eyes or body of any person may be exposed to injurious 
corrosive materials, suitable facilities for quick drenching or flushing 
of the eyes and body shall be provided within the work area for 
immediate emergency use.

       Appendix A to Sec. 1910.151--First aid kits (Non-Mandatory)

    First aid supplies are required to be readily available under 
paragraph Sec. 1910.151(b). An example of the minimal contents of a 
generic first aid kit is described in American National Standard (ANSI) 
Z308.1-1978 ``Minimum Requirements for Industrial Unit-Type First-aid 
Kits.'' The contents of the kit listed in the ANSI standard should be 
adequate for small worksites. When larger operations or multiple 
operations are being conducted at the same location, employers should 
determine the need for additional first aid kits at the worksite, 
additional types of first aid equipment and supplies and additional 
quantities and types of supplies and equipment in the first aid kits.
    In a similar fashion, employers who have unique or changing first-
aid needs in their workplace may need to enhance their first-aid kits. 
The employer can use the OSHA 200 log, OSHA 101's or other reports to 
identify these unique problems. Consultation from the local fire/rescue 
department, appropriate medical professional, or local emergency room 
may be helpful to employers in these circumstances. By assessing the 
specific needs of their workplace, employers can ensure that reasonably 
anticipated supplies are

[[Page 486]]

available. Employers should assess the specific needs of their worksite 
periodically and augment the first aid kit appropriately.
    If it is reasonably anticipated that employees will be exposed to 
blood or other potentially infectious materials while using first aid 
supplies, employers are required to provide appropriate personal 
protective equipment (PPE) in compliance with the provisions of the 
Occupational Exposure to Blood borne Pathogens standard, 
Sec. 1910.1030(d)(3) (56 FR 64175). This standard lists appropriate PPE 
for this type of exposure, such as gloves, gowns, face shields, masks, 
and eye protection.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33466, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.151 
was amended by revising the last sentence of paragraph (b) and by adding 
appendix A to the section, effective Aug. 17, 1998. For the convenience 
of the user, the superseded text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 1910.151  Medical services and first aid.

                                * * * * *

    (b) * * * First aid supplies approved by the consulting physician 
shall be readily available.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 1910.152  [Reserved]


<R04>
                       Subpart L--Fire Protection

    Authority:  Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 6-96 
(62 FR 111) as applicable; 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.155  Scope, application and definitions applicable to this subpart.

    (a) Scope. This subpart contains requirements for fire brigades, and 
all portable and fixed fire suppression equipment, fire detection 
systems, and fire or employee alarm systems installed to meet the fire 
protection requirements of 29 CFR part 1910.
    (b) Application. This subpart applies to all employments except for 
maritime, construction, and agriculture.
    (c) Definitions applicable to this subpart. (1) After-flame means 
the time a test specimen continues to flame after the flame source has 
been removed.
    (2) Aqueous film forming foam (AFFF) means a fluorinated surfactant 
with a foam stabilizer which is diluted with water to act as a temporary 
barrier to exclude air from mixing with the fuel vapor by developing an 
aqueous film on the fuel surface of some hydrocarbons which is capable 
of suppressing the generation of fuel vapors.
    (3) Approved means acceptable to the Assistant Secretary under the 
following criteria:
    (i) If it is accepted, or certified, or listed, or labeled or 
otherwise determined to be safe by a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory; or
    (ii) With respect to an installation or equipment of a kind which no 
nationally recognized testing laboratory accepts, certifies, lists, 
labels, or determines to be safe, if it is inspected or tested by 
another Federal agency and found in compliance with the provisions of 
the applicable National Fire Protection Association Fire Code; or
    (iii) With respect to custom-made equipment or related installations 
which are designed, fabricated for, and intended for use by its 
manufacturer on the basis of test data which the employer keeps and 
makes available for inspection to the Assistant Secretary.
    (iv) For the purposes of paragraph (c)(3) of this section:
    (A) Equipment is listed if it is of a kind mentioned in a list which 
is published by a nationally recognized testing laboratory which makes 
periodic inspections of the production of such equipment and which 
states that such equipment meets nationally recognized standards or has 
been tested and found safe for use in a specified manner;
    (B) Equipment is labeled if there is attached to it a label, symbol, 
or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory 
which makes periodic inspections of the production of such equipment, 
and whose labeling indicates compliance with nationally recognized 
standards or tests to determine safe use in a specified manner;
    (C) Equipment is accepted if it has been inspected and found by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory to conform to specified plans 
or to procedures of applicable codes; and
    (D) Equipment is certified if it has been tested and found by a 
nationally

[[Page 487]]

recognized testing laboratory to meet nationally recognized standards or 
to be safe for use in a specified manner or is of a kind whose 
production is periodically inspected by a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory, and if it bears a label, tag, or other record of 
certification.
    (E) Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for definition of nationally recognized 
testing laboratory.
    (4) Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary of Labor for 
Occupational Safety and Health or designee.
    (5) Automatic fire detection device means a device designed to 
automatically detect the presence of fire by heat, flame, light, smoke 
or other products of combustion.
    (6) Buddy-breathing device means an accessory to self-contained 
breathing apparatus which permits a second person to share the same air 
supply as that of the wearer of the apparatus.
    (7) Carbon dioxide means a colorless, odorless, electrically 
nonconductive inert gas (chemical formula CO<INF>2</INF>) that is a 
medium for extinguishing fires by reducing the concentration of oxygen 
or fuel vapor in the air to the point where conbustion is impossible.
    (8) Class A fire means a fire involving ordinary combustible 
materials such as paper, wood, cloth, and some rubber and plastic 
materials.
    (9) Class B fire means a fire involving flammable or combustible 
liquids, flammable gases, greases and similar materials, and some rubber 
and plastic materials.
    (10) Class C fire means a fire involving energized electrical 
equipment where safety to the employee requires the use of electrically 
nonconductive extinguishing media.
    (11) Class D fire means a fire involving combustible metals such as 
magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, lithium and potassium.
    (12) Dry chemical means an extinguishing agent composed of very 
small particles of chemicals such as, but not limited to, sodium 
bicarbonate, potassium bicarbonate, urea-based potassium bicarbonate, 
potassium chloride, or monoammonium phosphate supplemented by special 
treatment to provide resistance to packing and moisture absorption 
(caking) as well as to provide proper flow capabilities. Dry chemical 
does not include dry powders.
    (13) Dry powder means an compound used to extinguish or control 
Class D fires.
    (14) Education means the process of imparting knowledge or skill 
through systematic instruction. It does not require formal classroom 
instruction.
    (15) Enclosed structure means a structure with a roof or ceiling and 
at least two walls which may present fire hazards to employees, such as 
accumulations of smoke, toxic gases and heat, similar to those found in 
buildings.
    (16) Extinguisher classification means the letter classification 
given an extinguisher to designate the class or classes of fire on which 
an extinguisher will be effective.
    (17) Extinguisher rating means the numerical rating given to an 
extinguisher which indicates the extinguishing potential of the unit 
based on standardized tests developed by Underwriters' Laboratories, 
Inc.
    (18) Fire brigade (private fire department, industrial fire 
department) means an organized group of employees who are knowledgeable, 
trained, and skilled in at least basic fire fighting operations.
    (19) Fixed extinguishing system means a permanently installed system 
that either extinguishes or controls a fire at the location of the 
system.
    (20) Flame resistance is the property of materials, or combinations 
of component materials, to retard ignition and restrict the spread of 
flame.
    (21) Foam means a stable aggregation of small bubbles which flow 
freely over a burning liquid surface and form a coherent blanket which 
seals combustible vapors and thereby extinguishes the fire.
    (22) Gaseous agent is a fire extinguishing agent which is in the 
gaseous state at normal room temperature and pressure. It has low 
viscosity, can expand or contract with changes in pressure and 
temperature, and has the ability to diffuse readily and to distribute 
itself uniformly throughout an enclosure.
    (23) Halon 1211 means a colorless, faintly sweet smelling, 
electrically nonconductive liquefied gas (chemical formula 
CBrC1F<INF>2</INF>) which is a medium for extinguishing fires by 
inhibiting

[[Page 488]]

the chemical chain reaction of fuel and oxygen. It is also known as 
bromochlorodifluoromethane.
    (24) Halon 1301 means a colorless, odorless, electrically 
nonconductive gas (chemical formula CBrF<INF>3</INF>) which is a medium 
for extinguishing fires by inhibiting the chemical chain reaction of 
fuel and oxygen. It is also known as bromotrifluoromethane.
    (25) Helmet is a head protective device consisting of a rigid shell, 
energy absorption system, and chin strap intended to be worn to provide 
protection for the head or portions thereof, against impact, flying or 
falling objects, electric shock, penetration, heat and flame.
    (26) Incipient stage fire means a fire which is in the initial or 
beginning stage and which can be controlled or extinguished by portable 
fire extinguishers, Class II standpipe or small hose systems without the 
need for protective clothing or breathing apparatus.
    (27) Inspection means a visual check of fire protection systems and 
equipment to ensure that they are in place, charged, and ready for use 
in the event of a fire.
    (28) Interior structural fire fighting means the physical activity 
of fire suppression, rescue or both, inside of buildings or enclosed 
structures which are involved in a fire situation beyond the incipient 
stage.
    (29) Lining means a material permanently attached to the inside of 
the outer shell of a garment for the purpose of thermal protection and 
padding.
    (30) Local application system means a fixed fire suppression system 
which has a supply of extinguishing agent, with nozzles arranged to 
automatically discharge extinguishing agent directly on the burning 
material to extinguish or control a fire.
    (31) Maintenance means the performance of services on fire 
protection equipment and systems to assure that they will perform as 
expected in the event of a fire. Maintenance differs from inspection in 
that maintenance requires the checking of internal fittings, devices and 
agent supplies.
    (32) Multipurpose dry chemical means a dry chemical which is 
approved for use on Class A, Class B and Class C fires.
    (33) Outer shell is the exterior layer of material on the fire coat 
and protective trousers which forms the outermost barrier between the 
fire fighter and the environment. It is attached to the vapor barrier 
and liner and is usually constructed with a storm flap, suitable 
closures, and pockets.
    (34) Positive-pressure breathing apparatus means self-contained 
breathing apparatus in which the pressure in the breathing zone is 
positive in relation to the immediate environment during inhalation and 
exhalation.
    (35) Pre-discharge employee alarm means an alarm which will sound at 
a set time prior to actual discharge of an extinguishing system so that 
employees may evacuate the discharge area prior to system discharge.
    (36) Quick disconnect valve means a device which starts the flow of 
air by inserting of the hose (which leads from the facepiece) into the 
regulator of self-contained breathing apparatus, and stops the flow of 
air by disconnection of the hose from the regulator.
    (37) Sprinkler alarm means an approved device installed so that any 
waterflow from a sprinkler system equal to or greater than that from 
single automatic sprinkler will result in an audible alarm signal on the 
premises.
    (38) Sprinkler system means a system of piping designed in 
accordance with fire protection engineering standards and installed to 
control or extinguish fires. The system includes an adequate and 
reliable water supply, and a network of specially sized piping and 
sprinklers which are interconnected. The system also includes a control 
valve and a device for actuating an alarm when the system is in 
operation.
    (39) Standpipe systems. (i) Class I standpipe system means a 2\1/2\" 
(6.3 cm) hose connection for use by fire departments and those trained 
in handling heavy fire streams.
    (ii) Class II standpipe system means a 1\1/2\" (3.8 cm) hose system 
which provides a means for the control or extinguishment of incipient 
stage fires.
    (iii) Class III standpipe system means a combined system of hose 
which is for the use of employees trained in the use

[[Page 489]]

of hose operations and which is capable of furnishing effective water 
discharge during the more advanced stages of fire (beyond the incipient 
stage) in the interior of workplaces. Hose outlets are available for 
both 1\1/2\" (3.8 cm) and 2\1/2\" (6.3 cm) hose.
    (iv) Small hose system means a system of hose ranging in diameter 
from \5/8\" (1.6 cm up to 1\1/2\" (3.8 cm) which is for the use of 
employees and which provides a means for the control and extinguishment 
of incipient stage fires.
    (40) Total flooding system means a fixed suppression system which is 
arranged to automatically discharge a predetermined concentration of 
agent into an enclosed space for the purpose of fire extinguishment or 
control.
    (41) Training means the process of making proficient through 
instruction and hands-on practice in the operation of equipment, 
including respiratory protection equipment, that is expected to be used 
and in the performance of assigned duties.
    (42) Vapor barrier means that material used to prevent or 
substantially inhibit the transfer of water, corrosive liquids and steam 
or other hot vapors from the outside of a garment to the wearer's body.
[45 FR 60704, Sept. 12, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 12122, Apr. 12, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.156  Fire brigades.

    (a) Scope and application--(1) Scope. This section contains 
requirements for the organization, training, and personal protective 
equipment of fire brigades whenever they are established by an employer.
    (2) Application. The requirements of this section apply to fire 
brigades, industrial fire departments and private or contractual type 
fire departments. Personal protective equipment requirements apply only 
to members of fire brigades performing interior structural fire 
fighting. The requirements of this section do not apply to airport crash 
rescue or forest fire fighting operations.
    (b) Organization--(1) Organizational statement. The employer shall 
prepare and maintain a statement or written policy which establishes the 
existence of a fire brigade; the basic organizational structure; the 
type, amount, and frequency of training to be provided to fire brigade 
members; the expected number of members in the fire brigade; and the 
functions that the fire brigade is to perform at the workplace. The 
organizational statement shall be available for inspection by the 
Assistant Secretary and by employees or their designated 
representatives.
    (2) Personnel. The employer shall assure that employees who are 
expected to do interior structural fire fighting are physically capable 
of performing duties which may be assigned to them during emergencies. 
The employer shall not permit employees with known heart disease, 
epilepsy, or emphysema, to participate in fire brigade emergency 
activities unless a physician's certificate of the employees' fitness to 
participate in such activities is provided. For employees assigned to 
fire brigades before September 15, 1980, this paragraph is effective on 
September 15, 1990. For employees assigned to fire brigades on or after 
September 15, 1980, this paragraph is effective December 15, 1980.
    (c) Training and education. (1) The employer shall provide training 
and education for all fire brigade members commensurate with those 
duties and functions that fire brigade members are expected to perform. 
Such training and education shall be provided to fire brigade members 
before they perform fire brigade emergency activities. Fire brigade 
leaders and training instructors shall be provided with training and 
education which is more comprehensive than that provided to the general 
membership of the fire brigade.
    (2) The employer shall assure that training and education is 
conducted frequently enough to assure that each member of the fire 
brigade is able to perform the member's assigned duties and functions 
satisfactorily and in a safe manner so as not to endanger fire brigade 
members or other employees. All fire brigade members shall be provided 
with training at least annually. In addition, fire brigade members who 
are expected to perform interior structural fire fighting shall be 
provided with an education session or training at least quarterly.
    (3) The quality of the training and education program for fire 
brigade

[[Page 490]]

members shall be similar to those conducted by such fire training 
schools as the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute; Iowa Fire Service 
Extension; West Virginia Fire Service Extension; Georgia Fire Academy, 
New York State Department, Fire Prevention and Control; Louisiana State 
University Firemen Training Program, or Washington State's Fire Service 
Training Commission for Vocational Education. (For example, for the oil 
refinery industry, with its unique hazards, the training and education 
program for those fire brigade members shall be similar to those 
conducted by Texas A & M University, Lamar University, Reno Fire School, 
or the Delaware State Fire School.)
    (4) The employer shall inform fire brigade members about special 
hazards such as storage and use of flammable liquids and gases, toxic 
chemicals, radioactive sources, and water reactive substances, to which 
they may be exposed during fire and other emergencies. The fire brigade 
members shall also be advised of any changes that occur in relation to 
the special hazards. The employer shall develop and make available for 
inspection by fire brigade members, written procedures that describe the 
actions to be taken in situations involving the special hazards and 
shall include these in the training and education program.
    (d) Fire fighting equipment. The employer shall maintain and 
inspect, at least annually, fire fighting equipment to assure the safe 
operational condition of the equipment. Portable fire extinguishers and 
respirators shall be inspected at least monthly. Fire fighting equipment 
that is in damaged or unserviceable condition shall be removed from 
service and replaced.
    (e) Protective clothing. The following requirements apply to those 
employees who perform interior structural fire fighting. The 
requirements do not apply to employees who use fire extinguishers or 
standpipe systems to control or extinguish fires only in the incipient 
stage.
    (1) General. (i) The employer shall provide at no cost to the 
employee and assure the use of protective clothing which complies with 
the requirements of this paragraph. The employer shall assure that 
protective clothing ordered or purchased after July 1, 1981, meets the 
requirements contained in this paragraph. As the new equipment is 
provided, the employer shall assure that all fire brigade members wear 
the equipment when performing interior structural fire fighting. After 
July 1, 1985, the employer shall assure that all fire brigade members 
wear protective clothing meeting the requirements of this paragraph when 
performing interior structural fire fighting.
    (ii) The employer shall assure that protective clothing protects the 
head, body, and extremities, and consists of at least the following 
components: foot and leg protection; hand protection; body protection; 
eye, face and head protection.
    (2) Foot and leg protection. (i) Foot and leg protection shall meet 
the requirements of paragraphs (e)(2)(ii) and (e)(2)(iii) of this 
section, and may be achieved by either of the following methods:
    (A) Fully extended boots which provide protection for the legs; or
    (B) Protective shoes or boots worn in combination with protective 
trousers that meet the requirements of paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (ii) Protective footwear shall meet the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.136 for Class 75 footwear. In addition, protective footwear 
shall be water-resistant for at least 5 inches (12.7 cm) above the 
bottom of the heel and shall be equipped with slip-resistant outer 
soles.
    (iii) Protective footwear shall be tested in accordance with 
paragraph (1) of appendix E, and shall provide protection against 
penetration of the midsole by a size 8D common nail when at least 300 
pounds (1330 N) of static force is applied to the nail.
    (3) Body protection. (i) Body protection shall be coordinated with 
foot and leg protection to ensure full body protection for the wearer. 
This shall be achieved by one of the following methods:
    (A) Wearing of a fire-resistive coat meeting the requirements of 
paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section in combination with fully extended 
boots meeting the requirements of paragraphs (e)(2)(ii) and (e)(2)(iii) 
of this section; or

[[Page 491]]

    (B) Wearing of a fire-resistive coat in combination with protective 
trousers both of which meet the requirements of paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of 
this section.
    (ii) The performance, construction, and testing of fire-resistive 
coats and protective trousers shall be at least equivalent to the 
requirements of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standard 
NFPA No. 1971-1975, ``Protective Clothing for Structural Fire 
Fighting,'' which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6, (See appendix D to subpart L) with the following 
permissible variations from those requirements:
    (A) Tearing strength of the outer shell shall be a minimum of 8 
pounds (35.6 N) in any direction when tested in accordance with 
paragraph (2) of appendix E; and
    (B) The outer shell may discolor but shall not separate or melt when 
placed in a forced air laboratory oven at a temperature of 500 deg.F 
(260 deg.C) for a period of five minutes. After cooling to ambient 
temperature and using the test method specified in paragraph (3) of 
appendix E, char length shall not exceed 4.0 inches (10.2 cm) and after-
flame shall not exceed 2.0 seconds.
    (4) Hand protection. (i) Hand protection shall consist of protective 
gloves or glove system which will provide protection against cut, 
puncture, and heat penetration. Gloves or glove system shall be tested 
in accordance with the test methods contained in the National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 1976 publication, ``The 
Development of Criteria for Fire Fighter's Gloves; Vol. II, Part II: 
Test Methods,'' which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6, (See appendix D to subpart L) and shall meet the following 
criteria for cut, puncture, and heat penetration:
    (A) Materials used for gloves shall resist surface cut by a blade 
with an edge having a 60 deg. included angle and a .001 inch (.0025 cm.) 
radius, under an applied force of 16 lbf (72N), and at a slicing 
velocity of greater or equal to 60 in/min (2.5 cm./sec);
    (B) Materials used for the palm and palm side of the fingers shall 
resist puncture by a penetrometer (simulating a 4d lath nail), under an 
applied force of 13.2 lbf (60N), and at a velocity greater or equal to 
20 in/min (.85 cm./sec); and
    (C) The temperature inside the palm and gripping surface of the 
fingers of gloves shall not exceed 135 deg.F (57 deg.C) when gloves or 
glove system are exposed to 932 deg.F (500 deg.C) for five seconds at 4 
psi (28 kPa) pressure.
    (ii) Exterior materials of gloves shall be flame resistant and shall 
be tested in accordance with paragraph (3) of appendix E. Maximum 
allowable afterflame shall be 2.0 seconds, and the maximum char length 
shall be 4.0 inches (10.2 cm).
    (iii) When design of the fire-resistive coat does not otherwise 
provide protection for the wrists, protective gloves shall have 
wristlets of at least 4.0 inches (10.2 cm) in length to protect the 
wrist area when the arms are extended upward and outward from the body.
    (5) Head, eye and face protection. (i) Head protection shall consist 
of a protective head device with ear flaps and chin strap which meet the 
performance, construction, and testing requirements of the National Fire 
Safety and Research Office of the National Fire Prevention and Control 
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce (now known as the U.S. Fire 
Administration), which are contained in ``Model Performance Criteria for 
Structural Firefighters' Helmets'' (August 1977) which is incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, (See appendix D to subpart L).
    (ii) Protective eye and face devices which comply with Sec. 1910.133 
shall be used by fire brigade members when performing operations where 
the hazards of flying or falling materials which may cause eye and face 
injuries are present. Protective eye and face devices provided as 
accessories to protective head devices (face shields) are permitted when 
such devices meet the requirements of Sec. 1910.133.
    (iii) Full facepieces, helmets, or hoods of breathing apparatus 
which meet the requirements of Sec. 1910.134 and paragraph (f) of this 
section, shall be acceptable as meeting the eye and face protection 
requirements of paragraph (e)(5)(ii) of this section.
    (f) Respiratory protection devices. (1) General requirements. (i) 
The employer

[[Page 492]]

must ensure that respirators are provided to, and used by, fire brigade 
members, and that the respirators meet the requirements of 29 CFR 
1910.134 and this paragraph.
    (ii) Approved self-contained breathing apparatus with full-
facepiece, or with approved helmet or hood configuration, shall be 
provided to and worn by fire brigade members while working inside 
buildings or confined spaces where toxic products of combustion or an 
oxygen deficiency may be present.

Such apparatus shall also be worn during emergency situations involving 
toxic substances.
    (iii) Approved self-contained breathing apparatus may be equipped 
with either a ``buddy-breathing'' device or a quick disconnect valve, 
even if these devices are not certified by NIOSH. If these accessories 
are used, they shall not cause damage to the apparatus, or restrict the 
air flow of the apparatus, or obstruct the normal operation of the 
apparatus.
    (iv) Approved self-contained compressed air breathing apparatus may 
be used with approved cylinders from other approved self-contained 
compressed air breathing apparatus provided that such cylinders are of 
the same capacity and pressure rating. All compressed air cylinders used 
with self-contained breathing apparatus shall meet DOT and NIOSH 
criteria.
    (v) Self-contained breathing apparatuses must have a minimum 
service-life rating of 30 minutes in accordance with the methods and 
requirements specified by NIOSH under 42 CFR part 84, except for escape 
self-contained breathing apparatus (ESCBAs) used only for emergency 
escape purposes.
    (vi) Self-contained breathing apparatus shall be provided with an 
indicator which automatically sounds an audible alarm when the remaining 
service life of the apparatus is reduced to within a range of 20 to 25 
percent of its rated service time.
    (2) Positive-pressure breathing apparatus. (i) The employer shall 
assure that self-contained breathing apparatus ordered or purchased 
after July 1, 1981, for use by fire brigade members performing interior 
structural fire fighting operations, are of the pressure-demand or other 
positive-pressure type. Effective July 1, 1983, only pressure-demand or 
other positive-pressure self-contained breathing apparatus shall be worn 
by fire brigade members performing interior structural fire fighting.
    (ii) This paragraph does not prohibit the use of a self-contained 
breathing apparatus where the apparatus can be switched from a demand to 
a positive-pressure mode. However, such apparatus shall be in the 
positive-pressure mode when fire brigade members are performing interior 
structural fire fighting operations.
    (iii) Negative-pressure self-contained breathing apparatus with a 
rated service life of more than 2 hours and which have a minimum 
protection factor of 5,000, as determined by an acceptable quantitative 
fit test performed on each individual, is acceptable for use only during 
those interior structural fire fighting situations for which the 
employer demonstrates that long duration breathing apparatus is 
necessary. Quantitative fit test procedures shall be available for 
inspection by the Assistant Secretary or authorized representative. Such 
negative-pressure breathing apparatus will continue to be acceptable for 
18 months after a positive-pressure breathing apparatus with the same or 
longer rated service life is certified by NIOSH. After this 18-month 
period, all self-contained breathing apparatus used for these long 
duration situations shall be of the positive-pressure type.
[45 FR 60706, Sept. 12, 1980; 46 FR 24557, May 1, 1981; 49 FR 18295, 
Apr. 30, 1984; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 FR 1284, Jan. 8, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.156 
was amended by removing paragraph (f)(2)(iii), effective Aug. 17, 1998.

                   Portable Fire Suppression Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 1910.157  Portable fire extinguishers.

    (a) Scope and application. The requirements of this section apply to 
the placement, use, maintenance, and testing of portable fire 
extinguishers provided for the use of employees. Paragraph (d) of this 
section does not apply to extinguishers provided for employee use on the 
outside of workplace buildings or structures. Where extinguishers

[[Page 493]]

are provided but are not intended for employee use and the employer has 
an emergency action plan and a fire prevention plan which meet the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.38, then only the requirements of paragraphs 
(e) and (f) of this section apply.
    (b) Exemptions. (1) Where the employer has established and 
implemented a written fire safety policy which requires the immediate 
and total evacuation of employees from the workplace upon the sounding 
of a fire alarm signal and which includes an emergency action plan and a 
fire prevention plan which meet the requirements of Sec. 1910.38, and 
when extinguishers are not available in the workplace, the employer is 
exempt from all requirements of this section unless a specific standard 
in part 1910 requires that a portable fire extinguisher be provided.
    (2) Where the employer has an emergency action plan meeting the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.38 which designates certain employees to be 
the only employees authorized to use the available portable fire 
extinguishers, and which requires all other employees in the fire area 
to immediately evacuate the affected work area upon the sounding of the 
fire alarm, the employer is exempt from the distribution requirements in 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (c) General requirements. (1) The employer shall provide portable 
fire extinguishers and shall mount, locate and identify them so that 
they are readily accessible to employees without subjecting the 
employees to possible injury.
    (2) Only approved portable fire extinguishers shall be used to meet 
the requirements of this section.
    (3) The employer shall not provide or make available in the 
workplace portable fire extinguishers using carbon tetrachloride or 
chlorobromomethane extinguishing agents.
    (4) The employer shall assure that portable fire extinguishers are 
maintained in a fully charged and operable condition and kept in their 
designated places at all times except during use.
    (5) The employer shall remove from service all soldered or riveted 
shell self-generating soda acid or self-generating foam or gas cartridge 
water type portable fire extinguishers which are operated by inverting 
the extinguisher to rupture the cartridge or to initiate an 
uncontrollable pressure generating chemical reaction to expel the agent.
    (d) Selection and distribution. (1) Portable fire extinguishers 
shall be provided for employee use and selected and distributed based on 
the classes of anticipated workplace fires and on the size and degree of 
hazard which would affect their use.
    (2) The employer shall distribute portable fire extinguishers for 
use by employees on Class A fires so that the travel distance for 
employees to any extinguisher is 75 feet (22.9 m) or less.
    (3) The employer may use uniformly spaced standpipe systems or hose 
stations connected to a sprinkler system installed for emergency use by 
employees instead of Class A portable fire extinguishers, provided that 
such systems meet the respective requirements of Sec. 1910.158 or 
Sec. 1910.159, that they provide total coverage of the area to be 
protected, and that employees are trained at least annually in their 
use.
    (4) The employer shall distribute portable fire extinguishers for 
use by employees on Class B fires so that the travel distance from the 
Class B hazard area to any extinguisher is 50 feet (15.2 m) or less.
    (5) The employer shall distribute portable fire extinguishers used 
for Class C hazards on the basis of the appropriate pattern for the 
existing Class A or Class B hazards.
    (6) The employer shall distribute portable fire extinguishers or 
other containers of Class D extinguishing agent for use by employees so 
that the travel distance from the combustible metal working area to any 
extinguishing agent is 75 feet (22.9 m) or less. Portable fire 
extinguishers for Class D hazards are required in those combustible 
metal working areas where combustible metal powders, flakes, shavings, 
or similarly sized products are generated at least once every two weeks.
    (e) Inspection, maintenance and testing. (1) The employer shall be 
responsible for the inspection, maintenance and testing of all portable 
fire extinguishers in the workplace.

[[Page 494]]

    (2) Portable extinguishers or hose used in lieu thereof under 
paragraph (d)(3) of this section shall be visually inspected monthly.
    (3) The employer shall assure that portable fire extinguishers are 
subjected to an annual maintenance check. Stored pressure extinguishers 
do not require an internal examination. The employer shall record the 
annual maintenance date and retain this record for one year after the 
last entry or the life of the shell, whichever is less. The record shall 
be available to the Assistant Secretary upon request.
    (4) The employer shall assure that stored pressure dry chemical 
extinguishers that require a 12-year hydrostatic test are emptied and 
subjected to applicable maintenance procedures every 6 years. Dry 
chemical extinguishers having non-refillable disposable containers are 
exempt from this requirement. When recharging or hydrostatic testing is 
performed, the 6-year requirement begins from that date.
    (5) The employer shall assure that alternate equivalent protection 
is provided when portable fire extinguishers are removed from service 
for maintenance and recharging.
    (f) Hydrostatic testing. (1) The employer shall assure that 
hydrostatic testing is performed by trained persons with suitable 
testing equipment and facilities.
    (2) The employer shall assure that portable extinguishers are 
hydrostatically tested at the intervals listed in Table L-1 of this 
section, except under any of the following conditions:
    (i) When the unit has been repaired by soldering, welding, brazing, 
or use of patching compounds;
    (ii) When the cylinder or shell threads are damaged;
    (iii) When there is corrosion that has caused pitting, including 
corrosion under removable name plate assemblies;
    (iv) When the extinguisher has been burned in a fire; or
    (v) When a calcium chloride extinguishing agent has been used in a 
stainless steel shell.
    (3) In addition to an external visual examination, the employer 
shall assure that an internal examination of cylinders and shells to be 
tested is made prior to the hydrostatic tests.

                                Table L-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Test
                     Type of extinguishers                      interval
                                                                 (years)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soda acid (soldered brass shells) (until 1/1/82)..............    (\1\)
Soda acid (stainless steel shell).............................        5
Cartridge operated water and/or antifreeze....................        5
Stored pressure water and/or antifreeze.......................        5
Wetting agent.................................................        5
Foam (soldered brass shells) (until 1/1/82)...................    (\1\)
Foam (stainless steel shell)..................................        5
Aqueous Film Forming foam (AFFF)..............................        5
Loaded stream.................................................        5
Dry chemical with stainless steel.............................        5
Carbon dioxide................................................        5
Dry chemical, stored pressure, with mild steel, brazed brass
 or aluminum shells...........................................       12
Dry chemical, cartridge or cylinder operated, with mild steel
 shells.......................................................       12
Halon 1211....................................................       12
Halon 1301....................................................       12
Dry powder, cartridge or cylinder operated with mild steel
 shells.......................................................       12
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Extinguishers having shells constructed of copper or brass joined by
  soft solder or rivets shall not be hydrostatically tested and shall be
  removed from service by January 1, 1982. (Not permitted)

    (4) The employer shall assure that portable fire extinguishers are 
hydrostatically tested whenever they show new evidence of corrosion or 
mechanical injury, except under the conditions listed in paragraphs 
(f)(2)(i)-(v) of this section.
    (5) The employer shall assure that hydrostatic tests are performed 
on extinguisher hose assemblies which are equipped with a shut-off 
nozzle at the discharge end of the hose. The test interval shall be the 
same as specified for the extinguisher on which the hose is installed.
    (6) The employer shall assure that carbon dioxide hose assemblies 
with a shut-off nozzle are hydrostatically tested at 1,250 psi (8,620 
kPa).
    (7) The employer shall assure that dry chemical and dry powder hose 
assemblies with a shut-off nozzle are hydrostatically tested at 300 psi 
(2,070 kPa).
    (8) Hose assemblies passing a hydrostatic test do not require any 
type of recording or stamping.
    (9) The employer shall assure that hose assemblies for carbon 
dioxide extinguishers that require a hydrostatic test are tested within 
a protective cage device.

[[Page 495]]

    (10) The employer shall assure that carbon dioxide extinguishers and 
nitrogen or carbon dioxide cylinders used with wheeled extinguishers are 
tested every 5 years at 5/3 of the service pressure as stamped into the 
cylinder. Nitrogen cylinders which comply with 49 CFR 173.34(e)(15) may 
be hydrostatically tested every 10 years.
    (11) The employer shall assure that all stored pressure and Halon 
1211 types of extinguishers are hydrostatically tested at the factory 
test pressure not to exceed two times the service pressure.
    (12) The employer shall assure that acceptable self-generating type 
soda acid and foam extinguishers are tested at 350 psi (2,410 kPa).
    (13) Air or gas pressure may not be used for hydrostatic testing.
    (14) Extinguisher shells, cylinders, or cartridges which fail a 
hydrostatic pressure test, or which are not fit for testing shall be 
removed from service and from the workplace.
    (15)(i) The equipment for testing compressed gas type cylinders 
shall be of the water jacket type. The equipment shall be provided with 
an expansion indicator which operates with an accuracy within one 
percent of the total expansion or .1cc (.1mL) of liquid.
    (ii) The equipment for testing non-compressed gas type cylinders 
shall consist of the following:
    (A) A hydrostatic test pump, hand or power operated, capable of 
producing not less than 150 percent of the test pressure, which shall 
include appropriate check valves and fittings;
    (B) A flexible connection for attachment to fittings to test through 
the extinguisher nozzle, test bonnet, or hose outlet, as is applicable; 
and
    (C) A protective cage or barrier for personal protection of the 
tester, designed to provide visual observation of the extinguisher under 
test.
    (16) The employer shall maintain and provide upon request to the 
Assistant Secretary evidence that the required hydrostatic testing of 
fire extinguishers has been performed at the time intervals shown in 
Table L-1. Such evidence shall be in the form of a certification record 
which includes the date of the test, the signature of the person who 
performed the test and the serial number, or other identifier, of the 
fire extinguisher that was tested. Such records shall be kept until the 
extinguisher is hydrostatically retested at the time interval specified 
in Table L-1 or until the extinguisher is taken out of service, 
whichever comes first.
    (g) Training and education. (1) Where the employer has provided 
portable fire extinguishers for employee use in the workplace, the 
employer shall also provide an educational program to familiarize 
employees with the general principles of fire extinguisher use and the 
hazards involved with incipient stage fire fighting.
    (2) The employer shall provide the education required in paragraph 
(g)(1) of this section upon initial employment and at least annually 
thereafter.
    (3) The employer shall provide employees who have been designated to 
use fire fighting equipment as part of an emergency action plan with 
training in the use of the appropriate equipment.
    (4) The employer shall provide the training required in paragraph 
(g)(3) of this section upon initial assignment to the designated group 
of employees and at least annually thereafter.
[45 FR 60708, Sept. 12, 1980; 46 FR 24557, May 1, 1981, as amended at 51 
FR 34560, Sept. 29, 1986; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.158  Standpipe and hose systems.

    (a) Scope and application--(1) Scope. This section applies to all 
small hose, Class II, and Class III standpipe systems installed to meet 
the requirements of a particular OSHA standard.
    (2) Exception. This section does not apply to Class I standpipe 
systems.
    (b) Protection of standpipes. The employer shall assure that 
standpipes are located or otherwise protected against mechanical damage. 
Damaged standpipes shall be repaired promptly.
    (c) Equipment--(1) Reels and cabinets. Where reels or cabinets are 
provided to contain fire hose, the employer shall assure that they are 
designed to facilitate prompt use of the hose valves, the hose, and 
other equipment at the time of a fire or other emergency. The employer 
shall assure that the reels and cabinets are conspicuously identified 
and used only for fire equipment.

[[Page 496]]

    (2) Hose outlets and connections. (i) The employer shall assure that 
hose outlets and connections are located high enough above the floor to 
avoid being obstructed and to be accessible to employees.
    (ii) The employer shall standardize screw threads or provide 
appropriate adapters throughout the system and assure that the hose 
connections are compatible with those used on the supporting fire 
equipment.
    (3) Hose. (i) The employer shall assure that every 1\1/2\" (3.8 cm) 
or smaller hose outlet used to meet this standard is equipped with hose 
connected and ready for use. In extremely cold climates where such 
installation may result in damaged equipment, the hose may be stored in 
another location provided it is readily available and can be connected 
when needed.
    (ii) Standpipe systems installed after January 1, 1981, for use by 
employees, shall be equipped with lined hose. Unlined hose may remain in 
use on existing systems. However, after the effective date of this 
standard, unlined hose which becomes unserviceable shall be replaced 
with lined hose.
    (iii) The employer shall provide hose of such length that friction 
loss resulting from water flowing through the hose will not decrease the 
pressure at the nozzle below 30 psi (210 kPa). The dynamic pressure at 
the nozzle shall be within the range of 30 psi (210 kPa) to 125 psi (860 
kPa).
    (4) Nozzles. The employer shall assure that standpipe hose is 
equipped with shut-off type nozzles.
    (d) Water supply. The minimum water supply for standpipe and hose 
systems, which are provided for the use of employees, shall be 
sufficient to provide 100 gallons per minute (6.3 l/s) for a period of 
at least thirty minutes.
    (e) Tests and maintenance--(1) Acceptance tests. (i) The employer 
shall assure that the piping of Class II and Class III systems installed 
after January 1, 1981, including yard piping, is hydrostatically tested 
for a period of at least 2 hours at not less than 200 psi (1380 kPa), or 
at least 50 psi (340 kPa) in excess of normal pressure when such 
pressure is greater than 150 psi (1030 kPa).
    (ii) The employer shall assure that hose on all standpipe systems 
installed after January 1, 1981, is hydrostatically tested with 
couplings in place, at a pressure of not less than 200 psi (1380 kPa), 
before it is placed in service. This pressure shall be maintained for at 
least 15 seconds and not more than one minute during which time the hose 
shall not leak nor shall any jacket thread break during the test.
    (2) Maintenance. (i) The employer shall assure that water supply 
tanks are kept filled to the proper level except during repairs. When 
pressure tanks are used, the employer shall assure that proper pressure 
is maintained at all times except during repairs.
    (ii) The employer shall assure that valves in the main piping 
connections to the automatic sources of water supply are kept fully open 
at all times except during repair.
    (iii) The employer shall assure that hose systems are inspected at 
least annually and after each use to assure that all of the equipment 
and hose are in place, available for use, and in serviceable condition.
    (iv) When the system or any portion thereof is found not to be 
serviceable, the employer shall remove it from service immediately and 
replace it with equivalent protection such as extinguishers and fire 
watches.
    (v) The employer shall assure that hemp or linen hose on existing 
systems is unracked, physically inspected for deterioration, and 
reracked using a different fold pattern at least annually. The employer 
shall assure that defective hose is replaced in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (vi) The employer shall designate trained persons to conduct all 
inspections required under this section.
[45 FR 60710, Sept. 12, 1980, as amended at 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]

                    Fixed Fire Suppression Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 1910.159  Automatic sprinkler systems.

    (a) Scope and application. (1) The requirements of this section 
apply to all automatic sprinkler systems installed to meet a particular 
OSHA standard.
    (2) For automatic sprinkler systems used to meet OSHA requirements 
and

[[Page 497]]

installed prior to the effective date of this standard, compliance with 
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) or the National Board of 
Fire Underwriters (NBFU) standard in effect at the time of the system's 
installation will be acceptable as compliance with this section.
    (b) Exemptions. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in workplaces, 
but not required by OSHA, are exempt from the requirements of this 
section.
    (c) General requirements--(1) Design. (i) All automatic sprinkler 
designs used to comply with this standard shall provide the necessary 
discharge patterns, densities, and water flow characteristics for 
complete coverage in a particular workplace or zoned subdivision of the 
workplace.
    (ii) The employer shall assure that only approved equipment and 
devices are used in the design and installation of automatic sprinkler 
systems used to comply with this standard.
    (2) Maintenance. The employer shall properly maintain an automatic 
sprinkler system installed to comply with this section. The employer 
shall assure that a main drain flow test is performed on each system 
annually. The inspector's test valve shall be opened at least every two 
years to assure that the sprinkler system operates properly.
    (3) Acceptance tests. The employer shall conduct proper acceptance 
tests on sprinkler systems installed for employee protection after 
January 1, 1981, and record the dates of such tests. Proper acceptance 
tests include the following:
    (i) Flushing of underground connections;
    (ii) Hydrostatic tests of piping in system;
    (iii) Air tests in dry-pipe systems;
    (iv) Dry-pipe valve operation; and
    (v) Test of drainage facilities.
    (4) Water supplies. The employer shall assure that every automatic 
sprinkler system is provided with at least one automatic water supply 
capable of providing design water flow for at least 30 minutes. An 
auxiliary water supply or equivalent protection shall be provided when 
the automatic water supply is out of service, except for systems of 20 
or fewer sprinklers.
    (5) Hose connections for fire fighting use. The employer may attach 
hose connections for fire fighting use to wet pipe sprinkler systems 
provided that the water supply satisfies the combined design demand for 
sprinklers and standpipes.
    (6) Protection of piping. The employer shall assure that automatic 
sprinkler system piping is protected against freezing and exterior 
surface corrosion.
    (7) Drainage. The employer shall assure that all dry sprinkler pipes 
and fittings are installed so that the system may be totally drained.
    (8) Sprinklers. (i) The employer shall assure that only approved 
sprinklers are used on systems.
    (ii) The employer may not use older style sprinklers to replace 
standard sprinklers without a complete engineering review of the altered 
part of the system.
    (iii) The employer shall assure that sprinklers are protected from 
mechanical damage.
    (9) Sprinkler alarms. On all sprinkler systems having more than 
twenty (20) sprinklers, the employer shall assure that a local waterflow 
alarm is provided which sounds an audible signal on the premises upon 
water flow through the system equal to the flow from a single sprinkler.
    (10) Sprinkler spacing. The employer shall assure that sprinklers 
are spaced to provide a maximum protection area per sprinkler, a minimum 
of interference to the discharge pattern by building or structural 
members or building contents and suitable sensitivity to possible fire 
hazards. The minimum vertical clearance between sprinklers and material 
below shall be 18 inches (45.7 cm).
    (11) Hydraulically designed systems. The employer shall assure that 
hydraulically designed automatic sprinkler systems or portions thereof 
are identified and that the location, number of sprinklers in the 
hydraulically designed section, and the basis of the design is 
indicated. Central records may be used in lieu of signs at sprinkler 
valves provided the records are available for inspection and copying by 
the Assistant Secretary.
[45 FR 60710, Sept. 12, 1980; 46 FR 24557, May 1, 1981]

[[Page 498]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.160  Fixed extinguishing systems, general.

    (a) Scope and application. (1) This section applies to all fixed 
extinguishing systems installed to meet a particular OSHA standard 
except for automatic sprinkler systems which are covered by 
Sec. 1910.159.
    (2) This section also applies to fixed systems not installed to meet 
a particular OSHA standard, but which, by means of their operation, may 
expose employees to possible injury, death, or adverse health 
consequences caused by the extinguishing agent. Such systems are only 
subject to the requirements of paragraphs (b)(4) through (b)(7) and (c) 
of this section.
    (3) Systems otherwise covered in paragraph (a)(2) of this section 
which are installed in areas with no employee exposure are exempted from 
the requirements of this section.
    (b) General requirements. (1) Fixed extinguishing system components 
and agents shall be designed and approved for use on the specific fire 
hazards they are expected to control or extinguish.
    (2) If for any reason a fixed extinguishing system becomes 
inoperable, the employer shall notify employees and take the necessary 
temporary precautions to assure their safety until the system is 
restored to operating order. Any defects or impairments shall be 
properly corrected by trained personnel.
    (3) The employer shall provide a distinctive alarm or signaling 
system which complies with Sec. 1910.165 and is capable of being 
perceived above ambient noise or light levels, on all extinguishing 
systems in those portions of the workplace covered by the extinguishing 
system to indicate when the extinguishing system is discharging. 
Discharge alarms are not required on systems where discharge is 
immediately recognizable.
    (4) The employer shall provide effective safeguards to warn 
employees against entry into discharge areas where the atmosphere 
remains hazardous to employee safety or health.
    (5) The employer shall post hazard warning or caution signs at the 
entrance to, and inside of, areas protected by fixed extinguishing 
systems which use agents in concentrations known to be hazardous to 
employee safety and health.
    (6) The employer shall assure that fixed systems are inspected 
annually by a person knowledgeable in the design and function of the 
system to assure that the system is maintained in good operating 
condition.
    (7) The employer shall assure that the weight and pressure of 
refillable containers is checked at least semi-annually. If the 
container shows a loss in net content or weight of more than 5 percent, 
or a loss in pressure of more than 10 percent, it shall be subjected to 
maintenance.
    (8) The employer shall assure that factory charged nonrefillable 
containers which have no means of pressure indication are weighed at 
least semi-annually. If a container shows a loss in net weight or more 
than 5 percent it shall be replaced.
    (9) The employer shall assure that inspection and maintenance dates 
are recorded on the container, on a tag attached to the container, or in 
a central location. A record of the last semi-annual check shall be 
maintained until the container is checked again or for the life of the 
container, whichever is less.
    (10) The employer shall train employees designated to inspect, 
maintain, operate, or repair fixed extinguishing systems and annually 
review their training to keep them up-to-date in the functions they are 
to perform.
    (11) The employer shall not use chlorobromomethane or carbon 
tetrachloride as an extinguishing agent where employees may be exposed.
    (12) The employer shall assure that systems installed in the 
presence of corrosive atmospheres are constructed of non-corrosive 
material or otherwise protected against corrosion.
    (13) Automatic detection equipment shall be approved, installed and 
maintained in accordance with Sec. 1910.164.
    (14) The employer shall assure that all systems designed for and 
installed in areas with climatic extremes shall operate effectively at 
the expected extreme temperatures.
    (15) The employer shall assure that at least one manual station is 
provided for discharge activation of each fixed extinguishing system.

[[Page 499]]

    (16) The employer shall assure that manual operating devices are 
identified as to the hazard against which they will provide protection.
    (17) The employer shall provide and assure the use of the personal 
protective equipment needed for immediate rescue of employees trapped in 
hazardous atmospheres created by an agent discharge.
    (c) Total flooding systems with potential health and safety hazards 
to employees. (1) The employer shall provide an emergency action plan in 
accordance with Sec. 1910.38 for each area within a workplace that is 
protected by a total flooding system which provides agent concentrations 
exceeding the maximum safe levels set forth in paragraphs (b)(5) and 
(b)(6) of Sec. 1910.162.
    (2) Systems installed in areas where employees cannot enter during 
or after the system's operation are exempt from the requirements of 
paragraph (c) of this section.
    (3) On all total flooding systems the employer shall provide a pre-
discharge employee alarm which complies with Sec. 1910.165, and is 
capable of being perceived above ambient light or noise levels before 
the system discharges, which will give employees time to safely exit 
from the discharge area prior to system discharge.
    (4) The employer shall provide automatic actuation of total flooding 
systems by means of an approved fire detection device installed and 
interconnected with a pre-discharge employee alarm system to give 
employees time to safely exit from the discharge area prior to system 
discharge.
[45 FR 60711, Sept. 12, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.161  Fixed extinguishing systems, dry chemical.

    (a) Scope and application. This section applies to all fixed 
extinguishing systems, using dry chemical as the extinguishing agent, 
installed to meet a particular OSHA standard. These systems shall also 
comply with Sec. 1910.160.
    (b) Specific requirements. (1) The employer shall assure that dry 
chemical agents are compatible with any foams or wetting agents with 
which they are used.
    (2) The employer may not mix together dry chemical extinguishing 
agents of different compositions. The employer shall assure that dry 
chemical systems are refilled with the chemical stated on the approval 
nameplate or an equivalent compatible material.
    (3) When dry chemical discharge may obscure vision, the employer 
shall provide a pre-discharge employee alarm which complies with 
Sec. 1910.165 and which will give employees time to safely exit from the 
discharge area prior to system discharge.
    (4) The employer shall sample the dry chemical supply of all but 
stored pressure systems at least annually to assure that the dry 
chemical supply is free of moisture which may cause the supply to cake 
or form lumps.
    (5) The employer shall assure that the rate of application of dry 
chemicals is such that the designed concentration of the system will be 
reached within 30 seconds of initial discharge.
[45 FR 60712, Sept. 12, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.162  Fixed extinguishing systems, gaseous agent.

    (a) Scope and application--(1) Scope. This section applies to all 
fixed extinguishing systems, using a gas as the extinguishing agent, 
installed to meet a particular OSHA standard. These systems shall also 
comply with Sec. 1910.160. In some cases, the gas may be in a liquid 
state during storage.
    (2) Application. The requirements of paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(4) 
through (b)(6) shall apply only to total flooding systems.
    (b) Specific requirements. (1) Agents used for initial supply and 
replenishment shall be of the type approved for the system's 
application. Carbon dioxide obtained by dry ice conversion to liquid is 
not acceptable unless it is processed to remove excess water and oil.
    (2) Except during overhaul, the employer shall assure that the 
designed concentration of gaseous agents is maintained until the fire 
has been extinguished or is under control.
    (3) The employer shall assure that employees are not exposed to 
toxic levels of gaseous agent or its decomposition products.

[[Page 500]]

    (4) The employer shall assure that the designed extinguishing 
concentration is reached within 30 seconds of initial discharge except 
for Halon systems which must achieve design concentration within 10 
seconds.
    (5) The employer shall provide a distinctive pre-discharge employee 
alarm capable of being perceived above ambient light or noise levels 
when agent design concentrations exceed the maximum safe level for 
employee exposure. A pre-discharge employee alarm for alerting employees 
before system discharge shall be provided on Halon 1211 and carbon 
dioxide systems with a design concentration of 4 percent or greater and 
for Halon 1301 systems with a design concentration of 10 percent or 
greater. The pre-discharge employee alarm shall provide employees time 
to safely exit the discharge area prior to system discharge.
    (6)(i) Where egress from an area cannot be accomplished within one 
minute, the employer shall not use Halon 1301 in concentrations greater 
than 7 percent.
    (ii) Where egress takes greater than 30 seconds but less than one 
minute, the employer shall not use Halon 1301 in a concentration greater 
than 10 percent.
    (iii) Halon 1301 concentrations greater than 10 percent are only 
permitted in areas not normally occupied by employees provided that any 
employee in the area can escape within 30 seconds. The employer shall 
assure that no unprotected employees enter the area during agent 
discharge.
[45 FR 60712, Sept. 12, 1980; 46 FR 24557, May 1, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.163  Fixed extinguishing systems, water spray and foam.

    (a) Scope and application. This section applies to all fixed 
extinguishing systems, using water or foam solution as the extinguishing 
agent, installed to meet a particular OSHA standard. These systems shall 
also comply with Sec. 1910.160. This section does not apply to automatic 
sprinkler systems which are covered under Sec. 1910.159.
    (b) Specific requirements. (1) The employer shall assure that foam 
and water spray systems are designed to be effective in at least 
controlling fire in the protected area or on protected equipment.
    (2) The employer shall assure that drainage of water spray systems 
is directed away from areas where employees are working and that no 
emergency egress is permitted through the drainage path.
[45 FR 60712, Sept. 12, 1980]

                      Other Fire Protection Systems


<R05>
Sec. 1910.164  Fire detection systems.

    (a) Scope and application. This section applies to all automatic 
fire detection systems installed to meet the requirements of a 
particular OSHA standard.
    (b) Installation and restoration. (1) The employer shall assure that 
all devices and equipment constructed and installed to comply with this 
standard are approved for the purpose for which they are intended.
    (2) The employer shall restore all fire detection systems and 
components to normal operating condition as promptly as possible after 
each test or alarm. Spare detection devices and components which are 
normally destroyed in the process of detecting fires shall be available 
on the premises or from a local supplier in sufficient quantities and 
locations for prompt restoration of the system.
    (c) Maintenance and testing. (1) The employer shall maintain all 
systems in an operable condition except during repairs or maintenance.
    (2) The employer shall assure that fire detectors and fire detection 
systems are tested and adjusted as often as needed to maintain proper 
reliability and operating condition except that factory calibrated 
detectors need not be adjusted after installation.
    (3) The employer shall assure that pneumatic and hydraulic operated 
detection systems installed after January 1, 1981, are equipped with 
supervised systems.
    (4) The employer shall assure that the servicing, maintenance and 
testing of fire detection systems, including cleaning and necessary 
sensitivity adjustments are performed by a trained person knowledgeable 
in the operations and functions of the system.
    (5) The employer shall also assure that fire detectors that need to 
be

[[Page 501]]

cleaned of dirt, dust, or other particulates in order to be fully 
operational are cleaned at regular periodic intervals.
    (d) Protection of fire detectors. (1) The employer shall assure that 
fire detection equipment installed outdoors or in the presence of 
corrosive atmospheres be protected from corrosion. The employer shall 
provide a canopy, hood, or other suitable protection for detection 
equipment requiring protection from the weather.
    (2) The employer shall locate or otherwise protect detection 
equipment so that it is protected from mechanical or physical impact 
which might render it inoperable.
    (3) The employer shall assure that detectors are supported 
independently of their attachment to wires or tubing.
    (e) Response time. (1) The employer shall assure that fire detection 
systems installed for the purpose of actuating fire extinguishment or 
suppression systems shall be designed to operate in time to control or 
extinguish a fire.
    (2) The employer shall assure that fire detection systems installed 
for the purpose of employee alarm and evacuation be designed and 
installed to provide a warning for emergency action and safe escape of 
employees.
    (3) The employer shall not delay alarms or devices initiated by fire 
detector actuation for more than 30 seconds unless such delay is 
necessary for the immediate safety of employees. When such delay is 
necessary, it shall be addressed in an emergency action plan meeting the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.38.
    (f) Number, location and spacing of detecting devices. The employer 
shall assure that the number, spacing and location of fire detectors is 
based upon design data obtained from field experience, or tests, 
engineering surveys, the manufacturer's recommendations, or a recognized 
testing laboratory listing.
[45 FR 60713, Sept. 12, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.165  Employee alarm systems.

    (a) Scope and application. (1) This section applies to all emergency 
employee alarms installed to meet a particular OSHA standard. This 
section does not apply to those discharge or supervisory alarms required 
on various fixed extinguishing systems or to supervisory alarms on fire 
suppression, alarm or detection systems unless they are intended to be 
employee alarm systems.
    (2) The requirements in this section that pertain to maintenance, 
testing and inspection shall apply to all local fire alarm signaling 
systems used for alerting employees regardless of the other functions of 
the system.
    (3) All pre-discharge employee alarms installed to meet a particular 
OSHA standard shall meet the requirements of paragraphs (b)(1) through 
(4), (c), and (d)(1) of this section.
    (b) General requirements. (1) The employee alarm system shall 
provide warning for necessary emergency action as called for in the 
emergency action plan, or for reaction time for safe escape of employees 
from the workplace or the immediate work area, or both.
    (2) The employee alarm shall be capable of being perceived above 
ambient noise or light levels by all employees in the affected portions 
of the workplace. Tactile devices may be used to alert those employees 
who would not otherwise be able to recognize the audibile or visual 
alarm.
    (3) The employee alarm shall be distinctive and recognizable as a 
signal to evacuate the work area or to perform actions designated under 
the emergency action plan.
    (4) The employer shall explain to each employee the preferred means 
of reporting emergencies, such as manual pull box alarms, public address 
systems, radio or telephones. The employer shall post emergency 
telephone numbers near telephones, or employee notice boards, and other 
conspicuous locations when telephones serve as a means of reporting 
emergencies. Where a communication system also serves as the employee 
alarm system, all emergency messages shall have priority over all non-
emergency messages.
    (5) The employer shall establish procedures for sounding emergency 
alarms in the workplace. For those employers with 10 or fewer employees 
in a particular workplace, direct voice communication is an acceptable 
procedure for sounding the alarm provided all employees can hear the 
alarm. Such workplaces need not have a back-up system.

[[Page 502]]

    (c) Installation and restoration. (1) The employer shall assure that 
all devices, components, combinations of devices or systems constructed 
and installed to comply with this standard are approved. Steam whistles, 
air horns, strobe lights or similar lighting devices, or tactile devices 
meeting the requirements of this section are considered to meet this 
requirement for approval.
    (2) The employer shall assure that all employee alarm systems are 
restored to normal operating condition as promptly as possible after 
each test or alarm. Spare alarm devices and components subject to wear 
or destruction shall be available in sufficient quantities and locations 
for prompt restoration of the system.
    (d) Maintenance and testing. (1) The employer shall assure that all 
employee alarm systems are maintained in operating condition except when 
undergoing repairs or maintenance.
    (2) The employer shall assure that a test of the reliability and 
adequacy of non-supervised employee alarm systems is made every two 
months. A different actuation device shall be used in each test of a 
multi-actuation device system so that no individual device is used for 
two consecutive tests.
    (3) The employer shall maintain or replace power supplies as often 
as is necessary to assure a fully operational condition. Back-up means 
of alarm, such as employee runners or telephones, shall be provided when 
systems are out of service.
    (4) The employer shall assure that employee alarm circuitry 
installed after January 1, 1981, which is capable of being supervised is 
supervised and that it will provide positive notification to assigned 
personnel whenever a deficiency exists in the system. The employer shall 
assure that all supervised employee alarm systems are tested at least 
annually for reliability and adequacy.
    (5) The employer shall assure that the servicing, maintenance and 
testing of employee alarms are done by persons trained in the designed 
operation and functions necessary for reliable and safe operation of the 
system.
    (e) Manual operation. The employer shall assure that manually 
operated actuation devices for use in conjunction with employee alarms 
are unobstructed, conspicuous and readily accessible.
[45 FR 60713, Sept. 12, 1980]

                  APPENDICES TO SUBPART L TO PART 1910

    Note: The following appendices to subpart L, except appendix E, 
serve as nonmandatory guidelines to assist employers in complying with 
the appropriate requirements of subpart L.

          Appendix A to Subpart L to Part 1910--Fire Protection

Sec. 1910.156  Fire brigades.
    1. Scope. This section does not require an employer to organize a 
fire brigade. However, if an employer does decide to organize a fire 
brigade, the requirements of this section apply.
    2. Pre-fire planning. It is suggested that pre-fire planning be 
conducted by the local fire department and/or the workplace fire brigade 
in order for them to be familiar with the workplace and process hazards. 
Involvement with the local fire department or fire prevention bureau is 
encouraged to facilitate coordination and cooperation between members of 
the fire brigade and those who might be called upon for assistance 
during a fire emergency.
    3. Organizational statement. In addition to the information required 
in the organizational statement, paragraph 1910.156(b)(1), it is 
suggested that the organizational statement also contain the following 
information: a description of the duties that the fire brigade members 
are expected to perform; the line authority of each fire brigade 
officer; the number of the fire brigade officers and number of training 
instructors; and a list and description of the types of awards or 
recognition that brigade members may be eligible to receive.
    4. Physical capability. The physical capability requirement applies 
only to those fire brigade members who perform interior structural fire 
fighting. Employees who cannot meet the physical capability requirement 
may still be members of the fire brigade as long as such employees do 
not perform interior structural fire fighting. It is suggested that fire 
brigade members who are unable to perform interior structural fire 
fighting be assigned less stressful and physically demanding fire 
brigade duties, e.g., certain types of training, recordkeeping, fire 
prevention inspection and maintenance, and fire pump operations.
    Physically capable can be defined as being able to perform those 
duties specified in the

[[Page 503]]

training requirements of section 1910.156(c). Physically capable can 
also be determined by physical performance tests or by a physical 
examination when the examining physician is aware of the duties that the 
fire brigade member is expected to perform.
    It is also recommended that fire brigade members participate in a 
physical fitness program. There are many benefits which can be 
attributed to being physically fit. It is believed that physical fitness 
may help to reduce the number of sprain and strain injuries as well as 
contributing to the improvement of the cardiovascular system.
    5. Training and education. The paragraph on training and education 
does not contain specific training and education requirements because 
the type, amount, and frequency of training and education will be as 
varied as are the purposes for which fire brigades are organized. 
However, the paragraph does require that training and education be 
commensurate with those functions that the fire brigade is expected to 
perform; i.e., those functions specified in the organizational 
statement. Such a performance requirement provides the necessary 
flexibility to design a training program which meets the needs of 
individual fire brigades.
    At a minimum, hands-on training is required to be conducted annually 
for all fire brigade members. However, for those fire brigade members 
who are expected to perform interior structural fire fighting, some type 
of training or education session must be provided at least quarterly.
    In addition to the required hands-on training, it is strongly 
recommended that fire brigade members receive other types of training 
and education such as: classroom instruction, review of emergency action 
procedures, pre-fire planning, review of special hazards in the 
workplace, and practice in the use of self-contained breathing 
apparatus.
    It is not necessary for the employer to duplicate the same training 
or education that a fire brigade member receives as a member of a 
community volunteer fire department, rescue squad, or similar 
organization. However, such training or education must have been 
provided to the fire brigade member within the past year and it must be 
documented that the fire brigade member has received the training or 
education. For example: there is no need for a fire brigade member to 
receive another training class in the use of positive-pressure self-
contained breathing apparatus if the fire brigade member has recently 
completed such training as a member of a community fire department. 
Instead, the fire brigade member should receive training or education 
covering other important equipment or duties of the fire brigade as they 
relate to the workplace hazards, facilities and processes.
    It is generally recognized that the effectiveness of fire brigade 
training and education depends upon the expertise of those providing the 
training and education as well as the motivation of the fire brigade 
members. Fire brigade training instructors must receive a higher level 
of training and education than the fire brigade members they will be 
teaching. This includes being more knowledgeable about the functions to 
be performed by the fire brigade and the hazards involved. The 
instructors should be qualified to train fire brigade members and 
demonstrate skills in communication, methods of teaching, and 
motivation. It is important for instructors and fire brigade members 
alike to be motivated toward the goals of the fire brigade and be aware 
of the importance of the service that they are providing for the 
protection of other employees and the workplace.
    It is suggested that publications from the International Fire 
Service Training Association, the National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA-1041), the International Society of Fire Service Instructors and 
other fire training sources be consulted for recommended qualifications 
of fire brigade training instructors.
    In order to be effective, fire brigades must have competent 
leadership and supervision. It is important for those who supervise the 
fire brigade during emergency situations, e.g., fire brigade chiefs, 
leaders, etc., to receive the necessary training and education for 
supervising fire brigade activities during these hazardous and stressful 
situations. These fire brigade members with leadership responsibilities 
should demonstrate skills in strategy and tactics, fire suppression and 
prevention techniques, leadership principles, pre-fire planning, and 
safety practices. It is again suggested that fire service training 
sources be consulted for determining the kinds of training and education 
which are necessary for those with fire brigade leadership 
responsibilities.
    It is further suggested that fire brigade leaders and fire brigade 
instructors receive more formalized training and education on a 
continuing basis by attending classes provided by such training sources 
as universities and university fire extension services.
    The following recommendations should not be considered to be all of 
the necessary elements of a complete comprehensive training program, but 
the information may be helpful as a guide in developing a fire brigade 
training program.
    All fire brigade members should be familiar with exit facilities and 
their location, emergency escape routes for handicapped workers, and the 
workplace ``emergency action plan.''
    In addition, fire brigade members who are expected to control and 
extinguish fires in the incipient stage should, at a minimum, be trained 
in the use of fire extinguishers, standpipes, and other fire equipment 
they

[[Page 504]]

are assigned to use. They should also be aware of first aid medical 
procedures and procedures for dealing with special hazards to which they 
may be exposed. Training and education should include both classroom 
instruction and actual operation of the equipment under simulated 
emergency conditions. Hands-on type training must be conducted at least 
annually but some functions should be reviewed more often.
    In addition to the above training, fire brigade members who are 
expected to perform emergency rescue and interior structural fire 
fighting should, at a minimum, be familiar with the proper techniques in 
rescue and fire suppression procedures. Training and education should 
include fire protection courses, classroom training, simulated fire 
situations including ``wet drills'' and, when feasible, extinguishment 
of actual mock fires. Frequency of training or education must be at 
least quarterly, but some drills or classroom training should be 
conducted as often as monthly or even weekly to maintain the proficiency 
of fire brigade members.
    There are many excellent sources of training and education that the 
employer may want to use in developing a training program for the 
workplace fire brigade. These sources include publications, seminars, 
and courses offered by universities.
    There are also excellent fire school courses by such facilities as 
Texas A and M University, Delaware State Fire School, Lamar University, 
and Reno Fire School, that deal with those unique hazards which may be 
encountered by fire brigades in the oil and chemical industry. These 
schools, and others, also offer excellent training courses which would 
be beneficial to fire brigades in other types of industries. These 
courses should be a continuing part of the training program, and 
employers are strongly encouraged to take advantage of these excellent 
resources.
    It is also important that fire brigade members be informed about 
special hazards to which they may be exposed during fire and other 
emergencies. Such hazards as storage and use areas of flammable liquids 
and gases, toxic chemicals, water-reactive substances, etc., can pose 
difficult problems. There must be written procedures developed that 
describe the actions to be taken in situations involving special 
hazards. Fire brigade members must be trained in handling these special 
hazards as well as keeping abreast of any changes that occur in relation 
to these special hazards.
    6. Fire fighting equipment. It is important that fire fighting 
equipment that is in damaged or unserviceable condition be removed from 
service and replaced. This will prevent fire brigade members from using 
unsafe equipment by mistake.
    Fire fighting equipment, except portable fire extinguishers and 
respirators, must be inspected at least annually. Portable fire 
extinguishers and respirators are required to be inspected at least 
monthly.
    7. Protective clothing. (A) General. Paragraph (e) of Sec. 1910.156 
does not require all fire brigade members to wear protective clothing. 
It is not the intention of these standards to require employers to 
provide a full ensemble of protective clothing for every fire brigade 
member without consideration given to the types of hazardous 
environments to which the fire brigade member might be exposed. It is 
the intention of these standards to require adequate protection for 
those fire brigade members who might be exposed to fires in an advanced 
stage, smoke, toxic gases, and high temperatures. Therefore, the 
protective clothing requirements only apply to those fire brigade 
members who perform interior structural fire fighting operations.
    Additionally, the protective clothing requirements do not apply to 
the protective clothing worn during outside fire fighting operations 
(brush and forest fires, crash crew operations) or other special fire 
fighting activities. It is important that the protective clothing to be 
worn during these types of fire fighting operations reflect the hazards 
which are expected to be encountered by fire brigade members.
    (B) Foot and leg protection. Section 1910.156 permits an option to 
achieve foot and leg protection.
    The section recognizes the interdependence of protective clothing to 
cover one or more parts of the body. Therefore, an option is given so 
that fire brigade members may meet the foot and leg requirements by 
either wearing long fire-resistive coats in combination with fully 
extended boots, or by wearing shorter fire-resistive costs in 
combination with protective trousers and protective shoes or shorter 
boots.
    (C) Body protection. Paragraph (e)(3) of Sec. 1910.156 provides an 
option for fire brigade members to achieve body protection. Fire brigade 
members may wear a fire-resistive coat in combination with fully 
extended boots, or they may wear a fire-resistive coat in combination 
with protective trousers.
    Fire-resistive coats and protective trousers meeting all of the 
requirements contained in NFPA 1971-1975 ``Protective Clothing for 
Structural Fire Fighters,'' are acceptable as meeting the requirements 
of this standard.
    The lining is required to be permanently attached to the outer 
shell. However, it is permissible to attach the lining to the outer 
shell material by stitching in one area such as at the neck. Fastener 
tape or snap fasteners may be used to secure the rest of the lining to 
the outer shell to facilitate cleaning. Reference to permanent lining 
does not refer to a winter liner which is a detachable extra lining used 
to give added protection to the wearer against the effects of cold 
weather and wind.

[[Page 505]]

    (D) Hand protection. The requirements of the paragraph on hand 
protection may be met by protective gloves or a glove system. A glove 
system consists of a combination of different gloves. The usual 
components of a glove system consist of a pair of gloves, which provide 
thermal insulation to the hands, worn in combination with a second pair 
of gloves which provide protection against flame, cut, and puncture.
    It is suggested that protective gloves provide dexterity and a sense 
of feel for objects. Criteria and test methods for dexterity are 
contained in the NIOSH publications, ``The Development of Criteria for 
Firefighters' Gloves; Vol. I: Glove Requirements'' and ``Vol. II: Glove 
Criteria and Test Methods.'' These NIOSH publications also contain a 
permissible modified version of Federal Test Method 191, Method 5903, 
(paragraph (3) of appendix E) for flame resistance when gloves, rather 
than glove material, are tested for flame resistance.
    (E) Head, eye, and face protection. Head protective devices which 
meet the requirements contained in NFPA No. 1972 are acceptable as 
meeting the requirements of this standard for head protection.
    Head protective devices are required to be provided with ear flaps 
so that the ear flaps will be available if needed. It is recommended 
that ear protection always be used while fighting interior structural 
fires.
    Many head protective devices are equipped with face shields to 
protect the eyes and face. These face shields are permissible as meeting 
the eye and face protection requirements of this paragraph as long as 
such face shields meet the requirements of Sec. 1910.133 of the General 
Industry Standards.
    Additionally, full facepieces, helmets or hoods of approved 
breathing apparatus which meet the requirements of Sec. 1910.134 and 
paragraph (f) of Sec. 1910.156 are also acceptable as meeting the eye 
and face protection requirements.
    It is recommended that a flame resistant protective head covering 
such as a hood or snood, which will not adversely affect the seal of a 
respirator facepiece, be worn during interior structural fire fighting 
operations to protect the sides of the face and hair.
    8. Respiratory protective devices. Respiratory protection is 
required to be worn by fire brigade members while working inside 
buildings or confined spaces where toxic products of combustion or an 
oxygen deficiency is likely to be present; respirators are also to be 
worn during emergency situations involving toxic substances. When fire 
brigade members respond to emergency situations, they may be exposed to 
unknown contaminants in unknown concentrations. Therefore, it is 
imperative that fire brigade members wear proper respiratory protective 
devices during these situations. Additionally, there are many instances 
where toxic products of combustion are still present during mop-up and 
overhaul operations. Therefore, fire brigade members should continue to 
wear respirators during these types of operations.
    Self-contained breathing apparatus are not required to be equipped 
with either a buddy-breathing device or a quick-disconnect valve. 
However, these accessories may be very useful and are acceptable as long 
as such accessories do not cause damage to the apparatus, restrict the 
air flow of the apparatus, or obstruct the normal operation of the 
apparatus.
    Buddy-breathing devices are useful for emergency situations where a 
victim or another fire brigade member can share the same air supply with 
the wearer of the apparatus for emergency escape purposes.
    The employer is encouraged to provide fire brigade members with an 
alternative means of respiratory protection to be used only for 
emergency escape purposes if the self-contained breathing apparatus 
becomes inoperative. Such alternative means of respiratory protection 
may be either a buddy-breathing device or an escape self-contained 
breathing apparatus (ESCBA). The ESCBA is a short-duration respiratory 
protective device which is approved for only emergency escape purposes. 
It is suggested that if ESCBA units are used, that they be of at least 5 
minutes service life.
    Quick-disconnect valves are devices which start the flow of air by 
insertion of the hose (which leads to the facepiece) into the regulator 
of self-contained breathing apparatus, and stop the flow of air by 
disconnecting the hose from the regulator. These devices are 
particularly useful for those positive-pressure self-contained breathing 
apparatus which do not have the capability of being switched from the 
demand to the positive-pressure mode.
    The use of a self-contained breathing apparatus where the apparatus 
can be switched from a demand to a positive-pressure mode is acceptable 
as long as the apparatus is in the positive-pressure mode when 
performing interior structural fire fighting operations. Also acceptable 
are approved respiratory protective devices which have been converted to 
the positive-pressure type when such modification is accomplished by 
trained and experienced persons using kits or parts approved by NIOSH 
and provided by the manufacturer and by following the manufacturer's 
instructions.
    There are situations which require the use of respirators which have 
a duration of 2 hours or more. Presently, there are no approved 
positive-pressure apparatus with a rated service life of more than 2 
hours. Consequently, negative-pressure self-contained breathing 
apparatus with a rated service life of more than 2 hours and which have 
a minimum protection factor of 5,000 as determined

[[Page 506]]

by an acceptable quantitative fit test performed on each individual, 
will be acceptable for use during situations which require long duration 
apparatus. Long duration apparatus may be needed in such instances as 
working in tunnels, subway systems, etc. Such negative-pressure 
breathing apparatus will continue to be acceptable for a maximum of 18 
months after a positive-pressure apparatus with the same or longer rated 
service life of more than 2 hours is certified by NIOSH/MSHA. After this 
18 month phase-in period, all self-contained breathing apparatus used 
for these long duration situations will have to be of the positive-
pressure type.
    Protection factor (sometimes called fit factor) is defined as the 
ratio of the contaminant concentrations outside of the respirator to the 
contaminant concentrations inside the facepiece of the respirator.


Protection factors are determined by quantitative fit tests. An 
acceptable quantitative fit test should include the following elements:
    1. A fire brigade member who is physically and medically capable of 
wearing respirators, and who is trained in the use of respirators, dons 
a self-contained breathing apparatus equipped with a device that will 
monitor the concentration of a contaminant inside the facepiece.
    2. The fire brigade member then performs a qualitative fit test to 
assure the best face to facepiece seal as possible. A qualitative fit 
test can consist of a negative-pressure test, positive-pressure test, 
isoamyl acetate vapor (banana oil) test, or an irritant smoke test. For 
more details on respirator fitting see the NIOSH booklet entitled ``A 
Guide to Industrial Respiratory Protection'' June, 1976, and HEW 
publication No. (NIOSH) 76-189.
    3. The wearer should then perform physical activity which reflects 
the level of work activity which would be expected during fire fighting 
activities. The physical activity should include simulated fire-ground 
work activity or physical exercise such as running-in-place, a step 
test, etc.
    4. Without readjusting the apparatus, the wearer is placed in a test 
atmosphere containing a non-toxic contaminant with a known, constant, 
concentration.
    The protection factor is then determined by dividing the known 
concentration of the contaminant in the test atmosphere by the 
concentration of the contaminant inside the facepiece when the following 
exercises are performed:
    (a) Normal breathing with head motionless for one minute;
    (b) Deep breathing with head motionless for 30 seconds;
    (c) Turning head slowly from side to side while breathing normally, 
pausing for at least two breaths before changing direction. Continue for 
at least one minute;
    (d) Moving head slowly up and down while breathing normally, pausing 
for at least two breaths before changing direction. Continue for at 
least two minutes;
    (e) Reading from a prepared text, slowly and clearly, and loudly 
enough to be heard and understood. Continue for one minute; and
    (f) Normal breathing with head motionless for at least one minute.
    The protection factor which is determined must be at least 5,000. 
The quantitative fit test should be conducted at least three times. It 
is acceptable to conduct all three tests on the same day. However, there 
should be at least one hour between tests to reflect the protection 
afforded by the apparatus during different times of the day.
    The above elements are not meant to be a comprehensive, technical 
description of a quantitative fit test protocol. However, quantitative 
fit test procedures which include these elements are acceptable for 
determining protection factors. Procedures for a quantitative fit test 
are required to be available for inspection by the Assistant Secretary 
or authorized representative.
    Organizations such as Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Lawrence 
Livermore Laboratory, NIOSH, and American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) are excellent sources for additional information concerning 
qualitative and quantitative fit testing.

               Sec. 1910.157  Portable fire extinguishers.

    1. Scope and application. The scope and application of this section 
is written to apply to three basic types of workplaces. First, there are 
those workplaces where the employer has chosen to evacuate all employees 
from the workplace at the time of a fire emergency. Second, there are 
those workplaces where the employer has chosen to permit certain 
employees to fight fires and to evacuate all other non-essential 
employees at the time of a fire emergency. Third, there are those 
workplaces where the employer has chosen to permit all employees in the 
workplace to use portable fire extinguishers to fight fires.
    The section also addresses two kinds of work areas. The entire 
workplace can be divided into outside (exterior) work areas and inside 
(interior) work areas. This division of the workplace into two areas is 
done in recognition of the different types of hazards employees may be 
exposed to during fire fighting operations. Fires in interior 
workplaces, pose a greater hazard to employees; they can produce greater 
exposure to quantities of smoke, toxic gases, and heat because of the

[[Page 507]]

capability of a building or structure to contain or entrap these 
products of combustion until the building can be ventilated. Exterior 
work areas, normally open to the environment, are somewhat less 
hazardous, because the products of combustion are generally carried away 
by the thermal column of the fire. Employees also have a greater 
selection of evacuation routes if it is necessary to abandon fire 
fighting efforts.
    In recognition of the degree of hazard present in the two types of 
work areas, the standards for exterior work areas are somewhat less 
restrictive in regards to extinguisher distribution. Paragraph (a) 
explains this by specifying which paragraphs in the section apply.
    2. Portable fire extinguisher exemptions. In recognition of the 
three options given to employers in regard to the amount of employee 
evacuation to be carried out, the standards permit certain exemptions 
based on the number of employees expected to use fire extinguishers.
    Where the employer has chosen to totally evacuate the workplace at 
the time of a fire emergency and when fire extinguishers are not 
provided, the requirements of this section do not apply to that 
workplace.
    Where the employer has chosen to partially evacuate the workplace or 
the effected area at the time of a fire emergency and has permitted 
certain designated employees to remain behind to operate critical plant 
operations or to fight fires with extinguishers, then the employer is 
exempt from the distribution requirements of this section. Employees who 
will be remaining behind to perform incipient fire fighting or members 
of a fire brigade must be trained in their duties. The training must 
result in the employees becoming familiar with the locations of fire 
extinguishers. Therefore, the employer must locate the extinguishers in 
convenient locations where the employees know they can be found. For 
example, they could be mounted in the fire truck or cart that the fire 
brigade uses when it responds to a fire emergency. They can also be 
distributed as set forth in the National Fire Protection Association's 
Standard No. 10, ``Portable Fire Extinguishers.''
    Where the employer has decided to permit all employees in the 
workforce to use fire extinguishers, then the entire OSHA section 
applies.
    3. Portable fire extinguisher mounting. Previous standards for 
mounting fire extinguishers have been criticized for requiring specific 
mounting locations. In recognition of this criticism, the standard has 
been rewritten to permit as much flexibility in extinguisher mounting as 
is acceptable to assure that fire extinguishers are available when 
needed and that employees are not subjected to injury hazards when they 
try to obtain an extinguisher.
    It is the intent of OSHA to permit the mounting of extinguishers in 
any location that is accessible to employees without the use of portable 
devices such as a ladder. This limitation is necessary because portable 
devices can be moved or taken from the place where they are needed and, 
therefore, might not be available at the time of an emergency.
    Employers are given as much flexibility as possible to assure that 
employees can obtain extinguishers as fast as possible. For example, an 
acceptable method of mounting extinguishers in areas where fork lift 
trucks or tow-motors are used is to mount the units on retractable 
boards which, by means of counterweighting, can be raised above the 
level where they could be struck by vehicular traffic. When needed, they 
can be lowered quickly for use. This method of mounting can also reduce 
vandalism and unauthorized use of extinguishers. The extinguishers may 
also be mounted as outlined in the National Fire Protection 
Association's Standard No. 10, ``Portable Fire Extinguishers.''
    4. Selection and distribution. The employer is responsible for the 
proper selection and distribution of fire extinguishers and the 
determination of the necessary degree of protection. The selection and 
distribution of fire extinguishers must reflect the type and class of 
fire hazards associated with a particular workplace.
    Extinguishers for protecting Class A hazards may be selected from 
the following types: water, foam, loaded stream, or multipurpose dry 
chemical. Extinguishers for protecting Class B hazards may be selected 
from the following types: Halon 1301, Halon 1211, carbon dioxide, dry 
chemicals, foam, or loaded stream. Extinguishers for Class C hazards may 
be selected from the following types: Halon 1301, Halon 1211, carbon 
dioxide, or dry chemical.
    Combustible metal (Class D hazards) fires pose a different type of 
fire problem in the workplace. Extinguishers using water, gas, or 
certain dry chemicals cannot extinguish or control this type of fire. 
Therefore, certain metals have specific dry powder extinguishing agents 
which can extinguish or control this type of fire. Those agents which 
have been specifically approved for use on certain metal fires provide 
the best protection; however, there are also some ``universal'' type 
agents which can be used effectively on a variety of combustible metal 
fires if necessary. The ``universal'' type agents include: Foundry flux, 
Lith-X powder, TMB liquid, pyromet powder, TEC powder, dry talc, dry 
graphite powder, dry sand, dry sodium chloride, dry soda ash, lithium 
chloride, zirconium silicate, and dry dolomite.
    Water is not generally accepted as an effective extinguishing agent 
for metal fires. When applied to hot burning metal, water

[[Page 508]]

will break down into its basic atoms of oxygen and hydrogen. This 
chemical breakdown contributes to the combustion of the metal. However, 
water is also a good universal coolant and can be used on some 
combustible metals, but only under proper conditions and application, to 
reduce the temperature of the burning metal below the ignition point. 
For example, automatic deluge systems in magnesium plants can discharge 
such large quantities of water on burning magnesium that the fire will 
be extinguished. The National Fire Protection Association has specific 
standards for this type of automatic sprinkler system. Further 
information on the control of metal fires with water can be found in the 
National Fire Protection Association's Fire Protection Handbook.
    An excellent source of selection and distribution criteria is found 
in the National Fire Protection Association's Standard No. 10. Other 
sources of information include the National Safety Council and the 
employer's fire insurance carrier.
    5. Substitution of standpipe systems for portable fire 
extinguishers. The employer is permitted to substitute acceptable 
standpipe systems for portable fire extinguishers under certain 
circumstances. It is necessary to assure that any substitution will 
provide the same coverage that portable units provide. This means that 
fire hoses, because of their limited portability, must be spaced 
throughout the protected area so that they can reach around obstructions 
such as columns, machinery, etc. and so that they can reach into closets 
and other enclosed areas.
    6. Inspection, maintenance and testing. The ultimate responsibility 
for the inspection, maintenance and testing of portable fire 
extinguishers lies with the employer. The actual inspection, 
maintenance, and testing may, however, be conducted by outside 
contractors with whom the employer has arranged to do the work. When 
contracting for such work, the employer should assure that the 
contractor is capable of performing the work that is needed to comply 
with this standard.
    If the employer should elect to perform the inspection, maintenance, 
and testing requirements of this section in-house, then the employer 
must make sure that those persons doing the work have been trained to do 
the work and to recognize problem areas which could cause an 
extinguisher to be inoperable. The National Fire Protection Association 
provides excellent guidelines in its standard for portable fire 
extinguishers. The employer may also check with the manufacturer of the 
unit that has been purchased and obtain guidelines on inspection, 
maintenance, and testing. Hydrostatic testing is a process that should 
be left to contractors or individuals using suitable facilities and 
having the training necessary to perform the work.
    Anytime the employer has removed an extinguisher from service to be 
checked or repaired, alternate equivalent protection must be provided. 
Alternate equivalent protection could include replacing the extinguisher 
with one or more units having equivalent or equal ratings, posting a 
fire watch, restricting the unprotected area from employee exposure, or 
providing a hose system ready to operate.
    7. Hydrostatic testing. As stated before, the employer may contract 
for hydrostatic testing. However, if the employer wishes to provide the 
testing service, certain equipment and facilities must be available. 
Employees should be made aware of the hazards associated with 
hydrostatic testing and the importance of using proper guards and water 
pressures. Severe injury can result if extinguisher shells fail 
violently under hydrostatic pressure.
    Employers are encouraged to use contractors who can perform adequate 
and reliable service. Firms which have been certified by the Materials 
Transportation Board (MTB) of the U.S. Department of Transportation 
(DOT) or State licensed extinguisher servicing firms or recognized by 
the National Association of Fire Equipment Distributors in Chicago, 
Illinois, are generally acceptable for performing this service.
    8. Training and education. This part of the standard is of the 
utmost importance to employers and employees if the risk of injury or 
death due to extinguisher use is to be reduced. If an employer is going 
to permit an employee to fight a workplace fire of any size, the 
employer must make sure that the employee knows everything necessary to 
assure the employee's safety.
    Training and education can be obtained through many channels. Often, 
local fire departments in larger cities have fire prevention bureaus or 
similar organizations which can provide basic fire prevention training 
programs. Fire insurance companies will have data and information 
available. The National Fire Protection Association and the National 
Safety Council will provide, at a small cost, publications that can be 
used in a fire prevention program.
    Actual fire fighting training can be obtained from various sources 
in the country. The Texas A & M University, the University of Maryland's 
Fire and Rescue Institute, West Virginia University's Fire Service 
Extension, Iowa State University's Fire Service Extension and other 
State training schools and land grant colleges have fire fighting 
programs directed to industrial applications. Some manufacturers of 
extinguishers, such as the Ansul Company and Safety First, conduct fire 
schools for customers in the proper use of extinguishers. Several large 
corporations have taken time to develop their own

[[Page 509]]

on-site training programs which expose employees to the actual 
``feeling'' of fire fighting. Simulated fires for training of employees 
in the proper use of extinguishers are also an acceptable part of a 
training program.
    In meeting the requirements of this section, the employer may also 
provide educational materials, without classroom instruction, through 
the use of employee notice campaigns using instruction sheets or flyers 
or similar types of informal programs. The employer must make sure that 
employees are trained and educated to recognize not only what type of 
fire is being fought and how to fight it, but also when it is time to 
get away from it and leave fire suppression to more experienced fire 
fighters.

               Sec. 1910.158  Standpipe and hose systems.

    1. Scope and application. This section has been written to provide 
adequate coverage of those standpipe and hose systems that an employer 
may install in the workplace to meet the requirements of a particular 
OSHA standard. For example, OSHA permits the substitution of hose 
systems for portable fire extinguishers in Sec. 1910.157. If an employer 
chooses to provide hose systems instead of portable Class A fire 
extinguishers, then those hose systems used for substitution would have 
to meet the applicable requirements of Sec. 1910.157. All other 
standpipe and hose systems not used as a substitute would be exempt from 
these requirements.
    The section specifically exempts Class I large hose systems. By 
large hose systems, OSHA means those 2\1/2\" (6.3 cm) hose lines that 
are usually associated with fire departments of the size that provide 
their own water supply through fire apparatus. When the fire gets to the 
size that outside protection of that degree is necessary, OSHA believes 
that in most industries employees will have been evacuated from the fire 
area and the ``professional'' fire fighters will take control.
    2. Protection of standpipes. Employers must make sure that 
standpipes are protected so that they can be relied upon during a fire 
emergency. This means protecting the pipes from mechanical and physical 
damage. There are various means for protecting the equipment such as, 
but not limited to, enclosing the supply piping in the construction of 
the building, locating the standpipe in an area which is inaccessible to 
vehicles, or locating the standpipe in a stairwell.
    3. Hose covers and cabinets. The employer should keep fire 
protection hose equipment in cabinets or inside protective covers which 
will protect it from the weather elements, dirt or other damaging 
sources. The use of protective covers must be easily removed or opened 
to assure that hose and nozzle are accessible. When the employer places 
hose in a cabinet, the employer must make sure that the hose and nozzle 
are accessible to employees without subjecting them to injury. In order 
to make sure that the equipment is readily accessible, the employer must 
also make sure that the cabinets used to store equipment are kept free 
of obstructions and other equipment which may interfere with the fast 
distribution of the fire hose stored in the cabinet.
    4. Hose outlets and connections. The employer must assure that 
employees who use standpipe and hose systems can reach the hose rack and 
hose valve without the use of portable equipment such as ladders. Hose 
reels are encouraged for use because one employee can retrieve the hose, 
charge it, and place it into service without much difficulty.
    5. Hose. When the employer elects to provide small hose in lieu of 
portable fire extinguishers, those hose stations being used for the 
substitution must have hose attached and ready for service. However, if 
more than the necessary amount of small hose outlets are provided, hose 
does not have to be attached to those outlets that would provide 
redundant coverage. Further, where the installation of hose on outlets 
may expose the hose to extremely cold climates, the employer may store 
the hose in houses or similar protective areas and connect it to the 
outlet when needed.
    There is approved lined hose available that can be used to replace 
unlined hose which is stored on racks in cabinets. The lined hose is 
constructed so that it can be folded and placed in cabinets in the same 
manner as unlined hose.
    Hose is considered to be unserviceable when it deteriorates to the 
extent that it can no longer carry water at the required pressure and 
flow rates. Dry rotted linen or hemp hose, cross threaded couplings, and 
punctured hose are examples of unserviceable hose.
    6. Nozzles. Variable stream nozzles can provide useful variations in 
water flow and spray patterns during fire fighting operations and they 
are recommended for employee use. It is recommended that 100 psi 
(700kPa) nozzle pressure be used to provide good flow patterns for 
variable stream nozzles. The most desirable attribute for nozzles is the 
ability of the nozzle person to shut off the water flow at the nozzle 
when it is necessary. This can be accomplished in many ways. For 
example, a shut-off nozzle with a lever or rotation of the nozzle to 
stop flow would be effective, but in other cases a simple globe valve 
placed between a straight stream nozzle and the hose could serve the 
same purpose. For straight stream nozzles 50 psi nozzle pressure is 
recommended. The intent of this standard is to protect the employee from 
``run-away'' hoses if it becomes necessary to drop a pressurized hose 
line and retreat from the fire front and other related hazards.

[[Page 510]]

    7. Design and installation. Standpipe and hose systems designed and 
installed in accordance with NFPA Standard No. 14, ``Standpipe and Hose 
Systems,'' are considered to be in compliance with this standard.

               Sec. 1910.159  Automatic sprinkler systems.

    1. Scope and application. This section contains the minimum 
requirements for design, installation and maintenance of sprinkler 
systems that are needed for employee safety. The Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration is aware of the fact that the National Board of 
Fire Underwriters is no longer an active organization, however, 
sprinkler systems still exist that were designed and installed in 
accordance with that organization's standards. Therefore, OSHA will 
recognize sprinkler systems designed to, and maintained in accordance 
with, NBFU and earlier NFPA standards.
    2. Exemptions. In an effort to assure that employers will continue 
to use automatic sprinkler systems as the primary fire protection system 
in workplaces, OSHA is exempting from coverage those systems not 
required by a particular OSHA standard and which have been installed in 
workplaces solely for the purpose of protecting property. Many of these 
types of systems are installed in areas or buildings with little or no 
employee exposure. An example is those warehouses where employees may 
enter occasionally to take inventory or move stock. Some employers may 
choose to shut down those systems which are not specifically required by 
OSHA rather than upgrade them to comply with the standards. OSHA does 
not intend to regulate such systems. OSHA only intends to regulate those 
systems which are installed to comply with a particular OSHA standard.
    3. Design. There are two basic types of sprinkler system design. 
Pipe schedule designed systems are based on pipe schedule tables 
developed to protect hazards with standard sized pipe, number of 
sprinklers, and pipe lengths. Hydraulic designed systems are based on an 
engineered design of pipe size which will produce a given water density 
or flow rate at any particular point in the system. Either design can be 
used to comply with this standard.
    The National Fire Protection Association's Standard No. 13, 
``Automatic Sprinkler Systems,'' contains the tables needed to design 
and install either type of system. Minimum water supplies, densities, 
and pipe sizes are given for all types of occupancies.
    The employer may check with a reputable fire protection engineering 
consultant or sprinkler design company when evaluating existing systems 
or designing a new installation.
    With the advent of new construction materials for the manufacuture 
of sprinkler pipe, materials, other than steel have been approved for 
use as sprinkler pipe. Selection of pipe material should be made on the 
basis of the type of installation and the acceptability of the material 
to local fire and building officials where such systems may serve more 
than one purpose.
    Before new sprinkler systems are placed into service, an acceptance 
test is to be conducted. The employer should invite the installer, 
designer, insurance representative, and a local fire official to witness 
the test. Problems found during the test are to be corrected before the 
system is placed into service.
    4. Maintenance. It is important that any sprinkler system 
maintenance be done only when there is minimal employee exposure to the 
fire hazard. For example, if repairs or changes to the system are to be 
made, they should be made during those hours when employees are not 
working or are not occupying that portion of the workplace protected by 
the portion of the system which has been shut down.
    The procedures for performing a flow test via a main drain test or 
by the use of an inspector's test valve can be obtained from the 
employer's fire insurance company or from the National Fire Protection 
Association's Standard No. 13A, ``Sprinkler System, Maintenance.''
    5. Water supplies. The water supply to a sprinkler system is one of 
the most important factors an employer should consider when evaluationg 
a system. Obviously, if there is no water supply, the system is useless. 
Water supplies can be lost for various reasons such as improperly closed 
valves, excessive demand, broken water mains, and broken fire pumps. The 
employer must be able to determine if or when this type of condition 
exists either by performing a main drain test or visual inspection. 
Another problem may be an inadequate water supply. For example, a light 
hazard occupancy may, through rehabilitation or change in tenants, 
become an ordinary or high hazard occupancy. In such cases, the existing 
water supply may not be able to provide the pressure or duration 
necessary for proper protection. Employers must assure that proper 
design and tests have been made to assure an adequate water supply. 
These tests can be arranged through the employer's fire insurance 
carrier or through a local sprinkler maintenance company or through the 
local fire prevention organization.
    Anytime the employer must shut down the primary water supply for a 
sprinkler system, the standard requires that equivalent protection be 
provided. Equivalent protection may include a fire watch with 
extinguishers or hose lines in place and manned, or a secondary water 
supply such as a tank truck and pump, or a tank or fire pond with fire 
pumps, to protect the areas where the primary water supply is limited or 
shut down. The employer

[[Page 511]]

may also require evacuation of the workplace and have an emergency 
action plan which specifies such action.
    6. Protection of piping. Piping which is exposed to corrosive 
atmospheres, either chemical or natural, can become defective to the 
extent that it is useless. Employers must assure that piping is 
protected from corrosion by its material of construction, e.g., 
stainless steel, or by a protective coating, e.g., paint.
    7. Sprinklers. When an employer finds it necessary to replace 
sprinkler system components or otherwise change a sprinkler's design, 
employer should make a complete fire protection engineering survey of 
that part of the system being changed. This review should assure that 
the changes to the system will not alter the effectiveness of the system 
as it is presently designed. Water supplies, densities and flow 
characteristics should be maintained.
    8. Protection of sprinklers. All components of the system must be 
protected from mechanical impact damage. This can be achieved with the 
use of mechanical guards or screens or by locating components in areas 
where physical contact is impossible or limited.
    9. Sprinkler alarms. The most recognized sprinkler alarm is the 
water motor gong or bell that sounds when water begins to flow through 
the system. This is not however, the only type of acceptable water flow 
alarm. Any alarm that gives an indication that water is flowing through 
the system is acceptable. For example, a siren, a whistle, a flashing 
light, or similar alerting device which can transmit a signal to the 
necessary persons would be acceptable. The purpose of the alarm is to 
alert persons that the system is operating, and that some type of 
planned action is necessary.
    10. Sprinkler spacing. For a sprinkler system to be effective there 
must be an adequate discharge of water spray from the sprinkler head. 
Any obstructions which hinder the designed density or spray pattern of 
the water may create unprotected areas which can cause fire to spread. 
There are some sprinklers that, because of the system's design, are 
deflected to specific areas. This type of obstruction is acceptable if 
the system's design takes it into consideration in providing adequate 
coverage.

          Sec. 1910.160  Fixed extinguishing systems, general.

    1. Scope and application. This section contains the general 
requirements that are applicable to all fixed extinguishing systems 
installed to meet OSHA standards. It also applies to those fixed 
extinguishing systems, generally total flooding, which are not required 
by OSHA, but which, because of the agent's discharge, may expose 
employees to hazardous concentrations of extinguishing agents or 
combustion by-products. Employees who work around fixed extinguishing 
systems must be warned of the possible hazards associated with the 
system and its agent. For example, fixed dry chemical extinguishing 
systems may generate a large enough cloud of dry chemical particles that 
employees may become visually disoriented. Certain gaseous agents can 
expose employees to hazardous by-products of combustion when the agent 
comes into contact with hot metal or other hot surface. Some gaseous 
agents may be present in hazardous concentrations when the system has 
totally discharged because an extra rich concentration is necessary to 
extinguish deep-seated fires. Certain local application systems may be 
designed to discharge onto the flaming surface of a liquid, and it is 
possible that the liquid can splatter when hit with the discharging 
agent. All of these hazards must be determined before the system is 
placed into operation, and must be discussed with employees.
    Based on the known toxicological effects of agents such as carbon 
tetrachloride and chlorobromomethane, OSHA is not permitting the use of 
these agents in areas where employees can be exposed to the agent or its 
side effects. However, chlorobromomethane has been accepted and may be 
used as an explosion suppression agent in unoccupied spaces. OSHA is 
permitting the use of this agent only in areas where employees will not 
be exposed.
    2. Distinctive alarm signals. A distinctive alarm signal is required 
to indicate that a fixed system is discharging. Such a signal is 
necessary on those systems where it is not immediately apparent that the 
system is discharging. For example, certain gaseous agents make a loud 
noise when they discharge. In this case no alarm signal is necessary. 
However, where systems are located in remote locations or away from the 
general work area and where it is possible that a system could discharge 
without anyone knowing that it is doing so, then a distinctive alarm is 
necessary to warn employees of the hazards that may exist. The alarm can 
be a bell, gong, whistle, horn, flashing light, or any combination of 
signals as long as it is identifiable as a discharge alarm.
    3. Maintenance. The employer is responsible for the maintenance of 
all fixed systems, but this responsibility does not preclude the use of 
outside contractors to do such work. New systems should be subjected to 
an acceptance test before placed in service. The employer should invite 
the installer, designer, insurance representative and others to witness 
the test. Problems found during the test need to be corrected before the 
system is considered operational.
    4. Manual discharge stations. There are instances, such as for 
mechanical reasons and others, where the standards call for a manual 
back-up activation device. While the location of this device is not 
specified in the standard, the employer should assume that

[[Page 512]]

the device should be located where employees can easily reach it. It 
could, for example, be located along the main means of egress from the 
protected area so that employees could activate the system as they 
evacuate the work area.
    5. Personal protective equipment. The employer is required to 
provide the necessary personal protective equipment to rescue employees 
who may be trapped in a totally flooded environment which may be 
hazardous to their health. This equipment would normally include a 
positive-pressure self-contained breathing apparatus and any necessary 
first aid equipment. In cases where the employer can assure the prompt 
arrival of the local fire department or plant emergency personnel which 
can provide the equipment, this can be considered as complying with the 
standards.

        Sec. 1910.161  Fixed extinguishing systems, dry chemical.

    1. Scope and application. The requirements of this section apply 
only to dry chemical systems. These requirements are to be used in 
conjunction with the requirements of Sec. 1910.160.
    2. Maintenance. The employer is responsible for assuring that dry 
chemical systems will operate effectively. To do this, periodic 
maintenance is necessary. One test that must be conducted during the 
maintenance check is one which will determine if the agent has remained 
free of moisture. If an agent absorbs any moisture, it may tend to cake 
and thereby clog the system. An easy test for acceptable moisture 
content is to take a lump of dry chemical from the container and drop it 
from a height of four inches. If the lump crumbles into fine particles, 
the agent is acceptable.

       Sec. 1910.162  Fixed extinguishing systems, gaseous agent.

    1. Scope and application. This section applies only to those systems 
which use gaseous agents. The requirements of Sec. 1910.160 also apply 
to the gaseous agent systems covered in this section.
    2. Design concentrations. Total flooding gaseous systems are based 
on the volume of gas which must be discharged in order to produce a 
certain designed concentration of gas in an enclosed area. The 
concentration needed to extinguish a fire depends on several factors 
including the type of fire hazard and the amount of gas expected to leak 
away from the area during discharge. At times it is necessary to 
``super-saturate'' a work area to provide for expected leakage from the 
enclosed area. In such cases, employers must assure that the flooded 
area has been ventilated before employees are permitted to reenter the 
work area without protective clothing and respirators.
    3. Toxic decomposition. Certain halogenated hydrocarbons will break 
down or decompose when they are combined with high temperatures found in 
the fire environment. The products of the decomposition can include 
toxic elements or compounds. For example, when Halon 1211 is placed into 
contact with hot metal it will break down and form bromide or fluoride 
fumes. The employer must find out which toxic products may result from 
decomposition of a particular agent from the manufacturer, and take the 
necessary precautions to prevent employee exposure to the hazard.

    Sec. 1910.163  Fixed extinguishing systems, water spray and foam.

    1. Scope and application. This section applies to those systems that 
use water spray or foam. The requirements of Sec. 1910.160 also apply to 
this type of system.
    2. Characteristics of foams. When selecting the type of foam for a 
specific hazard, the employer should consider the following limitations 
of some foams.
    a. Some foams are not acceptable for use on fires involving 
flammable gases and liquefied gases with boiling points below ambient 
workplace temperatures. Other foams are not effective when used on fires 
involving polar solvent liquids.
    b. Any agent using water as part of the mixture should not be used 
on fire involving combustible metals unless it is applied under proper 
conditions to reduce the temperature of burning metal below the ignition 
temperature. The employer should use only those foams that have been 
tested and accepted for this application by a recognized independent 
testing laboratory.
    c. Certain types of foams may be incompatible and break down when 
they are mixed together.
    d. For fires involving water miscible solvents, employers should use 
only those foams tested and approved for such use. Regular protein foams 
may not be effective on such solvents.
    Whenever employers provide a foam or water spray system, drainage 
facilities must be provided to carry contaminated water or foam overflow 
away from the employee work areas and egress routes. This drainage 
system should drain to a central impounding area where it can be 
collected and disposed of properly. Other government agencies may have 
regulations concerning environmental considerations.

                 Sec. 1910.164  Fire detection systems.

    1. Installation and restoration. Fire detection systems must be 
designed by knowledgeable engineers or other professionals, with 
expertise in fire detection systems and when the systems are installed, 
there should

[[Page 513]]

be an acceptance test performed on the system to insure it operates 
properly. The manufacturer's recommendations for system design should be 
consulted. While entire systems may not be approved, each component used 
in the system is required to be approved. Custom fire detection systems 
should be designed by knowledgeable fire protection or electrical 
engineers who are familiar with the workplace hazards and conditions. 
Some systems may only have one or two individual detectors for a small 
workplace, but good design and installation is still important. An 
acceptance test should be performed on all systems, including these 
smaller systems.
    OSHA has a requirement that spare components used to replace those 
which may be destroyed during an alarm situation be available in 
sufficient quantities and locations for prompt restoration of the 
system. This does not mean that the parts or components have to be 
stored at the workplace. If the employer can assure that the supply of 
parts is available in the local community or the general metropolitan 
area of the workplace, then the requirements for storage and 
availability have been met. The intent is to make sure that the alarm 
system is fully operational when employees are occupying the workplace, 
and that when the system operates it can be returned to full service the 
next day or sooner.
    2. Supervision. Fire detection systems should be supervised. The 
object of supervision is detection of any failure of the circuitry, and 
the employer should use any method that will assure that the system's 
circuits are operational. Electrically operated sensors for air 
pressure, fluid pressure, or electrical circuits, can provide effective 
monitoring and are the typical types of supervision.
    3. Protection of fire detectors. Fire detectors must be protected 
from corrosion either by protective coatings, by being manufactured from 
non-corrosive materials or by location. Detectors must also be protected 
from mechanical impact damage, either by suitable cages or metal guards 
where such hazards are present, or by locating them above or out of 
contact with materials or equipment which may cause damage.
    4. Number, location, and spacing of detectors. This information can 
be obtained from the approval listing for detectors or NFPA standards. 
It can also be obtained from fire protection engineers or consultants or 
manufacturers of equipment who have access to approval listings and 
design methods.

                 Sec. 1910.165  Employee alarm systems.

    1. Scope and application. This section is intended to apply to 
employee alarm systems used for all types of employee emergencies except 
those which occur so quickly and at such a rapid rate (e.g., explosions) 
that any action by the employee is extremely limited following 
detection.
    In small workplaces with 10 or less employees the alarm system can 
be by direct voice communication (shouting) where any one individual can 
quickly alert all other employees. Radio may be used to transmit alarms 
from remote workplaces where telephone service is not available, 
provided that radio messages will be monitored by emergency services, 
such as fire, police or others, to insure alarms are transmitted and 
received.
    2. Alarm signal alternatives. In recognition of physically impaired 
individuals, OSHA is accepting various methods of giving alarm signals. 
For example, visual, tactile or audible alarm signals are acceptable 
methods for giving alarms to employees. Flashing lights or vibrating 
devices can be used in areas where the employer has hired employees with 
hearing or vision impairments. Vibrating devices, air fans, or other 
tactile devices can be used where visually and hearing impaired 
employees work. Employers are cautioned that certain frequencies of 
flashing lights have been claimed to initiate epileptic seizures in some 
employees and that this fact should be considered when selecting an 
alarm device. Two way radio communications would be most appropriate for 
transmitting emergency alarms in such workplaces which may be remote or 
where telephones may not be available.
    3. Reporting alarms. Employee alarms may require different means of 
reporting, depending on the workplace involved. For example, in small 
workplaces, a simple shout throughout the workplace may be sufficient to 
warn employees of a fire or other emergency. In larger workplaces, more 
sophisticated equipment is necessary so that entire plants or high-rise 
buildings are not evacuated for one small emergency. In remote areas, 
such as pumping plants, radio communication with a central base station 
may be necessary. The goal of this standard is to assure that all 
employees who need to know that an emergency exists can be notified of 
the emergency. The method of transmitting the alarm should reflect the 
situation found at the workplace.
    Personal radio transmitters, worn by an individual, can be used 
where the individual may be working such as in a remote location. Such 
personal radio transmitters shall send a distinct signal and should 
clearly indicate who is having an emergency, the location, and the 
nature of the emergency. All radio transmitters need a feedback system 
to assure that the emergency alarm is sent to the people who can provide 
assistance.
    For multi-story buildings or single story buildings with interior 
walls for subdivisions, the more traditional alarm systems are 
recommended for these types of workplaces. Supervised telephone or 
manual fire alarm or pull box stations with paging systems to transmit 
messages throughout the

[[Page 514]]

building is the recommended alarm system. The alarm box stations should 
be available within a travel distance of 200 feet. Water flow detection 
on a sprinkler system, fire detection systems (guard's supervisory 
station) or tour signal (watchman's service), or other related systems 
may be part of the overall system. The paging system may be used for 
nonemergency operations provided the emergency messages and uses will 
have precedence over all other uses of the system.
    4. Supervision. The requirements for supervising the employee alarm 
system circuitry and power supply may be accomplished in a variety of 
ways. Typically, electrically operated sensors for air pressure, fluid 
pressure, steam pressure, or electrical continuity of circuitry may be 
used to continuously monitor the system to assure it is operational and 
to identify trouble in the system and give a warning signal.
[45 FR 60715, Sept. 12, 1980; 46 FR 24557, May 1, 1981]

   Appendix B to Subpart L to Part 1910--National Consensus Standards

    The following table contains a cross-reference listing of those 
current national consensus standards which contains information and 
guidelines that would be considered acceptable in complying with 
requirements in the specific sections of subpart L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Subpart L section               National consensus standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1910.156................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 1972; Structural
                                           Fire Fighter's Helmets.
                                          ANSI Z88.5 American National
                                           Standard, Practice for
                                           Respirator Protection for the
                                           Fire Service.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 1971, Protective
                                           Clothing for Structural Fire
                                           Fighters.
                                          NFPA No. 1041, Fire Service
                                           Instructor Professional
                                           Qualifications.
1910.157................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 10, Portable
                                           Fire Extinguishers.
1910.158................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 18, Wetting
                                           Agents.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 20, Centrifugal
                                           Fire Pumps.
                                          NFPA No. 21, Steam Fire Pumps.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 22, Water Tanks.
                                          NFPA No. 24, Outside
                                           Protection.
                                          NFPA No. 26, Supervision of
                                           Valves.
                                          NFPA No. 13E, Fire Department
                                           Operations in Properties
                                           Protected by Sprinkler,
                                           Standpipe Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 194, Fire Hose
                                           Connections.
                                          NFPA No. 197, Initial Fire
                                           Attack, Training for.
                                          NFPA No. 1231, Water Supplies
                                           for Suburban and Rural Fire
                                           Fighting.
1910.159................................  ANSI-NFPA No. 13, Sprinkler
                                           Systems.
                                          NFPA No. 13A, Sprinkler
                                           Systems, Maintenance.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 18, Wetting
                                           Agents.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 20, Centrifugal
                                           Fire Pumps.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 22, Water Tanks.
                                          NFPA No. 24, Outside
                                           Protection.
                                          NFPA No. 26, Supervision of
                                           Valves.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72B, Auxiliary
                                           Signaling Systems.
                                          NFPA No. 1231, Water Supplies
                                           for Suburban and Rural Fire
                                           Fighting.
1910.160................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 11, Foam
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA 11A, High Expansion
                                           Foam Extinguishing Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 11B, Synthetic
                                           Foam and Combined Agent
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 12, Carbon
                                           Dioxide Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 12A, Halon 1301
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 12B, Halon 1211
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 15, Water Spray
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA 16 Foam-Water Spray
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 17, Dry Chemical
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA 69, Explosion
                                           Suppression Systems.
1910.161................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 11B, Synthetic
                                           Foam and Combined Agent
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 17, Dry Chemical
                                           Systems.
1910.162................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 12, Carbon
                                           Dioxide Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 12A, Halon 1211
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 12B, Halon 1301
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 69, Explosion
                                           Suppression Systems.
1910.163................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 11, Foam
                                           Extinguishing Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 11A, High
                                           Expansion Foam Extinguishing
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 11B, Synthetic
                                           Foam and Combined Agent
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 15, Water Spray
                                           Fixed Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 16, Foam-Water
                                           Spray Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 18, Wetting
                                           Agents.
                                          NFPA No. 26, Supervision of
                                           Valves.
1910.164................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 71, Central
                                           Station Signaling Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72A, Local
                                           Protective Signaling Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72B, Auxiliary
                                           Signaling Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72D, Proprietary
                                           Protective Signaling Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72E, Automatic
                                           Fire Detectors.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 101, Life Safety
                                           Code.
1910.165................................  ANSI/NFPA No. 71, Central
                                           Station Signaling Systems.

[[Page 515]]

                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72A, Local
                                           Protective Signaling Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72B, Auxiliary
                                           Protective Signaling Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72C, Remote
                                           Station Protective Signaling
                                           Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 72D, Proprietary
                                           Protective Signaling Systems.
                                          ANSI/NFPA No. 101, Life Safety
                                           Code.
Metric Conversion.......................  ANSI/ASTM No. E380, American
                                           National Standard for Metric
                                           Practice.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NFPA standards are available from the National Fire Protection
  Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
ANSI Standards are available from the American National Standards
  Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, NY 10018.

[45 FR 60715, Sept. 12, 1980, as amended at 58 FR 35309, June 30, 1993]

  Appendix C to Subpart L to Part 1910--Fire Protection References For 
                           Further Information

    I. Appendix general references. The following references provide 
information which can be helpful in understanding the requirements 
contained in all of the sections of subpart L:
    A. Fire Protection Handbook, National Fire Protection Association, 
Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    B. Accident Prevention Manual for Industrial Operations, National 
Safety Council; 425 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611.
    C. Various associations also publish information which may be useful 
in understanding these standards. Examples of these associations are: 
Fire Equipment Manufacturers Association (FEMA) of Arlington, VA 22204 
and the National Association of Fire Equipment Distributors (NAFED) of 
Chicago, IL 60601.
    II. Appendix references applicable to individual sections. The 
following references are grouped according to individual sections 
contained in subpart L. These references provide information which may 
be helpful in understanding and implementing the standards of each 
section of subpart L.
    A. Sec. 1910.156. Fire brigades:
    1. Private Fire Brigades, NFPA 27; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    2. Initial Fire Attack, Training Standard On, NFPA 197; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    3. Fire Fighter Professional Qualifications, NFPA 1001; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    4. Organization for Fire Services, NFPA 1201; National Fire 
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    5. Organization of a Fire Department, NFPA 1202; National Fire 
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    6. Protective Clothing for Structural Fire Fighting, ANSI/NFPA 1971; 
.
    7. American National Standard for Men's Safety-Toe Footwear, ANSI 
Z41.1; American National Standards Institute, New York, NY 10018.
    8. American National Standard for Occupational and Educational Eye 
and Face Protection, ANSI Z87.1; American National Standards Institute, 
New York, NY 10018.
    9. American National Standard, Safety Requirements for Industrial 
Head Protection, ANSI Z89.1; American National Standards Institute, New 
York, NY 10018.
    10. Specifications for Protective Headgear for Vehicular Users, ANSI 
Z90.1; American National Standards Institute, New York, NY 10018.
    11. Testing Physical Fitness; Davis and Santa Maria. Fire Command. 
April 1975.
    12. Development of a Job-Related Physical Performance Examination 
for Fire Fighters; Dotson and Others. A summary report for the National 
Fire Prevention and Control Administration. Washington, DC. March 1977.
    13. Proposed Sample Standards for Fire Fighters' Protective Clothing 
and Equipment; International Association of Fire Fighters, Washington, 
DC.
    14. A Study of Facepiece Leakage of Self-Contained Breathing 
Apparatus by DOP Man Tests; Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los 
Alamos, NM.
    15. The Development of Criteria for Fire Fighters' Gloves; Vol. II: 
Glove Criteria and Test Methods; National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, Cincinnati, OH. 1976.
    16. Model Performance Criteria for Structural Fire Fighters' 
Helmets; National Fire Prevention and Control Administration, 
Washington, DC. 1977.
    17. Firefighters; Job Safety and Health Magazine, Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration, Washington, DC. June 1978.
    18. Eating Smoke--The Dispensable Diet; Utech, H.P. The Fire 
Independent, 1975.
    19. Project Monoxide--A Medical Study of an Occupational Hazard of 
Fire Fighters; International Association of Fire Fighters, Washington, 
DC.
    20. Occupational Exposures to Carbon Monoxide in Baltimore 
Firefighters; Radford and Levine. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD. Journal of Occupational Medicine, September, 1976.
    21. Fire Brigades; National Safety Council, Chicago, IL. 1966.
    22. American National Standard, Practice for Respiratory Protection 
for the Fire Service; ANSI Z88.5; American National Standards Institute, 
New York, NY 10018.
    23. Respirator Studies for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; 
October 1, 1977--September 30, 1978. Evaluation and Performance of Open 
Circuit Breathing Apparatus. NU REG/CR-1235.

[[Page 516]]

Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory; Los Alamos, NM. 87545, January, 1980.
    B. Sec. 1910.157. Portable fire extinguishers:
    1. Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers, ANSI/NFPA 10; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269
    2. Methods for Hydrostatic Testing of Compressed Gas Cylinders, C-1; 
Compressed Gas Association, 1235 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington, VA 
22202.
    3. Recommendations for the Disposition of Unserviceable Compressed 
Gas Cylinders, C-2; Compressed Gas Association, 1235 Jefferson Davis 
Highway, Arlington, VA 22202.
    4. Standard for Visual Inspection of Compressed Gas Cylinders, C-6; 
Compressed Gas Association, 1235 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington, VA 
22202.
    5. Portable Fire Extinguisher Selection Guide, National Association 
of Fire Equipment Distributors; 111 East Wacker Drive, Chicago, IL 
60601.
    C. Sec. 1910.158. Standpipe and hose systems:
    1. Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, ANSI/NFPA 13; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    2. Standard of the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems, ANSI/
NFPA 14; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269.
    3. Standard for the Installation of Centrifugal Fire Pumps, ANSI/
NFPA 20; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269.
    4. Standard for Water Tanks for Private Fire Protection, ANSI/NFPA 
22; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    5. Standard for Screw Threads and Gaskets for Fire Hose Connections, 
ANSI/NFPA 194; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269 .
    6. Standard for Fire Hose, NFPA 196; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    7. Standard for the Care of Fire Hose, NFPA 198; National Fire 
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    D. Sec. 1910.159. Automatic sprinkler systems:
    1. Standard of the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, ANSI-NFPA 13; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    2. Standard for the Care and Maintenance of Sprinkler Systems, ANSI/
NFPA 13A; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269.
    3. Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems, 
ANSI/NFPA 14; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269.
    4. Standard for the Installation of Centrifugal Fire Pumps, ANSI/
NFPA 20; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269 .
    5. Standard for Water Tanks for Private Fire Protection, ANSI-NFPA 
22; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    6. Standard for Indoor General Storage, ANSI/NFPA 231; National Fire 
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    7. Standard for Rack Storage of Materials, ANSI/NFPA 231C; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    E. Sec. 1910.160. Fixed extinguishing systems--general information:
    1. Standard for Foam Extinguishing Systems, ANSI-NFPA 11; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    2. Standard for Hi-Expansion Foam Systems, ANSI/NFPA 11A; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    3. Standard on Synthetic Foam and Combined Agent Systems, ANSI/NFPA 
11B; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    4. Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems, ANSI/NFPA 12; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269 .
    5. Standard on Halon 1301, ANSI/NFPA 12A; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    6. Standard on Halon 1211, ANSI/NFPA 12B; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    7. Standard for Water Spray Systems, ANSI/NFPA 15; National Fire 
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    8. Standard for Foam-Water Sprinkler Systems and Foam-Water Spray 
Systems, ANSI/NFPA 16; National Fire Protection Association, National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269
    9. Standard for Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems, ANSI/NFPA 17; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    F. Sec. 1910.161. Fixed extinguishing systems--dry chemical:
    1. Standard for Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems, ANSI/NFPA 17; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    2. National Electrical Code, ANSI/NFPA 70; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    3. Standard for the Installation of Equipment for the Removal of 
Smoke and Grease-Laden Vapor from Commercial Cooking Equipment, NFPA 96; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    G. Sec. 1910.162. Fixed extinguishing systems--gaseous agents:

[[Page 517]]

    1. Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems, ANSI/NFPA 12; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269 .
    2. Standard on Halon 1301, ANSI/NFPA 12B; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    3. Standard on Halon 1211, ANSI/NFPA 12B; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    4. Standard on Explosion Prevention Systems, ANSI/NFPA 69; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    5. National Electrical Code, ANSI/NFPA 70; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    6. Standard on Automatic Fire Detectors, ANSI/NFPA 72E; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    7. Determination of Halon 1301/1211 Threshold Extinguishing 
Concentrations Using the Cup Burner Method; Riley and Olson, Ansul 
Report AL-530-A.
    H. Sec. 1910.163. Fixed extinguishing systems--water spray and foam 
agents:
    1. Standard for Foam Extinguisher Systems, ANSI/NFPA 11; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    2. Standard for High Expansion Foam Systems, ANSI/NFPA 11A; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    3. Standard for Water Spray Fixed Systems for Fire Protection, ANSI/
NFPA 15; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269 .
    4. Standard for the Installation of Foam-Water Sprinkler Systems and 
Foam-Water Spray Systems, ANSI/NFPA 16; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    I. Sec. 1910.164. Fire Detection systems:
    1. National Electrical Code, ANSI/NFPA 70; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    2. Standard for Central Station Signaling Systems, ANSI/NFPA 71; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269 .
    3. Standard on Automatic Fire Detectors, ANSI/NFPA 72E; National 
Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    J. Sec. 1910.165. Employee alarm systems:
    1. National Electrical Code, ANSI/NFPA 70; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269 .
    2. Standard for Central Station Signaling systems, ANSI/NFPA 71; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    3. Standard for Local Protective Signaling Systems, ANSI/NFPA 72A; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    4. Standard for Auxiliary Protective Signaling Systems, ANSI/NFPA 
72B; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    5. Standard for Remote Station Protective Signaling Systems, ANSI/
NFPA 72C; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, MA 02269 .
    6. Standard for Proprietary Protective Signaling Systems, ANSI/NFPA 
72D; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 
02269.
    7. Vocal Emergency Alarms in Hospitals and Nursing Facilities: 
Practice and Potential. National Bureau of Standards. Washington, D.C., 
July 1977.
    8. Fire Alarm and Communication Systems. National Bureau of 
Standards. Washington, D.C., April 1978.
[45 FR 60715, Sept. 12, 1980, as amended at 58 FR 35309, June 30, 1993 ]

   Appendix D to Subpart L to Part 1910--Availability of Publications 
       Incorporated by Reference in Section 1910.156 Fire Brigades

    The final standard for fire brigades, Section 1910.156, contains 
provisions which incorporate certain publications by reference. The 
publications provide criteria and test methods for protective clothing 
worn by those fire brigade members who are expected to perform interior 
structural fire fighting. The standard references the publications as 
the chief sources of information for determining if the protective 
clothing affords the required level of protection.
    It is appropriate to note that the final standard does not require 
employers to purchase a copy of the referenced publications. Instead, 
employers can specify (in purchase orders to the manufacturers) that the 
protective clothing meet the criteria and test methods contained in the 
referenced publications and can rely on the manufacturers' assurances of 
compliance. Employers, however, may desire to obtain a copy of the 
referenced publications for their own information.
    The paragraph designation of the standard where the referenced 
publications appear, the title of the publications, and the availablity 
of the publications are as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          Paragraph designation                 Referenced Publication                  Available From
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1910.156(e)(3)(ii)......................  ``Protective Clothing for           National Fire Protection
                                           Structural Fire Fighting,'' NFPA    Association, Batterymarch Park,
                                           No. 1971 (1975).                    Quincy, MA 02269.

[[Page 518]]

1910.156(e)(4)(i).......................  ``Development of Criteria for Fire  U.S. Government Printing Office,
                                           Fighter's Gloves; Vol. II, Part     Washington, D.C. 20402. Stock No.
                                           II: Test Methods'' (1976).          for Vol. II is: 071-033-0201-1.
1910.156(e)(5)(i).......................  ``Model Performance Criteria for    U.S. Fire Administration, National
                                           Structural Firefighter's            Fire Safety and Research Office,
                                           Helmets'' (1977).                   Washington, D.C. 20230.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The referenced publications (or a microfiche of the publications) 
are available for review at many universities and public libraries 
throughout the country. These publications may also be examined at the 
OSHA Technical Data Center, Room N2439-Rear, United States Department of 
Labor, 200 Constitution Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20210 (202-219-
7500), or at any OSHA Regional Office (see telephone directories under 
United States Government-Labor Department).
[45 FR 60715, Sept. 12, 1980, as amended at 58 FR 33509, June 30, 1993; 
61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]

   Appendix E to Subpart L to Part 1910--Test Methods for Protective 
                                Clothing

    This appendix contains test methods which must be used to determine 
if protective clothing affords the required level of protection as 
specified in Sec. 1910.156, fire brigades.
    (1) Puncture resistance test method for foot protection.
    A. Apparatus. The puncture resistance test shall be performed on a 
testing machine having a movable platform adjusted to travel at \1/4\-
inch/min (0.1 cm/sec). Two blocks of hardwood, metal, or plastic shall 
be prepared as follows: the blocks shall be of such size and thickness 
as to insure a suitable rigid test ensemble and allow for at least one-
inch of the pointed end of an 8D nail to be exposed for the penetration. 
One block shall have a hole drilled to hold an 8D common nail firmly at 
an angle of 98 deg.. The second block shall have a maximum \1/2\-inch 
(1.3 cm) diameter hole drilled through it so that the hole will allow 
free passage of the nail after it penetrates the insole during the test.
    B. Procedure. The test ensemble consisting of the sample unit, the 
two prepared blocks, a piece of leather outsole 10 to 11 irons thick, 
and a new 8D nail, shall be placed as follows: the 8D nail in the hole, 
the sample of outsole stock superimposed above the nail, the area of the 
sole plate to be tested placed on the outsole, and the second block with 
hole so placed as to allow for free passage of the nail after it passes 
through the outsole stock and sole plate in that order. The machine 
shall be started and the pressure, in pounds required for the nail to 
completely penetrate the outsole and sole plate, recorded to the nearest 
five pounds. Two determinations shall be made on each sole plate and the 
results averaged. A new nail shall be used for each determination.
    C. Source. These test requirements are contained in ``Military 
Specification For Fireman's Boots,'' MIL-B-2885D (1973 and amendment 
dated 1975) and are reproduced for your convenience.
    (2) Test method for determining the strength of cloth by tearing: 
Trapezoid Method.
    A. Test specimen. The specimen shall be a rectangle of cloth 3-
inches by 6-inches (7.6 cm by 15.2 cm). The long dimension shall be 
parallel to the warp for warp tests and parallel to the filling for 
filling tests. No two specimens for warp tests shall contain the same 
warp yarns, nor shall any two specimens for filling tests contain the 
same filling yarns. The specimen shall be taken no nearer the selvage 
than \1/10\ the width of the cloth. An isosceles trapezoid having an 
altitude of 3-inches (7.6 cm) and bases of 1 inch (2.5cm) and 4 inches 
(10.2 cm) in length, respectively, shall be marked on each specimen, 
preferably with the aid of a template. A cut approximately \3/8\-inch (1 
cm) in length shall then be made in the center of a perpendicular to the 
1-inch (2.5 cm) edge.
    B. Apparatus. (i) Six-ounce (.17 kg) weight tension clamps shall be 
used so designed that the six ounces (.17 kg) of weight are distributed 
evenly across the complete width of the sample.
    (ii) The machine shall consist of three main parts: Straining 
mechanism, clamps for holding specimen, and load and elongation 
recording mechanisms.
    (iii) A machine wherein the specimen is held between two clamps and 
strained by a uniform movement of the pulling clamp shall be used.
    (iv) The machine shall be adjusted so that the pulling clamp shall 
have a uniform speed of 12  10.5 inches per minute (0.5 .02 cm/sec).
    (v) The machine shall have two clamps with two jaws on each clamp. 
The design of the two clamps shall be such that one gripping surface or 
jaw may be an integral part of the rigid frame of the clamp or be 
fastened to allow a slight vertical movement, while the other gripping 
surface or jaw shall be completely moveable. The dimension of the 
immovable jaw of each clamp parallel to the application of the load 
shall measure one-inch, and the dimension of the jaw perpendicular to 
this direction shall measure

[[Page 519]]

three inches or more. The face of the movable jaw of each clamp shall 
measure one-inch by three inches.
    Each jaw face shall have a flat smooth, gripping surface. All edges 
which might cause a cutting action shall be rounded to a radius of not 
over \1/64\-inch (.04 cm). In cases where a cloth tends to slip when 
being tested, the jaws may be faced with rubber or other material to 
prevent slippage. The distance between the jaws (gage length) shall be 
one-inch at the start of the test.
    (vi) Calibrated dial; scale or chart shall be used to indicate 
applied load and elongation. The machine shall be adjusted or set, so 
that the maximum load required to break the specimen will remain 
indicated on the calibrated dial or scale after the test specimen has 
ruptured.
    (vii) The machine shall be of such capacity that the maximum load 
required to break the specimen shall be not greater than 85 percent or 
less than 15 percent of the rated capacity.
    (viii) The error of the machine shall not exceed 2 percent up to and 
including a 50-pound load (22.6 kg) and 1 percent over a 50-pound load 
(22.6 kg) at any reading within its loading range.
    (ix) All machine attachments for determining maximum loads shall be 
disengaged during this test.
    C. Procedure. (i) The specimen shall be clamped in the machine along 
the nonparallel sides of the trapezoid so that these sides lie along the 
lower edge of the upper clamp and the upper edge of the lower clamp with 
the cut halfway between the clamps. The short trapezoid base shall be 
held taut and the long trapezoid base shall lie in the folds.
    (ii) The machine shall be started and the force necessary to tear 
the cloth shall be observed by means of an autographic recording device. 
The speed of the pulling clamp shall be 12 inches 0.5 inch per minute 
(0.5 .02 cm/sec).
    (iii) If a specimen slips between the jaws, breaks in or at the 
edges of the jaws, or if for any reason attributable to faulty 
technique, an individual measurement falls markedly below the average 
test results for the sample unit, such result shall be discarded and 
another specimen shall be tested.
    (iv) The tearing strength of the specimen shall be the average of 
the five highest peak loads of resistance registered for 3 inches (7.6 
cm) of separation of the tear.
    D. Report. (i) Five specimens in each of the warp and filling 
directions shall be tested from each sample unit.
    (ii) The tearing strength of the sample unit shall be the average of 
the results obtained from the specimens tested in each of the warp and 
filling directions and shall be reported separately to the nearest 0.1-
pound (.05 kg).
    E. Source. These test requirements are contained in ``Federal Test 
Method Standard 191, Method 5136'' and are reproduced for your 
convenience.
    (3) Test method for determining flame resistance of cloth; vertical.
    A. Test specimen. The specimen shall be a rectangle of cloth 2\3/4\ 
inches (7.0 cm) by 12 inches (30.5 cm) with the long dimension parallel 
to either the warp or filling direction of the cloth. No two warp 
specimens shall contain the same warp yarns, and no two filling 
specimens shall contain the same filling yarn.
    B. Number of determinations. Five specimens from each of the warp 
and filling directions shall be tested from each sample unit.
    C. Apparatus. (i) Cabinet. A cabinet and accessories shall be 
fabricated in accordance with the requirements specified in Figures L-1, 
L-2, and L-3. Galvanized sheet metal or other suitable metal shall be 
used. The entire inside back wall of the cabinet shall be painted black 
to facilitate the viewing of the test specimen and pilot flame.
    (ii) Burner. The burner shall be equipped with a variable orifice to 
adjust the flame height, a barrel having a \3/8\-inch (1 cm) inside 
diameter and a pilot light.
    (a) The burner may be constructed by combining a \3/8\-inch (1 cm) 
inside diameter barrel 3 \1/4\ inches (7.6 .6 cm) long from a fixed 
orifice burner with a base from a variable orifice burner.
    (b) The pilot light tube shall have a diameter of approximately \1/
16\-inch (.2 cm) and shall be spaced \1/8\-inch (.3 cm) away from the 
burner edge with a pilot flame \1/8\-inch (.3 cm) long.
    (c) The necessary gas connections and the applicable plumbing shall 
be as specified in Figure L-4 except that a solenoid valve may be used 
in lieu of the stopcock valve to which the burner is attached. The 
stopcock valve or solenoid valve, whichever is used, shall be capable of 
being fully opened or fully closed in 0.1-second.
    (d) On the side of the barrel of the burner, opposite the pilot 
light there shall be a metal rod of approximately \1/8\-inch (.3 cm) 
diameter spaced \1/2\-inch (1.3 cm) from the barrel and extending above 
the burner. The rod shall have two \5/16\-inch (.8 cm) prongs marking 
the distances of \3/4\-inch (1.9 cm) and 1\1/2\ inches (3.8 cm) above 
the top of the burner.
    (e) The burner shall be fixed in a position so that the center of 
the barrel of the burner is directly below the center of the specimen.
    (iii) There shall be a control valve system with a delivery rate 
designed to furnish gas to the burner under a pressure of 2\1/2\ \1/4\ 
(psi) (17.5 1.8 kPa) per square inch at the burner inlet (see 
(g)(3)(vi)(A)). The manufacturer's recommended delivery rate for the 
valve system shall be included in the required pressure.

[[Page 520]]

    (iv) A synthetic gas mixture shall be of the following composition 
within the following limits (analyzed at standard conditions): 55 3 
percent hydrogen, 24 1 percent methane, 3 1 percent ethane, and 18 1 
percent carbon monoxide which will give a specific gravity of 0.365 
0.018 (air = 1) and a B.T.U. content of 540 20 per cubic foot (20.1 
3.7 kJ/L)(dry basis) at 69.8 deg.F (21 deg.C).
    (v) There shall be metal hooks and weights to produce a series of 
total loads to determine length of char. The metal hooks shall consist 
of No. 19 gage steel wire or equivalent and shall be made from 3-inch 
(7.6 cm) lengths of wire and bent \1/2\-inch (1.3 cm) from one end to a 
45 degree hook. One end of the hook shall be fastened around the neck of 
the weight to be used.
    (vi) There shall be a stop watch or other device to measure the 
burning time to 0.2-second.
    (vii) There shall be a scale, graduated in 0.1 inch (.3 cm) to 
measure the length of char.
    D. Procedure. (i) The material undergoing test shall be evaluated 
for the characteristics of after-flame time and char length on each 
specimen.
    (ii) All specimens to be tested shall be at moisture equilibrium 
under standard atmospheric conditions in accordance with paragraph (3)C 
of this appendix. Each specimen to be tested shall be exposed to the 
test flame within 20 seconds after removal from the standard atmosphere. 
In case of dispute, all testing will be conducted under Standard 
Atmospheric Conditions in accordance with paragraph (3)C of this 
appendix.
    (iii) The specimen in its holder shall be suspended vertically in 
the cabinet in such a manner that the entire length of the specimen is 
exposed and the lower end is \3/4\-inch (1.9 cm) above the top of the 
gas burner. The apparatus shall be set up in a draft free area.
    (iv) Prior to inserting the specimen, the pilot flame shall be 
adjusted to approximately \1/8\-inch (.3 cm) in height measured from its 
lowest point to the tip.
    The burner flame shall be adjusted by means of the needle valve in 
the base of the burner to give a flame height of 1\1/2\ inches (3.8 cm) 
with the stopcock fully open and the air supply to the burner shut off 
and taped. The 1\1/2\-inch (3.8 cm) flame height is obtained by 
adjusting the valve so that the uppermost portion (tip) of the flame is 
level with the tip of the metal prong (see Figure L-2) specified for 
adjustment of flame height. It is an important aspect of the evaluation 
that the flame height be adjusted with the tip of the flame level with 
the tip of the metal prong. After inserting the specimen, the stopcock 
shall be fully opened, and the burner flame applied vertically at the 
middle of the lower edge of the specimen for 12 seconds and the burner 
turned off. The cabinet door shall remain shut during testing.
    (v) The after-flame shall be the time the specimen continues to 
flame after the burner flame is shut off.
    (vi) After each specimen is removed, the test cabinet shall be 
cleared of fumes and smoke prior to testing the next specimen.
    (vii) After both flaming and glowing have ceased, the char length 
shall be measured. The char length shall be the distance from the end of 
the specimen, which was exposed to the flame, to the end of a tear (made 
lengthwise) of the specimen through the center of the charred area as 
follows: The specimen shall be folded lengthwise and creased by hand 
along a line through the highest peak of the charred area. The hook 
shall be inserted in the specimen (or a hole, \1/4\-inch (.6 cm) 
diameter or less, punched out for the hook) at one side of the charred 
area \1/4\-inch (.6 cm) from the adjacent outside edge and \1/4\-inch 
(.6 cm) in from the lower end. A weight of sufficient size such that the 
weight and hook together shall equal the total tearing load required in 
Table L-2 of this section shall be attached to the hook.
    (viii) A tearing force shall be applied gently to the specimen by 
grasping the corner of the cloth at the opposite edge of the char from 
the load and raising the specimen and weight clear of the supporting 
surface. The end of the tear shall be marked off on the edge and the 
char length measurement made along the undamaged edge.
    Loads for determining char length applicable to the weight of the 
test cloth shall be as shown in Table L-2.

                              Table L-2\1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Total tearing
                                                             weight for
Specified weight per square yard of cloth before any fire   determining
          retardant treatment or coating--ounces            the charred
                                                           length--pound
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.0 to 6.0...............................................          0.25
Over 6.0 to 15.0.........................................          0.50
Over 15.0 to 23.0........................................          0.75
Over 23.0................................................           1.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ To change into S.I. (System International) units, 1 ounce=28.35
  grams, 1 pound=453 grams, 1 yard=.91 metre.

    (ix) The after-flame time of the specimen shall be recorded to the 
nearest 0.2-second and the char length to the nearest 0.1-inch (.3 cm).
    E. Report. (i) The after-flame time and char length of the sample 
unit shall be the average of the results obtained from the individual 
specimens tested. All values obtained from the individual specimens 
shall be recorded.
    (ii) The after-flame time shall be reported to the nearest 0.2-
second and the char length to the nearest 0.1-inch (.3 cm).
    F. Source. These test requirements are contained in ``Federal Test 
Method Standard

[[Page 521]]

191, Method 5903 (1971)'' and are reproduced for your convenience.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.032


[[Page 522]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.033



[[Page 523]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.034



[[Page 524]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.035


[45 FR 60715, Sept. 12, 1980; 46 FR 24557, May 1, 1981]


<R04>
         Subpart M--Compressed Gas and Compressed Air Equipment

    Authority: Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 1-90 
(55 FR 9033), as applicable.


<R05>
Secs. 1910.166--1910.168    [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.169  Air receivers.

    (a) General requirements--(1) Application. This section applies to 
compressed air receivers, and other equipment used in providing and 
utilizing compressed air for performing operations such as cleaning, 
drilling, hoisting, and chipping. On the other hand, however, this 
section does not deal with the special problems created by using 
compressed air to convey materials nor the problems created when men 
work in compressed air as in tunnels and caissons. This section is not 
intended to apply to compressed air machinery and equipment used on 
transportation vehicles such as steam railroad cars, electric railway 
cars, and automotive equipment.
    (2) New and existing equipment. (i) All new air receivers installed 
after the effective date of these regulations shall be constructed in 
accordance with the 1968 edition of the A.S.M.E. Boiler and Pressure 
Vessel Code Section VIII, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) All safety valves used shall be constructed, installed, and 
maintained in accordance with the A.S.M.E. Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Code, Section VIII Edition 1968.
    (b) Installation and equipment requirements--(1) Installation. Air 
receivers shall be so installed that all drains, handholes, and manholes 
therein are

[[Page 525]]

easily accessible. Under no circumstances shall an air receiver be 
buried underground or located in an inaccessible place.
    (2) Drains and traps. A drain pipe and valve shall be installed at 
the lowest point of every air receiver to provide for the removal of 
accumulated oil and water. Adequate automatic traps may be installed in 
addition to drain valves. The drain valve on the air receiver shall be 
opened and the receiver completely drained frequently and at such 
intervals as to prevent the accumulation of excessive amounts of liquid 
in the receiver.
    (3) Gages and valves. (i) Every air receiver shall be equipped with 
an indicating pressure gage (so located as to be readily visible) and 
with one or more spring-loaded safety valves. The total relieving 
capacity of such safety valves shall be such as to prevent pressure in 
the receiver from exceeding the maximum allowable working pressure of 
the receiver by more than 10 percent.
    (ii) No valve of any type shall be placed between the air receiver 
and its safety valve or valves.
    (iii) Safety appliances, such as safety valves, indicating devices 
and controlling devices, shall be constructed, located, and installed so 
that they cannot be readily rendered inoperative by any means, including 
the elements.
    (iv) All safety valves shall be tested frequently and at regular 
intervals to determine whether they are in good operating condition.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 
FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R04>
                Subpart N--Materials Handling and Storage

    Authority:  Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 6-96 
(62 FR 111), as applicable; and 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.176  Handling materials--general.

    (a) Use of mechanical equipment. Where mechanical handling equipment 
is used, sufficient safe clearances shall be allowed for aisles, at 
loading docks, through doorways and wherever turns or passage must be 
made. Aisles and passageways shall be kept clear and in good repair, 
with no obstruction across or in aisles that could create a hazard. 
Permanent aisles and passageways shall be appropriately marked.
    (b) Secure storage. Storage of material shall not create a hazard. 
Bags, containers, bundles, etc., stored in tiers shall be stacked, 
blocked, interlocked and limited in height so that they are stable and 
secure against sliding or collapse.
    (c) Housekeeping. Storage areas shall be kept free from accumulation 
of materials that constitute hazards from tripping, fire, explosion, or 
pest harborage. Vegetation control will be exercised when necessary.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Clearance limits. Clearance signs to warn of clearance limits 
shall be provided.
    (f) Rolling railroad cars. Derail and/or bumper blocks shall be 
provided on spur railroad tracks where a rolling car could contact other 
cars being worked, enter a building, work or traffic area.
    (g) Guarding. Covers and/or guard- rails shall be provided to 
protect personnel from the hazards of open pits, tanks, vats, ditches, 
etc.
[39 FR 23052, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49749, Oct. 24, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.177  Servicing multi-piece and single piece rim wheels.

    (a) Scope. (1) This section applies to the servicing of multi-piece 
and single piece rim wheels used on large vehicles such as trucks, 
tractors, trailers, buses and off-road machines. It does not apply to 
the servicing of rim wheels used on automobiles, or on pickup trucks and 
vans utilizing automobile tires or truck tires designated ``LT''.
    (2) This section does not apply to employers and places of 
employment regulated under the Construction Safety Standards, 29 CFR 
part 1926; the Agriculture Standards, 29 CFR part 1928; the Shipyard 
Standards, 29 CFR part 1915; or the Longshoring Standards, 29 CFR part 
1918.
    (3) All provisions of this section apply to the servicing of both 
single piece rim wheels and multi-piece rim wheels unless designated 
otherwise.

[[Page 526]]

    (b) Definitions. Barrier means a fence, wall or other structure or 
object placed between a single piece rim wheel and an employee during 
tire inflation, to contain the rim wheel components in the event of the 
sudden release of the contained air of the single piece rim wheel.
    Charts means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration publications entitled ``Demounting and Mounting 
Procedures for Truck/Bus Tires'' and ``Multi-piece Rim Matching Chart,'' 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) publications 
entitled ``Demounting and Mounting Procedures Truck/Bus Tires'' and 
``Multi-piece Rim Matching Chart,'' or any other poster which contains 
at least the same instructions, safety precautions and other information 
contained in the charts that is applicable to the types of wheels being 
serviced.
    Installing a rim wheel means the transfer and attachment of an 
assembled rim wheel onto a vehicle axle hub. Removing means the opposite 
of installing.
    Mounting a tire means the assembly or putting together of the wheel 
and tire components to form a rim wheel, including inflation. Demounting 
means the opposite of mounting.
    Multi-piece rim wheel means the assemblage of a multi-piece wheel 
with the tire tube and other components.
    Multi-piece wheel means a vehicle wheel consisting of two or more 
parts, one of which is a side or locking ring designed to hold the tire 
on the wheel by interlocking components when the tire is inflated.
    Restraining device means an apparatus such as a cage, rack, 
assemblage of bars and other components that will constrain all rim 
wheel components during an explosive separation of a multi-piece rim 
wheel, or during the sudden release of the contained air of a single 
piece rim wheel.
    Rim manual means a publication containing instructions from the 
manufacturer or other qualified organization for correct mounting, 
demounting, maintenance, and safety precautions peculiar to the type of 
wheel being serviced.
    Rim wheel means an assemblage of tire, tube and liner (where 
appropriate), and wheel components.
    Service or servicing means the mounting and demounting of rim 
wheels, and related activities such as inflating, deflating, installing, 
removing, and handling.
    Service area means that part of an employer's premises used for the 
servicing of rim wheels, or any other place where an employee services 
rim wheels.
    Single piece rim wheel means the assemblage of single piece rim 
wheel with the tire and other components.
    Single piece wheel means a vehicle wheel consisting of one part, 
designed to hold the tire on the wheel when the tire is inflated.
    Trajectory means any potential path or route that a rim wheel 
component may travel during an explosive separation, or the sudden 
release of the pressurized air, or an area at which an airblast from a 
single piece rim wheel may be released. The trajectory may deviate from 
paths which are perpendicular to the assembled position of the rim wheel 
at the time of separation or explosion. (See appendix A for examples of 
trajectories.)
    Wheel means that portion of a rim wheel which provides the method of 
attachment of the assembly to the axle of a vehicle and also provides 
the means to contain the inflated portion of the assembly (i.e., the 
tire and/or tube).
    (c) Employee training. (1) The employer shall provide a program to 
train all employees who service rim wheels in the hazards involved in 
servicing those rim wheels and the safety procedures to be followed.
    (i) The employer shall assure that no employee services any rim 
wheel unless the employee has been trained and instructed in correct 
procedures of servicing the type of wheel being serviced, and in the 
safe operating procedures described in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this 
section.
    (ii) Information to be used in the training program shall include, 
at a minimum, the applicable data contained in the charts (rim manuals) 
and the contents of this standard.

[[Page 527]]

    (iii) Where an employer knows or has reason to believe that any of 
his employees is unable to read and understand the charts or rim manual, 
the employer shall assure that the employee is instructed concerning the 
contents of the charts and rim manual in a manner which the employee is 
able to understand.
    (2) The employer shall assure that each employee demonstrates and 
maintains the ability to service rim wheels safely, including 
performance of the following tasks:
    (i) Demounting of tires (including deflation);
    (ii) Inspection and identification of the rim wheel components;
    (iii) Mounting of tires (including inflation with a restraining 
device or other safeguard required by this section);
    (iv) Use of the restraining device or barrier, and other equipment 
required by this section;
    (v) Handling of rim wheels;
    (vi) Inflation of the tire when a single piece rim wheel is mounted 
on a vehicle;
    (vii) An understanding of the necessity of standing outside the 
trajectory both during inflation of the tire and during inspection of 
the rim wheel following inflation; and
    (viii) Installation and removal of rim wheels.
    (3) The employer shall evaluate each employee's ability to perform 
these tasks and to service rim wheels safely, and shall provide 
additional training as necessary to assure that each employee maintains 
his or her proficiency.
    (d) Tire servicing equipment. (1) The employer shall furnish a 
restraining device for inflating tires on multi-piece wheels.
    (2) The employer shall provide a restraining device or barrier for 
inflating tires on single piece wheels unless the rim wheel will be 
bolted onto a vehicle during inflation.
    (3) Restraining devices and barriers shall comply with the following 
requirements:
    (i) Each restraining device or barrier shall have the capacity to 
withstand the maximum force that would be transferred to it during a rim 
wheel separation occurring at 150 percent of the maximum tire 
specification pressure for the type of rim wheel being serviced.
    (ii) Restraining devices and barriers shall be capable of preventing 
the rim wheel components from being thrown outside or beyond the device 
or barrier for any rim wheel positioned within or behind the device;
    (iii) Restraining devices and barriers shall be visually inspected 
prior to each day's use and after any separation of the rim wheel 
components or sudden release of contained air. Any restraining device or 
barrier exhibiting damage such as the following defects shall be 
immediately removed from service:
    (A) Cracks at welds;
    (B) Cracked or broken components;
    (C) Bent or sprung components caused by mishandling, abuse, tire 
explosion or rim wheel separation;
    (D) Pitting of components due to corrosion; or
    (E) Other structural damage which would decrease its effectiveness.
    (iv) Restraining devices or barriers removed from service shall not 
be returned to service until they are repaired and reinspected. 
Restraining devices or barriers requiring structural repair such as 
component replacement or rewelding shall not be returned to service 
until they are certified by either the manufacturer or a Registered 
Professional Engineer as meeting the strength requirements of paragraph 
(d)(3)(i) of this section.
    (4) The employer shall furnish and assure that an air line assembly 
consisting of the following components be used for inflating tires:
    (i) A clip-on chuck;
    (ii) An in-line valve with a pressure gauge or a presettable 
regulator; and
    (iii) A sufficient length of hose between the clip-on chuck and the 
in-line valve (if one is used) to allow the employee to stand outside 
the trajectory.
    (5) Current charts or rim manuals containing instructions for the 
type of wheels being serviced shall be available in the service area.
    (6) The employer shall furnish and assure that only tools 
recommended in the rim manual for the type of wheel being serviced are 
used to service rim wheels.

[[Page 528]]

    (e) Wheel component acceptability. (1) Multi-piece wheel components 
shall not be interchanged except as provided in the charts or in the 
applicable rim manual.
    (2) Multi-piece wheel components and single piece wheels shall be 
inspected prior to assembly. Any wheel or wheel component which is bent 
out of shape, pitted from corrosion, broken, or cracked shall not be 
used and shall be marked or tagged unserviceable and removed from the 
service area. Damaged or leaky valves shall be replaced.
    (3) Rim flanges, rim gutters, rings, bead seating surfaces and the 
bead areas of tires shall be free of any dirt, surface rust, scale or 
loose or flaked rubber build-up prior to mounting and inflation.
    (4) The size (bead diameter and tire/wheel widths) and type of both 
the tire and the wheel shall be checked for compatibility prior to 
assembly of the rim wheel.
    (f) Safe operating procedure--multi-piece rim wheels. The employer 
shall establish a safe operating procedure for servicing multi-piece rim 
wheels and shall assure that employees are instructed in and follow that 
procedure. The procedure shall include at least the following elements:
    (1) Tires shall be completely deflated before demounting by removal 
of the valve core.
    (2) Tires shall be completely deflated by removing the valve core 
before a rim wheel is removed from the axle in either of the following 
situations:
    (i) When the tire has been driven underinflated at 80% or less of 
its recommended pressure, or
    (ii) When there is obvious or suspected damage to the tire or wheel 
components.
    (3) Rubber lubricant shall be applied to bead and rim mating 
surfaces during assembly of the wheel and inflation of the tire, unless 
the tire or wheel manufacturer recommends against it.
    (4) If a tire on a vehicle is underinflated but has more than 80% of 
the recommended pressure, the tire may be inflated while the rim wheel 
is on the vehicle provided remote control inflation equipment is used, 
and no employees remain in the trajectory during inflation.
    (5) Tires shall be inflated outside a restraining device only to a 
pressure sufficient to force the tire bead onto the rim ledge and create 
an airtight seal with the tire and bead.
    (6) Whenever a rim wheel is in a restraining device the employee 
shall not rest or lean any part of his body or equipment on or against 
the restraining device.
    (7) After tire inflation, the tire and wheel components shall be 
inspected while still within the restraining device to make sure that 
they are properly seated and locked. If further adjustment to the tire 
or wheel components is necessary, the tire shall be deflated by removal 
of the valve core before the adjustment is made.
    (8) No attempt shall be made to correct the seating of side and lock 
rings by hammering, striking or forcing the components while the tire is 
pressurized.
    (9) Cracked, broken, bent or otherwise damaged rim components shall 
not be reworked, welded, brazed, or otherwise heated.
    (10) Whenever multi-piece rim wheels are being handled, employees 
shall stay out of the trajectory unless the employer can demonstrate 
that performance of the servicing makes the employee's presence in the 
trajectory necessary.
    (11) No heat shall be applied to a multi-piece wheel or wheel 
component.
    (g) Safe operating procedure--single piece rim wheels. The employer 
shall establish a safe operating procedure for servicing single piece 
rim wheels and shall assure that employees are instructed in and follow 
that procedure. The procedure shall include at least the following 
elements:
    (1) Tires shall be completely deflated by removal of the valve core 
before demounting.
    (2) Mounting and demounting of the tire shall be done only from the 
narrow ledge side of the wheel. Care shall be taken to avoid damaging 
the tire beads while mounting tires on wheels. Tires shall be mounted 
only on compatible wheels of matching bead diameter and width.
    (3) Nonflammable rubber lubricant shall be applied to bead and wheel 
mating surfaces before assembly of the rim

[[Page 529]]

wheel, unless the tire or wheel manufacturer recommends against the use 
of any rubber lubricant.
    (4) If a tire changing machine is used, the tire shall be inflated 
only to the minimum pressure necessary to force the tire bead onto the 
rim ledge while on the tire changing machine.
    (5) If a bead expander is used, it shall be removed before the valve 
core is installed and as soon as the rim wheel becomes airtight (the 
tire bead slips onto the bead seat).
    (6) Tires may be inflated only when contained within a restraining 
device, positioned behind a barrier or bolted on the vehicle with the 
lug nuts fully tightened.
    (7) Tires shall not be inflated when any flat, solid surface is in 
the trajectory and within one foot of the sidewall.
    (8) Employees shall stay out of the trajectory when inflating a 
tire.
    (9) Tires shall not be inflated to more than the inflation pressure 
stamped in the sidewall unless a higher pressure is recommended by the 
manufacturer.
    (10) Tires shall not be inflated above the maximum pressure 
recommended by the manufacturer to seat the tire bead firmly against the 
rim flange.
    (11) No heat shall be applied to a single piece wheel.
    (12) Cracked, broken, bent, or otherwise damaged wheels shall not be 
reworked, welded, brazed, or otherwise heated.

[[Page 530]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.036



[[Page 531]]

  Appendix B to Sec. 1910.177--Ordering Information for the OSHA Charts

    OSHA has printed two charts entitled ``Demounting and Mounting 
Procedures for Truck/Bus Tires'' and ``Multi-piece Rim Matching Chart,'' 
as part of a continuing campaign to reduce accidents among employees who 
service large vehicle rim wheels.
    Reprints of the charts are available through the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration (OSHA) Area and Regional Offices. The address 
and telephone number of the nearest OSHA office can be obtained by 
looking in the local telephone directory under U.S. Government, U.S. 
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
Single copies are available without charge.
    Individuals, establishments and other organizations desiring single 
or multiple copies of these charts may order them from the OSHA 
Publications Office, U.S. Department of Labor, Room N-3101, Washington, 
DC 20210, Telephone (202) 219-4667.
[49 FR 4350, Feb. 3, 1984, as amended at 52 FR 36026, Sept. 25, 1987; 53 
FR 34737, Sept. 8, 1988; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.178  Powered industrial trucks.

    (a) General requirements. (1) This section contains safety 
requirements relating to fire protection, design, maintenance, and use 
of fork trucks, tractors, platform lift trucks, motorized hand trucks, 
and other specialized industrial trucks powered by electric motors or 
internal combustion engines. This section does not apply to compressed 
air or nonflammable compressed gas-operated industrial trucks, nor to 
farm vehicles, nor to vehicles intended primarily for earth moving or 
over-the-road hauling.
    (2) All new powered industrial trucks acquired and used by an 
employer after the effective date specified in paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1910.182 shall meet the design and construction requirements for 
powered industrial trucks established in the ``American National 
Standard for Powered Industrial Trucks, Part II, ANSI B56.1-1969'', 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, except 
for vehicles intended primarily for earth moving or over-the-road 
hauling.
    (3) Approved trucks shall bear a label or some other identifying 
mark indicating approval by the testing laboratory. See paragraph (a)(7) 
of this section and paragraph 405 of ``American National Standard for 
Powered Industrial Trucks, Part II, ANSI B56.1-1969'', which is 
incorporated by reference in paragraph (a)(2) of this section and which 
provides that if the powered industrial truck is accepted by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory it should be so marked.
    (4) Modifications and additions which affect capacity and safe 
operation shall not be performed by the customer or user without 
manufacturers prior written approval. Capacity, operation, and 
maintenance instruction plates, tags, or decals shall be changed 
accordingly.
    (5) If the truck is equipped with front-end attachments other than 
factory installed attachments, the user shall request that the truck be 
marked to identify the attachments and show the approximate weight of 
the truck and attachment combination at maximum elevation with load 
laterally centered.
    (6) The user shall see that all nameplates and markings are in place 
and are maintained in a legible condition.
    (7) As used in this section, the term, approved truck or approved 
industrial truck means a truck that is listed or approved for fire 
safety purposes for the intended use by a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory, using nationally recognized testing standards. Refer to 
Sec. 1910.155(c)(3)(iv)(A) for definition of listed, and to Sec. 1910.7 
for definition of nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    (b) Designations. For the purpose of this standard there are eleven 
different designations of industrial trucks or tractors as follows: D, 
DS, DY, E, ES, EE, EX, G, GS, LP, and LPS.
    (1) The D designated units are units similar to the G units except 
that they are diesel engine powered instead of gasoline engine powered.
    (2) The DS designated units are diesel powered units that are 
provided with additional safeguards to the exhaust, fuel and electrical 
systems. They may be used in some locations where a D unit may not be 
considered suitable.
    (3) The DY designated units are diesel powered units that have all 
the safeguards of the DS units and in addition do not have any 
electrical equipment including the ignition and are

[[Page 532]]

equipped with temperature limitation features.
    (4) The E designated units are electrically powered units that have 
minimum acceptable safeguards against inherent fire hazards.
    (5) The ES designated units are electrically powered units that, in 
addition to all of the requirements for the E units, are provided with 
additional safeguards to the electrical system to prevent emission of 
hazardous sparks and to limit surface temperatures. They may be used in 
some locations where the use of an E unit may not be considered 
suitable.
    (6) The EE designated units are electrically powered units that 
have, in addition to all of the requirements for the E and ES units, the 
electric motors and all other electrical equipment completely enclosed. 
In certain locations the EE unit may be used where the use of an E and 
ES unit may not be considered suitable.
    (7) The EX designated units are electrically powered units that 
differ from the E, ES, or EE units in that the electrical fittings and 
equipment are so designed, constructed and assembled that the units may 
be used in certain atmospheres containing flammable vapors or dusts.
    (8) The G designated units are gasoline powered units having minimum 
acceptable safeguards against inherent fire hazards.
    (9) The GS designated units are gasoline powered units that are 
provided with additional safeguards to the exhaust, fuel, and electrical 
systems. They may be used in some locations where the use of a G unit 
may not be considered suitable.
    (10) The LP designated unit is similar to the G unit except that 
liquefied petroleum gas is used for fuel instead of gasoline.
    (11) The LPS designated units are liquefied petroleum gas powered 
units that are provided with additional safeguards to the exhaust, fuel, 
and electrical systems. They may be used in some locations where the use 
of an LP unit may not be considered suitable.
    (12) The atmosphere or location shall have been classified as to 
whether it is hazardous or nonhazardous prior to the consideration of 
industrial trucks being used therein and the type of industrial truck 
required shall be as provided in paragraph (d) of this section for such 
location.
    (c) Designated locations. (1) The industrial trucks specified under 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph are the minimum types required but 
industrial trucks having greater safeguards may be used if desired.
    (2) For specific areas of use, see Table N-1 which tabulates the 
information contained in this section. References are to the 
corresponding classification as used in subpart S of this part.
    (i) Power-operated industrial trucks shall not be used in 
atmospheres containing hazardous concentration of acetylene, butadiene, 
ethylene oxide, hydrogen (or gases or vapors equivalent in hazard to 
hydrogen, such as manufactured gas), propylene oxide, acetaldehyde, 
cyclopropane, diethyl ether, ethylene, isoprene, or unsymmetrical 
dimethyl hydrazine (UDMH).
    (ii)(a) Power-operated industrial trucks shall not be used in 
atmospheres containing hazardous concentrations of metal dust, including 
aluminum, magnesium, and their commercial alloys, other metals of 
similarly hazardous characteristics, or in atmospheres containing carbon 
black, coal or coke dust except approved power-operated industrial 
trucks designated as EX may be used in such atmospheres.
    (b) In atmospheres where dust of magnesium, aluminum or aluminum 
bronze may be present, fuses, switches, motor controllers, and circuit 
breakers of trucks shall have enclosures specifically approved for such 
locations.
    (iii) Only approved power-operated industrial trucks designated as 
EX may be used in atmospheres containing acetone, acrylonitrile, 
alcohol, ammonia, benzine, benzol, butane, ethylene dichloride, 
gasoline, hexane, lacquer solvent vapors, naphtha, natural gas, propane, 
propylene, styrene, vinyl acetate, vinyl chloride, or xylenes in 
quantities sufficient to produce explosive or ignitable mixtures and 
where such concentrations of these gases or vapors exist continuously, 
intermittently or periodically under normal operating

[[Page 533]]

conditions or may exist frequently because of repair, maintenance 
operations, leakage, breakdown or faulty operation of equipment.
    (iv) Power-operated industrial trucks designated as DY, EE, or EX 
may be used in locations where volatile flammable liquids or flammable 
gases are handled, processed or used, but in which the hazardous 
liquids, vapors or gases will normally be confined within closed 
containers or closed systems from which they can escape only in case of 
accidental rupture or breakdown of such containers or systems, or in the 
case of abnormal operation of equipment; also in locations in which 
hazardous concentrations of gases or vapors are normally prevented by 
positive mechanical ventilation but which might become hazardous through 
failure or abnormal operation of the ventilating equipment; or in 
locations which are adjacent to Class I, Division 1 locations, and to 
which hazardous concentrations of gases or vapors might occasionally be 
communicated unless such communication is prevented by adequate 
positive-pressure ventilation from a source of clear air, and effective 
safeguards against ventilation failure are provided.

[[Page 534]]



                                                           Table N-1.--Summary Table on Use of Industrial Trucks in Various Locations
Description of classes......  Locations not possessing          Locations in which flammable gases or vapors are,    Locations which are hazardous because of the         Locations where easily
                               atmospheres as described in       or may be, present in the air in quantities          presence of combustible dust.                        ignitible fibers or
                               other columns.                    sufficient to produce explosive or ignitible                                                              flyings are present
                                                                 mixtures.                                                                                                 but not likely to be
                                                                                                                                                                           in suspension in
                                                                                                                                                                           quantities sufficient
                                                                                                                                                                           to produce ignitible
                                                                                                                                                                           mixtures.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Groups in classes                None                    A               B               C               D               E               F                    G                    None
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Examples of locations    Piers and wharves inside    Acetylene       Hydrogen        Ethyl ether     Gasoline        Metal dust      Carbon black    Grain dust, flour dust,   Baled waste,
 or atmospheres in        and outside general                                                        Naphtha                          coal dust,      starch dust, organic      cocoa fiber,
 classes and groups.      storage, general                                                           Alcohols                         coke dust       dust                      cotton,
                          industrial or commercial                                                   Acetone                                                                    excelsior, hemp,
                          properties.                                                                Lacquer                                                                    istle, jute,
                                                                                                      solvent                                                                   kapok, oakum,
                                                                                                     Benzene                                                                    sisal, Spanish
                                                                                                                                                                                moss, synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                fibers, tow.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  Table N-1.--Summary Table on Use of Industrial Trucks in Various Locations--Continued
Divisions (nature    None           Above condition     Above condition     Explosive mixture   Explosive mixture   Locations in       Locations in
 of hazardous                        exists              may occur           may be present      not normally        which easily       which easily
 conditions)                         continuously,       accidentally as     under normal        present, but        ignitible fibers   ignitible fibers
                                     intermittently,     due to a puncture   operating           where deposits of   or materials       are stored or
                                     or periodically     of a storage drum.  conditions, or      dust may cause      producing          handled (except
                                     under normal                            where failure of    heat rise in        combustible        in the process
                                     operating                               equipment may       electrical          flyings are        of manufacture).
                                     conditions.                             cause the           equipment, or       handled,
                                                                             condition to        where such          manufactured, or
                                                                             exist               deposits may be     used.
                                                                             simultaneously      ignited by arcs
                                                                             with arcing or      or sparks from
                                                                             sparking of         electrical
                                                                             electrical          equipment.
                                                                             equipment, or
                                                                             where dusts of an
                                                                             electrically
                                                                             conducting nature
                                                                             may be present.

[[Page 535]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                              Authorized uses of trucks by types in groups of classes and divisions
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Groups in classes               None                A                  B                  C                  D                  A                  B                  C                  D                  E                  F                  G                  E                  F                  G                 None              None
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Type of truck authorized:
  Diesel:
    Type D....................  D**..............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  ................
    Type DS...................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  DS...............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  DS...............  .................  DS
    Type DY...................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  DY...............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  DY...............  DY...............  DY
  Electric:
    Type E....................  E**..............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  E
    Type ES...................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  ES...............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  ES...............  .................  ES
    Type EE...................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  EE...............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  EE...............  EE...............  EE
    Type EX...................  .................  .................  .................  .................  EX...............  .................  .................  .................  EX...............  .................  EX...............  EX...............  .................  .................  EX...............  EX...............  EX
  Gasoline:
    Type G....................  G**..............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  ................
    Type GS...................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  GS...............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  GS...............  .................  GS
  LP-Gas:
    Type LP...................  LP**.............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  ................
    Type LPS..................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  LPS..............  .................  .................  .................  .................  .................  LPS..............  .................  LPS
Paragraph Ref. in No. 505.....       210.211                                 201                                   203                                   209                                   204                                   202                205                                   209                206               207(a)            208 (a)
                       (a)................(a),.............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
                                          (b)..............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
**Trucks conforming to these types may also be used--see subdivision (c)(2)(x) and (c)(2)(xii) of this section.

[[Page 536]]


    (v) In locations used for the storage of hazardous liquids in sealed 
containers or liquefied or compressed gases in containers, approved 
power-operated industrial trucks designated as DS, ES, GS, or LPS may be 
used. This classification includes locations where volatile flammable 
liquids or flammable gases or vapors are used, but which, would become 
hazardous only in case of an accident or of some unusual operating 
condition. The quantity of hazardous material that might escape in case 
of accident, the adequacy of ventilating equipment, the total area 
involved, and the record of the industry or business with respect to 
explosions or fires are all factors that should receive consideration in 
determining whether or not the DS or DY, ES, EE, GS, LPS designated 
truck possesses sufficient safeguards for the location. Piping without 
valves, checks, meters and similar devices would not ordinarily be 
deemed to introduce a hazardous condition even though used for hazardous 
liquids or gases. Locations used for the storage of hazardous liquids or 
of liquified or compressed gases in sealed containers would not normally 
be considered hazardous unless subject to other hazardous conditions 
also.
    (vi)(a) Only approved power operated industrial trucks designated as 
EX shall be used in atmospheres in which combustible dust is or may be 
in suspension continuously, intermittently, or periodically under normal 
operating conditions, in quantities sufficient to produce explosive or 
ignitable mixtures, or where mechanical failure or abnormal operation of 
machinery or equipment might cause such mixtures to be produced.
    (b) The EX classification usually includes the working areas of 
grain handling and storage plants, room containing grinders or 
pulverizers, cleaners, graders, scalpers, open conveyors or spouts, open 
bins or hoppers, mixers, or blenders, automatic or hopper scales, 
packing machinery, elevator heads and boots, stock distributors, dust 
and stock collectors (except all-metal collectors vented to the 
outside), and all similar dust producing machinery and equipment in 
grain processing plants, starch plants, sugar pulverizing plants, 
malting plants, hay grinding plants, and other occupancies of similar 
nature; coal pulverizing plants (except where the pulverizing equipment 
is essentially dust tight); all working areas where metal dusts and 
powders are produced, processed, handled, packed, or stored (except in 
tight containers); and other similar locations where combustible dust 
may, under normal operating conditions, be present in the air in 
quantities sufficient to produce explosive or ignitable mixtures.
    (vii) Only approved power-operated industrial trucks designated as 
DY, EE, or EX shall be used in atmospheres in which combustible dust 
will not normally be in suspension in the air or will not be likely to 
be thrown into suspension by the normal operation of equipment or 
apparatus in quantities sufficient to produce explosive or ignitable 
mixtures but where deposits or accumulations of such dust may be ignited 
by arcs or sparks originating in the truck.
    (viii) Only approved power-operated industrial trucks designated as 
DY, EE, or EX shall be used in locations which are hazardous because of 
the presence of easily ignitable fibers or flyings but in which such 
fibers or flyings are not likely to be in suspension in the air in 
quantities sufficient to produce ignitable mixtures.
    (ix) Only approved power-operated industrial trucks designated as 
DS, DY, ES, EE, EX, GS, or LPS shall be used in locations where easily 
ignitable fibers are stored or handled, including outside storage, but 
are not being processed or manufactured. Industrial trucks designated as 
E, which have been previously used in these locations may be continued 
in use.
    (x) On piers and wharves handling general cargo, any approved power-
operated industrial truck designated as Type D, E, G, or LP may be used, 
or trucks which conform to the requirements for these types may be used.
    (xi) If storage warehouses and outside storage locations are 
hazardous only the approved power-operated industrial truck specified 
for such locations in this paragraph (c)(2) shall be used. If not 
classified as hazardous, any approved power-operated industrial truck 
designated as Type D, E, G, or LP may be used, or trucks which conform 
to

[[Page 537]]

the requirements for these types may be used.
    (xii) If general industrial or commercial properties are hazardous, 
only approved power-operated industrial trucks specified for such 
locations in this paragraph (c)(2) shall be used. If not classified as 
hazardous, any approved power-operated industrial truck designated as 
Type D, E, G, or LP may be used, or trucks which conform to the 
requirements of these types may be used.
    (d) Converted industrial trucks. Power-operated industrial trucks 
that have been originally approved for the use of gasoline for fuel, 
when converted to the use of liquefied petroleum gas fuel in accordance 
with paragraph (q) of this section, may be used in those locations where 
G, GS or LP, and LPS designated trucks have been specified in the 
preceding paragraphs.
    (e) Safety guards. (1) High Lift Rider trucks shall be fitted with 
an overhead guard manufactured in accordance with paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section, unless operating conditions do not permit.
    (2) If the type of load presents a hazard, the user shall equip fork 
trucks with a vertical load backrest extension manufactured in 
accordance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (f) Fuel handling and storage. (1) The storage and handling of 
liquid fuels such as gasoline and diesel fuel shall be in accordance 
with NFPA Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code (NFPA No. 30-1969), 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) The storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gas fuel shall 
be in accordance with NFPA Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum 
Gases (NFPA No. 58-1969), which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (g) Changing and charging storage batteries. (1) Battery charging 
installations shall be located in areas designated for that purpose.
    (2) Facilities shall be provided for flushing and neutralizing 
spilled electrolyte, for fire protection, for protecting charging 
apparatus from damage by trucks, and for adequate ventilation for 
dispersal of fumes from gassing batteries.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) A conveyor, overhead hoist, or equivalent material handling 
equipment shall be provided for handling batteries.
    (5) Reinstalled batteries shall be properly positioned and secured 
in the truck.
    (6) A carboy tilter or siphon shall be provided for handling 
electrolyte.
    (7) When charging batteries, acid shall be poured into water; water 
shall not be poured into acid.
    (8) Trucks shall be properly positioned and brake applied before 
attempting to change or charge batteries.
    (9) Care shall be taken to assure that vent caps are functioning. 
The battery (or compartment) cover(s) shall be open to dissipate heat.
    (10) Smoking shall be prohibited in the charging area.
    (11) Precautions shall be taken to prevent open flames, sparks, or 
electric arcs in battery charging areas.
    (12) Tools and other metallic objects shall be kept away from the 
top of uncovered batteries.
    (h) Lighting for operating areas.
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) Where general lighting is less than 2 lumens per square foot, 
auxiliary directional lighting shall be provided on the truck.
    (i) Control of noxious gases and fumes. (1) Concentration levels of 
carbon monoxide gas created by powered industrial truck operations shall 
not exceed the levels specified in Sec. 1910.1000.
    (j) Dockboards (bridge plates). See Sec. 1910.30(a).
    (k) Trucks and railroad cars. (1) The brakes of highway trucks shall 
be set and wheel chocks placed under the rear wheels to prevent the 
trucks from rolling while they are boarded with powered industrial 
trucks.
    (2) Wheel stops or other recognized positive protection shall be 
provided to prevent railroad cars from moving during loading or 
unloading operations.
    (3) Fixed jacks may be necessary to support a semitrailer and 
prevent upending during the loading or unloading when the trailer is not 
coupled to a tractor.
    (4) Positive protection shall be provided to prevent railroad cars 
from

[[Page 538]]

being moved while dockboards or bridge plates are in position.
    (l) Operator training. Only trained and authorized operators shall 
be permitted to operate a powered industrial truck. Methods shall be 
devised to train operators in the safe operation of powered industrial 
trucks.
    (m) Truck operations. (1) Trucks shall not be driven up to anyone 
standing in front of a bench or other fixed object.
    (2) No person shall be allowed to stand or pass under the elevated 
portion of any truck, whether loaded or empty.
    (3) Unauthorized personnel shall not be permitted to ride on powered 
industrial trucks. A safe place to ride shall be provided where riding 
of trucks is authorized.
    (4) The employer shall prohibit arms or legs from being placed 
between the uprights of the mast or outside the running lines of the 
truck.
    (5)(i) When a powered industrial truck is left unattended, load 
engaging means shall be fully lowered, controls shall be neutralized, 
power shall be shut off, and brakes set. Wheels shall be blocked if the 
truck is parked on an incline.
    (ii) A powered industrial truck is unattended when the operator is 
25 ft. or more away from the vehicle which remains in his view, or 
whenever the operator leaves the vehicle and it is not in his view.
    (iii) When the operator of an industrial truck is dismounted and 
within 25 ft. of the truck still in his view, the load engaging means 
shall be fully lowered, controls neutralized, and the brakes set to 
prevent movement.
    (6) A safe distance shall be maintained from the edge of ramps or 
platforms while on any elevated dock, or platform or freight car. Trucks 
shall not be used for opening or closing freight doors.
    (7) Brakes shall be set and wheel blocks shall be in place to 
prevent movement of trucks, trailers, or railroad cars while loading or 
unloading. Fixed jacks may be necessary to support a semitrailer during 
loading or unloading when the trailer is not coupled to a tractor. The 
flooring of trucks, trailers, and railroad cars shall be checked for 
breaks and weakness before they are driven onto.
    (8) There shall be sufficient headroom under overhead installations, 
lights, pipes, sprinkler system, etc.
    (9) An overhead guard shall be used as protection against falling 
objects. It should be noted that an overhead guard is intended to offer 
protection from the impact of small packages, boxes, bagged material, 
etc., representative of the job application, but not to withstand the 
impact of a falling capacity load.
    (10) A load backrest extension shall be used whenever necessary to 
minimize the possibility of the load or part of it from falling 
rearward.
    (11) Only approved industrial trucks shall be used in hazardous 
locations.
    (12) Whenever a truck is equipped with vertical only, or vertical 
and horizontal controls elevatable with the lifting carriage or forks 
for lifting personnel, the following additional precautions shall be 
taken for the protection of personnel being elevated.
    (i) Use of a safety platform firmly secured to the lifting carriage 
and/or forks.
    (ii) Means shall be provided whereby personnel on the platform can 
shut off power to the truck.
    (iii) Such protection from falling objects as indicated necessary by 
the operating conditions shall be provided.
    (13) [Reserved]
    (14) Fire aisles, access to stairways, and fire equipment shall be 
kept clear.
    (n) Traveling. (1) All traffic regulations shall be observed, 
including authorized plant speed limits. A safe distance shall be 
maintained approximately three truck lengths from the truck ahead, and 
the truck shall be kept under control at all times.
    (2) The right of way shall be yielded to ambulances, fire trucks, or 
other vehicles in emergency situations.
    (3) Other trucks traveling in the same direction at intersections, 
blind spots, or other dangerous locations shall not be passed.
    (4) The driver shall be required to slow down and sound the horn at 
cross aisles and other locations where vision is obstructed. If the load 
being carried obstructs forward view, the driver shall

[[Page 539]]

be required to travel with the load trailing.
    (5) Railroad tracks shall be crossed diagonally wherever possible. 
Parking closer than 8 feet from the center of railroad tracks is 
prohibited.
    (6) The driver shall be required to look in the direction of, and 
keep a clear view of the path of travel.
    (7) Grades shall be ascended or descended slowly.
    (i) When ascending or descending grades in excess of 10 percent, 
loaded trucks shall be driven with the load upgrade.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) On all grades the load and load engaging means shall be tilted 
back if applicable, and raised only as far as necessary to clear the 
road surface.
    (8) Under all travel conditions the truck shall be operated at a 
speed that will permit it to be brought to a stop in a safe manner.
    (9) Stunt driving and horseplay shall not be permitted.
    (10) The driver shall be required to slow down for wet and slippery 
floors.
    (11) Dockboard or bridgeplates, shall be properly secured before 
they are driven over. Dockboard or bridgeplates shall be driven over 
carefully and slowly and their rated capacity never exceeded.
    (12) Elevators shall be approached slowly, and then entered squarely 
after the elevator car is properly leveled. Once on the elevator, the 
controls shall be neutralized, power shut off, and the brakes set.
    (13) Motorized hand trucks must enter elevator or other confined 
areas with load end forward.
    (14) Running over loose objects on the roadway surface shall be 
avoided.
    (15) While negotiating turns, speed shall be reduced to a safe level 
by means of turning the hand steering wheel in a smooth, sweeping 
motion. Except when maneuvering at a very low speed, the hand steering 
wheel shall be turned at a moderate, even rate.
    (o) Loading. (1) Only stable or safely arranged loads shall be 
handled. Caution shall be exercised when handling off-center loads which 
cannot be centered.
    (2) Only loads within the rated capacity of the truck shall be 
handled.
    (3) The long or high (including multiple-tiered) loads which may 
affect capacity shall be adjusted.
    (4) Trucks equipped with attachments shall be operated as partially 
loaded trucks when not handling a load.
    (5) A load engaging means shall be placed under the load as far as 
possible; the mast shall be carefully tilted backward to stabilize the 
load.
    (6) Extreme care shall be used when tilting the load forward or 
backward, particularly when high tiering. Tilting forward with load 
engaging means elevated shall be prohibited except to pick up a load. An 
elevated load shall not be tilted forward except when the load is in a 
deposit position over a rack or stack. When stacking or tiering, only 
enough backward tilt to stabilize the load shall be used.
    (p) Operation of the truck. (1) If at any time a powered industrial 
truck is found to be in need of repair, defective, or in any way unsafe, 
the truck shall be taken out of service until it has been restored to 
safe operating condition.
    (2) Fuel tanks shall not be filled while the engine is running. 
Spillage shall be avoided.
    (3) Spillage of oil or fuel shall be carefully washed away or 
completely evaporated and the fuel tank cap replaced before restarting 
engine.
    (4) No truck shall be operated with a leak in the fuel system until 
the leak has been corrected.
    (5) Open flames shall not be used for checking electrolyte level in 
storage batteries or gasoline level in fuel tanks.
    (q) Maintenance of industrial trucks. (1) Any power-operated 
industrial truck not in safe operating condition shall be removed from 
service. All repairs shall be made by authorized personnel.
    (2) No repairs shall be made in Class I, II, and III locations.
    (3) Those repairs to the fuel and ignition systems of industrial 
trucks which involve fire hazards shall be conducted only in locations 
designated for such repairs.

[[Page 540]]

    (4) Trucks in need of repairs to the electrical system shall have 
the battery disconnected prior to such repairs.
    (5) All parts of any such industrial truck requiring replacement 
shall be replaced only by parts equivalent as to safety with those used 
in the original design.
    (6) Industrial trucks shall not be altered so that the relative 
positions of the various parts are different from what they were when 
originally received from the manufacturer, nor shall they be altered 
either by the addition of extra parts not provided by the manufacturer 
or by the elimination of any parts, except as provided in paragraph 
(q)(12) of this section. Additional counterweighting of fork trucks 
shall not be done unless approved by the truck manufacturer.
    (7) Industrial trucks shall be examined before being placed in 
service, and shall not be placed in service if the examination shows any 
condition adversely affecting the safety of the vehicle. Such 
examination shall be made at least daily.

Where industrial trucks are used on a round-the-clock basis, they shall 
be examined after each shift. Defects when found shall be immediately 
reported and corrected.
    (8) Water mufflers shall be filled daily or as frequently as is 
necessary to prevent depletion of the supply of water below 75 percent 
of the filled capacity. Vehicles with mufflers having screens or other 
parts that may become clogged shall not be operated while such screens 
or parts are clogged. Any vehicle that emits hazardous sparks or flames 
from the exhaust system shall immediately be removed from service, and 
not returned to service until the cause for the emission of such sparks 
and flames has been eliminated.
    (9) When the temperature of any part of any truck is found to be in 
excess of its normal operating temperature, thus creating a hazardous 
condition, the vehicle shall be removed from service and not returned to 
service until the cause for such overheating has been eliminated.
    (10) Industrial trucks shall be kept in a clean condition, free of 
lint, excess oil, and grease. Noncombustible agents should be used for 
cleaning trucks. Low flash point (below 100 deg. F.) solvents shall not 
be used. High flash point (at or above 100 deg. F.) solvents may be 
used. Precautions regarding toxicity, ventilation, and fire hazard shall 
be consonant with the agent or solvent used.
    (11) [Reserved]
    (12) Industrial trucks originally approved for the use of gasoline 
for fuel may be converted to liquefied petroleum gas fuel provided the 
complete conversion results in a truck which embodies the features 
specified for LP or LPS designated trucks. Such conversion equipment 
shall be approved. The description of the component parts of this 
conversion system and the recommended method of installation on specific 
trucks are contained in the ``Listed by Report.''
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 23073, May 28, 1975; 43 
FR 49749, Oct. 24, 1978; 49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 53 FR 12122, Apr. 
12, 1988; 55 FR 32015, Aug 6, 1990; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.179  Overhead and gantry cranes.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section. (1) A crane is a machine 
for lifting and lowering a load and moving it horizontally, with the 
hoisting mechanism an integral part of the machine. Cranes whether fixed 
or mobile are driven manually or by power.
    (2) An automatic crane is a crane which when activated operates 
through a preset cycle or cycles.
    (3) A cab-operated crane is a crane controlled by an operator in a 
cab located on the bridge or trolley.
    (4) Cantilever gantry crane means a gantry or semigantry crane in 
which the bridge girders or trusses extend transversely beyond the crane 
runway on one or both sides.
    (5) Floor-operated crane means a crane which is pendant or 
nonconductive rope controlled by an operator on the floor or an 
independent platform.
    (6) Gantry crane means a crane similar to an overhead crane except 
that the bridge for carrying the trolley or trolleys is rigidly 
supported on two or more legs running on fixed rails or other runway.

[[Page 541]]

    (7) Hot metal handling crane means an overhead crane used for 
transporting or pouring molten material.
    (8) Overhead crane means a crane with a movable bridge carrying a 
movable or fixed hoisting mechanism and traveling on an overhead fixed 
runway structure.
    (9) Power-operated crane means a crane whose mechanism is driven by 
electric, air, hydraulic, or internal combustion means.
    (10) A pulpit-operated crane is a crane operated from a fixed 
operator station not attached to the crane.
    (11) A remote-operated crane is a crane controlled by an operator 
not in a pulpit or in the cab attached to the crane, by any method other 
than pendant or rope control.
    (12) A semigantry crane is a gantry crane with one end of the bridge 
rigidly supported on one or more legs that run on a fixed rail or 
runway, the other end of the bridge being supported by a truck running 
on an elevated rail or runway.
    (13) Storage bridge crane means a gantry type crane of long span 
usually used for bulk storage of material; the bridge girders or trusses 
are rigidly or nonrigidly supported on one or more legs. It may have one 
or more fixed or hinged cantilever ends.
    (14) Wall crane means a crane having a jib with or without trolley 
and supported from a side wall or line of columns of a building. It is a 
traveling type and operates on a runway attached to the side wall or 
columns.
    (15) Appointed means assigned specific responsibilities by the 
employer or the employer's representative.
    (16) ANSI means the American National Standards Institute.
    (17) An auxiliary hoist is a supplemental hoisting unit of lighter 
capacity and usually higher speed than provided for the main hoist.
    (18) A brake is a device used for retarding or stopping motion by 
friction or power means.
    (19) A drag brake is a brake which provides retarding force without 
external control.
    (20) A holding brake is a brake that automatically prevents motion 
when power is off.
    (21) Bridge means that part of a crane consisting of girders, 
trucks, end ties, footwalks, and drive mechanism which carries the 
trolley or trolleys.
    (22) Bridge travel means the crane movement in a direction parallel 
to the crane runway.
    (23) A bumper (buffer) is an energy absorbing device for reducing 
impact when a moving crane or trolley reaches the end of its permitted 
travel; or when two moving cranes or trolleys come in contact.
    (24) The cab is the operator's compartment on a crane.
    (25) Clearance means the distance from any part of the crane to a 
point of the nearest obstruction.
    (26) Collectors current are contacting devices for collecting 
current from runway or bridge conductors.
    (27) Conductors, bridge are the electrical conductors located along 
the bridge structure of a crane to provide power to the trolley.
    (28) Conductors, runway (main) are the electrical conductors located 
along a crane runway to provide power to the crane.
    (29) The control braking means is a method of controlling crane 
motor speed when in an overhauling condition.
    (30) Countertorque means a method of control by which the power to 
the motor is reversed to develop torque in the opposite direction.
    (31) Dynamic means a method of controlling crane motor speeds when 
in the overhauling condition to provide a retarding force.
    (32) Regenerative means a form of dynamic braking in which the 
electrical energy generated is fed back into the power system.
    (33) Mechanical means a method of control by friction.
    (34) Controller, spring return means a controller which when 
released will return automatically to a neutral position.
    (35) Designated means selected or assigned by the employer or the 
employer's representative as being qualified to perform specific duties.
    (36) A drift point means a point on a travel motion controller which 
releases

[[Page 542]]

the brake while the motor is not energized. This allows for coasting 
before the brake is set.
    (37) The drum is the cylindrical member around which the ropes are 
wound for raising or lowering the load.
    (38) An equalizer is a device which compensates for unequal length 
or stretch of a rope.
    (39) Exposed means capable of being contacted inadvertently. Applied 
to hazardous objects not adequately guarded or isolated.
    (40) Fail-safe means a provision designed to automatically stop or 
safely control any motion in which a malfunction occurs.
    (41) Footwalk means the walkway with handrail, attached to the 
bridge or trolley for access purposes.
    (42) A hoist is an apparatus which may be a part of a crane, 
exerting a force for lifting or lowering.
    (43) Hoist chain means the load bearing chain in a hoist.

    Note: Chain properties do not conform to those shown in ANSI B30.9-
1971, Safety Code for Slings.

    (44) Hoist motion means that motion of a crane which raises and 
lowers a load.
    (45) Load means the total superimposed weight on the load block or 
hook.
    (46) The load block is the assembly of hook or shackle, swivel, 
bearing, sheaves, pins, and frame suspended by the hoisting rope.
    (47) Magnet means an electromagnetic device carried on a crane hook 
to pick up loads magnetically.
    (48) Main hoist means the hoist mechanism provided for lifting the 
maximum rated load.
    (49) A man trolley is a trolley having an operator's cab attached 
thereto.
    (50) Rated load means the maximum load for which a crane or 
individual hoist is designed and built by the manufacturer and shown on 
the equipment nameplate(s).
    (51) Rope refers to wire rope, unless otherwise specified.
    (52) Running sheave means a sheave which rotates as the load block 
is raised or lowered.
    (53) Runway means an assembly of rails, beams, girders, brackets, 
and framework on which the crane or trolley travels.
    (54) Side pull means that portion of the hoist pull acting 
horizontally when the hoist lines are not operated vertically.
    (55) Span means the horizontal distance center to center of runway 
rails.
    (56) Standby crane means a crane which is not in regular service but 
which is used occasionally or intermittently as required.
    (57) A stop is a device to limit travel of a trolley or crane 
bridge. This device normally is attached to a fixed structure and 
normally does not have energy absorbing ability.
    (58) A switch is a device for making, breaking, or for changing the 
connections in an electric circuit.
    (59) An emergency stop switch is a manually or automatically 
operated electric switch to cut off electric power independently of the 
regular operating controls.
    (60) A limit switch is a switch which is operated by some part or 
motion of a power-driven machine or equipment to alter the electric 
circuit associated with the machine or equipment.
    (61) A main switch is a switch controlling the entire power supply 
to the crane.
    (62) A master switch is a switch which dominates the operation of 
contactors, relays, or other remotely operated devices.
    (63) The trolley is the unit which travels on the bridge rails and 
carries the hoisting mechanism.
    (64) Trolley travel means the trolley movement at right angles to 
the crane runway.
    (65) Truck means the unit consisting of a frame, wheels, bearings, 
and axles which supports the bridge girders or trolleys.
    (b) General requirements--(1) Application. This section applies to 
overhead and gantry cranes, including semigantry, cantilever gantry, 
wall cranes, storage bridge cranes, and others having the same 
fundamental characteristics. These cranes are grouped because they all 
have trolleys and similar travel characteristics.

[[Page 543]]

    (2) New and existing equipment. All new overhead and gantry cranes 
constructed and installed on or after August 31, 1971, shall meet the 
design specifications of the American National Standard Safety Code for 
Overhead and Gantry Cranes, ANSI B30.2.0-1967, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (3) Modifications. Cranes may be modified and rerated provided such 
modifications and the supporting structure are checked thoroughly for 
the new rated load by a qualified engineer or the equipment 
manufacturer. The crane shall be tested in accordance with paragraph 
(k)(2) of this section. New rated load shall be displayed in accordance 
with subparagraph (5) of this paragraph.
    (4) Wind indicators and rail clamps. Outdoor storage bridges shall 
be provided with automatic rail clamps. A wind-indicating device shall 
be provided which will give a visible or audible alarm to the bridge 
operator at a predetermined wind velocity. If the clamps act on the rail 
heads, any beads or weld flash on the rail heads shall be ground off.
    (5) Rated load marking. The rated load of the crane shall be plainly 
marked on each side of the crane, and if the crane has more than one 
hoisting unit, each hoist shall have its rated load marked on it or its 
load block and this marking shall be clearly legible from the ground or 
floor.
    (6) Clearance from obstruction. (i) Minimum clearance of 3 inches 
overhead and 2 inches laterally shall be provided and maintained between 
crane and obstructions in conformity with Crane Manufacturers 
Association of America, Inc., Specification No. 61, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6 (formerly the 
Electric Overhead Crane Institute, Inc).
    (ii) Where passageways or walkways are provided obstructions shall 
not be placed so that safety of personnel will be jeopardized by 
movements of the crane.
    (7) Clearance between parallel cranes. If the runways of two cranes 
are parallel, and there are no intervening walls or structure, there 
shall be adequate clearance provided and maintained between the two 
bridges.
    (8) Designated personnel--Only designated personnel shall be 
permitted to operate a crane covered by this section.
    (c) Cabs--(1) Cab location. (i) The general arrangement of the cab 
and the location of control and protective equipment shall be such that 
all operating handles are within convenient reach of the operator when 
facing the area to be served by the load hook, or while facing the 
direction of travel of the cab. The arrangement shall allow the operator 
a full view of the load hook in all positions.
    (ii) The cab shall be located to afford a minimum of 3 inches 
clearance from all fixed structures within its area of possible 
movement.
    (2) Access to crane. Access to the cab and/or bridge walkway shall 
be by a conveniently placed fixed ladder, stairs, or platform requiring 
no step over any gap exceeding 12 inches. Fixed ladders shall be in 
conformance with the American National Standard Safety Code for Fixed 
Ladders, ANSI A14.3-1956, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (3) Fire extinguisher. Carbon tetrachloride extinguishers shall not 
be used.
    (4) Lighting. Light in the cab shall be sufficient to enable the 
operator to see clearly enough to perform his work.
    (d) Footwalks and ladders--(1) Location of footwalks. (i) If 
sufficient headroom is available on cab-operated cranes, a footwalk 
shall be provided on the drive side along the entire length of the 
bridge of all cranes having the trolley running on the top of the 
girders.
    (ii) Where footwalks are located in no case shall less than 48 
inches of headroom be provided.
    (2) Construction of footwalks. (i) Footwalks shall be of rigid 
construction and designed to sustain a distributed load of at least 50 
pounds per square foot.
    (ii) Footwalks shall have a walking surface of antislip type.

    Note: Wood will meet this requirement.

    (iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) The inner edge shall extend at least to the line of the outside 
edge of the lower cover plate or flange of the girder.

[[Page 544]]

    (3) Toeboards and handrails for footwalks. Toeboards and handrails 
shall be in compliance with section 1910.23 of this part.
    (4) Ladders and stairways. (i) Gantry cranes shall be provided with 
ladders or stairways extending from the ground to the footwalk or cab 
platform.
    (ii) Stairways shall be equipped with rigid and substantial metal 
handrails. Walking surfaces shall be of an antislip type.
    (iii) Ladders shall be permanently and securely fastened in place 
and shall be constructed in compliance with Sec. 1910.27.
    (e) Stops, bumpers, rail sweeps, and guards--(1) Trolley stops. (i) 
Stops shall be provided at the limits of travel of the trolley.
    (ii) Stops shall be fastened to resist forces applied when 
contacted.
    (iii) A stop engaging the tread of the wheel shall be of a height at 
least equal to the radius of the wheel.
    (2) Bridge bumpers--(i) A crane shall be provided with bumpers or 
other automatic means providing equivalent effect, unless the crane 
travels at a slow rate of speed and has a faster deceleration rate due 
to the use of sleeve bearings, or is not operated near the ends of 
bridge and trolley travel, or is restricted to a limited distance by the 
nature of the crane operation and there is no hazard of striking any 
object in this limited distance, or is used in similar operating 
conditions. The bumpers shall be capable of stopping the crane (not 
including the lifted load) at an average rate of deceleration not to 
exceed 3 ft/s/s when traveling in either direction at 20 percent of the 
rated load speed.
    (a) The bumpers shall have sufficient energy absorbing capacity to 
stop the crane when traveling at a speed of at least 40 percent of rated 
load speed.
    (b) The bumper shall be so mounted that there is no direct shear on 
bolts.
    (ii) Bumpers shall be so designed and installed as to minimize parts 
falling from the crane in case of breakage.
    (3) Trolley bumpers--(i) A trolley shall be provided with bumpers or 
other automatic means of equivalent effect, unless the trolley travels 
at a slow rate of speed, or is not operated near the ends of bridge and 
trolley travel, or is restricted to a limited distance of the runway and 
there is no hazard of striking any object in this limited distance, or 
is used in similar operating conditions. The bumpers shall be capable of 
stopping the trolley (not including the lifted load) at an average rate 
of deceleration not to exceed 4.7 ft/s/s when traveling in either 
direction at one-third of the rated load speed.
    (ii) When more than one trolley is operated on the same bridge, each 
shall be equipped with bumpers or equivalent on their adjacent ends.
    (iii) Bumpers or equivalent shall be designed and installed to 
minimize parts falling from the trolley in case of age.
    (4) Rail sweeps. Bridge trucks shall be equipped with sweeps which 
extend below the top of the rail and project in front of the truck 
wheels.
    (5) Guards for hoisting ropes. (i) If hoisting ropes run near enough 
to other parts to make fouling or chafing possible, guards shall be 
installed to prevent this condition.
    (ii) A guard shall be provided to prevent contact between bridge 
conductors and hoisting ropes if they could come into contact.
    (6) Guards for moving parts. (i) Exposed moving parts such as gears, 
set screws, projecting keys, chains, chain sprockets, and reciprocating 
components which might constitute a hazard under normal operating 
conditions shall be guarded.
    (ii) Guards shall be securely fastened.
    (iii) Each guard shall be capable of supporting without permanent 
distortion the weight of a 200-pound person unless the guard is located 
where it is impossible for a person to step on it.
    (f) Brakes--(1) Brakes for hoists. (i) Each independent hoisting 
unit of a crane shall be equipped with at least one self-setting brake, 
hereafter referred to as a holding brake, applied directly to the motor 
shaft or some part of the gear train.
    (ii) Each independent hoisting unit of a crane, except worm-geared 
hoists, the angle of whose worm is such as to prevent the load from 
accelerating in the lowering direction shall, in addition to a holding 
brake, be equipped with control braking means to prevent overspeeding.

[[Page 545]]

    (2) Holding brakes. (i) Holding brakes for hoist motors shall have 
not less than the following percentage of the full load hoisting torque 
at the point where the brake is applied.
    (a) 125 percent when used with a control braking means other than 
mechanical.
    (b) 100 percent when used in conjunction with a mechanical control 
braking means.
    (c) 100 percent each if two holding brakes are provided.
    (ii) Holding brakes on hoists shall have ample thermal capacity for 
the frequency of operation required by the service.
    (iii) Holding brakes on hoists shall be applied automatically when 
power is removed.
    (iv) Where necessary holding brakes shall be provided with 
adjustment means to compensate for wear.
    (v) The wearing surface of all holding-brake drums or discs shall be 
smooth.
    (vi) Each independent hoisting unit of a crane handling hot metal 
and having power control braking means shall be equipped with at least 
two holding brakes.
    (3) Control braking means. (i) A power control braking means such as 
regenerative, dynamic or countertorque braking, or a mechanically 
controlled braking means shall be capable of maintaining safe lowering 
speeds of rated loads.
    (ii) The control braking means shall have ample thermal capacity for 
the frequency of operation required by service.
    (4) Brakes for trolleys and bridges. (i) Foot-operated brakes shall 
not require an applied force of more than 70 pounds to develop 
manufacturer's rated brake torque.
    (ii) Brakes may be applied by mechanical, electrical, pneumatic, 
hydraulic, or gravity means.
    (iii) Where necessary brakes shall be provided with adjustment means 
to compensate for wear.
    (iv) The wearing surface of all brakedrums or discs shall be smooth.
    (v) All foot-brake pedals shall be constructed so that the 
operator's foot will not easily slip off the pedal.
    (vi) Foot-operated brakes shall be equipped with automatic means for 
positive release when pressure is released from the pedal.
    (vii) Brakes for stopping the motion of the trolley or bridge shall 
be of sufficient size to stop the trolley or bridge within a distance in 
feet equal to 10 percent of full load speed in feet per minute when 
traveling at full speed with full load.
    (viii) If holding brakes are provided on the bridge or trolleys, 
they shall not prohibit the use of a drift point in the control circuit.
    (ix) Brakes on trolleys and bridges shall have ample thermal 
capacity for the frequency of operation required by the service to 
prevent impairment of functions from overheating.
    (5) Application of trolley brakes. (i) On cab-operated cranes with 
cab on trolley, a trolley brake shall be required as specified under 
paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
    (ii) A drag brake may be applied to hold the trolley in a desired 
position on the bridge and to eliminate creep with the power off.
    (6) Application of bridge brakes. (i) On cab-operated cranes with 
cab on bridge, a bridge brake is required as specified under paragraph 
(f)(4) of this section.
    (ii) On cab-operated cranes with cab on trolley, a bridge brake of 
the holding type shall be required.
    (iii) On all floor, remote and pulpit-operated crane bridge drives, 
a brake of noncoasting mechanical drive shall be provided.
    (g) Electric equipment--(1) General. (i) Wiring and equipment shall 
comply with subpart S of this part.
    (ii) The control circuit voltage shall not exceed 600 volts for a.c. 
or d.c. current.
    (iii) The voltage at pendant push-buttons shall not exceed 150 volts 
for a.c. and 300 volts for d.c.
    (iv) Where multiple conductor cable is used with a suspended 
pushbutton station, the station must be supported in some satisfactory 
manner that will protect the electrical conductors against strain.
    (v) Pendant control boxes shall be constructed to prevent electrical 
shock and shall be clearly marked for identification of functions.

[[Page 546]]

    (2) Equipment. (i) Electrical equipment shall be so located or 
enclosed that live parts will not be exposed to accidental contact under 
normal operating conditions.
    (ii) Electric equipment shall be protected from dirt, grease, oil, 
and moisture.
    (iii) Guards for live parts shall be substantial and so located that 
they cannot be accidently deformed so as to make contact with the live 
parts.
    (3) Controllers. (i) Cranes not equipped with spring-return 
controllers or momentary contact pushbuttons shall be provided with a 
device which will disconnect all motors from the line on failure of 
power and will not permit any motor to be restarted until the controller 
handle is brought to the ``off'' position, or a reset switch or button 
is operated.
    (ii) Lever operated controllers shall be provided with a notch or 
latch which in the ``off'' position prevents the handle from being 
inadvertently moved to the ``on'' position. An ``off'' detent or spring 
return arrangement is acceptable.
    (iii) The controller operating handle shall be located within 
convenient reach of the operator.
    (iv) As far as practicable, the movement of each controller handle 
shall be in the same general directions as the resultant movements of 
the load.
    (v) The control for the bridge and trolley travel shall be so 
located that the operator can readily face the direction of travel.
    (vi) For floor-operated cranes, the controller or controllers if 
rope operated, shall automatically return to the ``off'' position when 
released by the operator.
    (vii) Pushbuttons in pendant stations shall return to the ``off'' 
position when pressure is released by the crane operator.
    (viii) Automatic cranes shall be so designed that all motions shall 
fail-safe if any malfunction of operation occurs.
    (ix) Remote-operated cranes shall function so that if the control 
signal for any crane motion becomes ineffective the crane motion shall 
stop.
    (4) Resistors. (i) Enclosures for resistors shall have openings to 
provide adequate ventilation, and shall be installed to prevent the 
accumulation of combustible matter too near to hot parts.
    (ii) Resistor units shall be supported so as to be as free as 
possible from vibration.
    (iii) Provision shall be made to prevent broken parts or molten 
metal falling upon the operator or from the crane.
    (5) Switches. (i) The power supply to the runway conductors shall be 
controlled by a switch or circuit breaker located on a fixed structure, 
accessible from the floor, and arranged to be locked in the open 
position.
    (ii) On cab-operated cranes a switch or circuit breaker of the 
enclosed type, with provision for locking in the open position, shall be 
provided in the leads from the runway conductors. A means of opening 
this switch or circuit breaker shall be located within easy reach of the 
operator.
    (iii) On floor-operated cranes, a switch or circuit breaker of the 
enclosed type, with provision for locking in the open position, shall be 
provided in the leads from the runway conductors. This disconnect shall 
be mounted on the bridge or footwalk near the runway collectors. One of 
the following types of floor-operated disconnects shall be provided:
    (a) Nonconductive rope attached to the main disconnect switch.
    (b) An undervoltage trip for the main circuit breaker operated by an 
emergency stop button in the pendant pushbutton in the pendant 
pushbutton station.
    (c) A main line contactor operated by a switch or pushbutton in the 
pendant pushbutton station.
    (iv) The hoisting motion of all electric traveling cranes shall be 
provided with an overtravel limit switch in the hoisting direction.
    (v) All cranes using a lifting magnet shall have a magnet circuit 
switch of the enclosed type with provision for locking in the open 
position. Means for discharging the inductive load of the magnet shall 
be provided.
    (6) Runway conductors. Conductors of the open type mounted on the 
crane runway beams or overhead shall be so

[[Page 547]]

located or so guarded that persons entering or leaving the cab or crane 
footwalk normally could not come into contact with them.
    (7) Extension lamps. If a service receptacle is provided in the cab 
or on the bridge of cab-operated cranes, it shall be a grounded three-
prong type permanent receptacle, not exceeding 300 volts.
    (h) Hoisting equipment--(1) Sheaves. (i) Sheave grooves shall be 
smooth and free from surface defects which could cause rope damage.
    (ii) Sheaves carrying ropes which can be momentarily unloaded shall 
be provided with close-fitting guards or other suitable devices to guide 
the rope back into the groove when the load is applied again.
    (iii) The sheaves in the bottom block shall be equipped with close-
fitting guards that will prevent ropes from becoming fouled when the 
block is lying on the ground with ropes loose.
    (iv) Pockets and flanges of sheaves used with hoist chains shall be 
of such dimensions that the chain does not catch or bind during 
operation.
    (v) All running sheaves shall be equipped with means for 
lubrication. Permanently lubricated, sealed and/or shielded bearings 
meet this requirement.
    (2) Ropes. (i) In using hoisting ropes, the crane manufacturer's 
recommendation shall be followed. The rated load divided by the number 
of parts of rope shall not exceed 20 percent of the nominal breaking 
strength of the rope.
    (ii) Socketing shall be done in the manner specified by the 
manufacturer of the assembly.
    (iii) Rope shall be secured to the drum as follows:
    (a) No less than two wraps of rope shall remain on the drum when the 
hook is in its extreme low position.
    (b) Rope end shall be anchored by a clamp securely attached to the 
drum, or by a socket arrangement approved by the crane or rope 
manufacturer.
    (iv) Eye splices. [Reserved]
    (v) Rope clips attached with U-bolts shall have the U-bolts on the 
dead or short end of the rope. Spacing and number of all types of clips 
shall be in accordance with the clip manufacturer's recommendation. 
Clips shall be drop-forged steel in all sizes manufactured commercially. 
When a newly installed rope has been in operation for an hour, all nuts 
on the clip bolts shall be retightened.
    (vi) Swaged or compressed fittings shall be applied as recommended 
by the rope or crane manufacturer.
    (vii) Wherever exposed to temperatures, at which fiber cores would 
be damaged, rope having an independent wirerope or wire-strand core, or 
other temperature-damage resistant core shall be used.
    (viii) Replacement rope shall be the same size, grade, and 
construction as the original rope furnished by the crane manufacturer, 
unless otherwise recommended by a wire rope manufacturer due to actual 
working condition requirements.
    (3) Equalizers. If a load is supported by more than one part of 
rope, the tension in the parts shall be equalized.
    (4) Hooks. Hooks shall meet the manufacturer's recommendations and 
shall not be overloaded.
    (i) Warning device. Except for floor-operated cranes a gong or other 
effective warning signal shall be provided for each crane equipped with 
a power traveling mechanism.
    (j) Inspection--(1) Inspection classification. (i) Initial 
inspection. Prior to initial use all new and altered cranes shall be 
inspected to insure compliance with the provisions of this section.
    (ii) Inspection procedure for cranes in regular service is divided 
into two general classifications based upon the intervals at which 
inspection should be performed. The intervals in turn are dependent upon 
the nature of the critical components of the crane and the degree of 
their exposure to wear, deterioration, or malfunction. The two general 
classifications are herein designated as ``frequent'' and ``periodic'' 
with respective intervals between inspections as defined below:
    (a) Frequent inspection--Daily to monthly intervals.
    (b) Periodic inspection--1 to 12- month intervals.
    (2) Frequent inspection. The following items shall be inspected for 
defects at intervals as defined in paragraph (j)(1)(ii) of this section 
or as specifically indicated, including observation

[[Page 548]]

during operation for any defects which might appear between regular 
inspections. All deficiencies such as listed shall be carefully examined 
and determination made as to whether they constitute a safety hazard:
    (i) All functional operating mechanisms for maladjustment 
interfering with proper operation. Daily.
    (ii) Deterioration or leakage in lines, tanks, valves, drain pumps, 
and other parts of air or hydraulic systems. Daily.
    (iii) Hooks with deformation or cracks. Visual inspection daily; 
monthly inspection with a certification record which includes the date 
of inspection, the signature of the person who performed the inspection 
and the serial number, or other identifier, of the hook inspected. For 
hooks with cracks or having more than 15 percent in excess of normal 
throat opening or more than 10 deg. twist from the plane of the unbent 
hook refer to paragraph (l)(3)(iii)(a) of this section.
    (iv) Hoist chains, including end connections, for excessive wear, 
twist, distorted links interfering with proper function, or stretch 
beyond manufacturer's recommendations. Visual inspection daily; monthly 
inspection with a certification record which includes the date of 
inspection, the signature of the person who performed the inspection and 
an identifier of the chain which was inspected.
    (v) [Reserved]
    (vi) All functional operating mechanisms for excessive wear of 
components.
    (vii) Rope reeving for noncompliance with manufacturer's 
recommendations.
    (3) Periodic inspection. Complete inspections of the crane shall be 
performed at intervals as generally defined in paragraph (j)(1)(ii)(b) 
of this section, depending upon its activity, severity of service, and 
environment, or as specifically indicated below. These inspections shall 
include the requirements of paragraph (j)(2) of this section and in 
addition, the following items. Any deficiencies such as listed shall be 
carefully examined and determination made as to whether they constitute 
a safety hazard:
    (i) Deformed, cracked, or corroded members.
    (ii) Loose bolts or rivets.
    (iii) Cracked or worn sheaves and drums.
    (iv) Worn, cracked or distorted parts such as pins, bearings, 
shafts, gears, rollers, locking and clamping devices.
    (v) Excessive wear on brake system parts, linings, pawls, and 
ratchets.
    (vi) Load, wind, and other indicators over their full range, for any 
significant inaccuracies.
    (vii) Gasoline, diesel, electric, or other powerplants for improper 
performance or noncompliance with applicable safety requirements.
    (viii) Excessive wear of chain drive sprockets and excessive chain 
stretch.
    (ix) [Reserved]
    (x) Electrical apparatus, for signs of pitting or any deterioration 
of controller contactors, limit switches and pushbutton stations.
    (4) Cranes not in regular use. (i) A crane which has been idle for a 
period of 1 month or more, but less than 6 months, shall be given an 
inspection conforming with requirements of paragraph (j)(2) of this 
section and paragraph (m)(2) of this section before placing in service.
    (ii) A crane which has been idle for a period of over 6 months shall 
be given a complete inspection conforming with requirements of 
paragraphs (j) (2) and (3) of this section and paragraph (m)(2) of this 
section before placing in service.
    (iii) Standby cranes shall be inspected at least semi-annually in 
accordance with requirements of paragraph (j)(2) of this section and 
paragraph (m)(2) of this section.
    (k) Testing--(1) Operational tests. (i) Prior to initial use all new 
and altered cranes shall be tested to insure compliance with this 
section including the following functions:
    (a) Hoisting and lowering.
    (b) Trolley travel.
    (c) Bridge travel.
    (d) Limit switches, locking and safety devices.
    (ii) The trip setting of hoist limit switches shall be determined by 
tests with an empty hook traveling in increasing speeds up to the 
maximum speed. The actuating mechanism of the limit switch shall be 
located so that it

[[Page 549]]

will trip the switch, under all conditions, in sufficient time to 
prevent contact of the hook or hook block with any part of the trolley.
    (2) Rated load test. Test loads shall not be more than 125 percent 
of the rated load unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer. The 
test reports shall be placed on file where readily available to 
appointed personnel.
    (l) Maintenance--(1) Preventive maintenance. A preventive 
maintenance program based on the crane manufacturer's recommendations 
shall be established.
    (2) Maintenance procedure. (i) Before adjustments and repairs are 
started on a crane the following precautions shall be taken:
    (a) The crane to be repaired shall be run to a location where it 
will cause the least interference with other cranes and operations in 
the area.
    (b) All controllers shall be at the off position.
    (c) The main or emergency switch shall be open and locked in the 
open position.
    (d) Warning or ``out of order'' signs shall be placed on the crane, 
also on the floor beneath or on the hook where visible from the floor.
    (e) Where other cranes are in operation on the same runway, rail 
stops or other suitable means shall be provided to prevent interference 
with the idle crane.
    (ii) After adjustments and repairs have been made the crane shall 
not be operated until all guards have been reinstalled, safety devices 
reactivated and maintenance equipment removed.
    (3) Adjustments and repairs. (i) Any unsafe conditions disclosed by 
the inspection requirements of paragraph (j) of this section shall be 
corrected before operation of the crane is resumed. Adjustments and 
repairs shall be done only by designated personnel.
    (ii) Adjustments shall be maintained to assure correct functioning 
of components. The following are examples:
    (a) All functional operating mechanisms.
    (b) Limit switches.
    (c) Control systems.
    (d) Brakes.
    (e) Power plants.
    (iii) Repairs or replacements shall be provided promptly as needed 
for safe operation. The following are examples:
    (a) Crane hooks showing defects described in paragraph (j)(2)(iii) 
of this section shall be discarded. Repairs by welding or reshaping are 
not generally recommended. If such repairs are attempted they shall only 
be done under competent supervision and the hook shall be tested to the 
load requirements of paragraph (k)(2) of this section before further 
use.
    (b) Load attachment chains and rope slings showing defects described 
in paragraph (j)(2) (iv) and (v) of this section respectively.
    (c) All critical parts which are cracked, broken, bent, or 
excessively worn.
    (d) Pendant control stations shall be kept clean and function labels 
kept legible.
    (m) Rope inspection--(1) Running ropes. A thorough inspection of all 
ropes shall be made at least once a month and a certification record 
which includes the date of inspection, the signature of the person who 
performed the inspection and an identifier for the ropes which were 
inspected shall be kept on file where readily available to appointed 
personnel. Any deterioration, resulting in appreciable loss of original 
strength, shall be carefully observed and determination made as to 
whether further use of the rope would constitute a safety hazard. Some 
of the conditions that could result in an appreciable loss of strength 
are the following:
    (i) Reduction of rope diameter below nominal diameter due to loss of 
core support, internal or external corrosion, or wear of outside wires.
    (ii) A number of broken outside wires and the degree of distribution 
or concentration of such broken wires.
    (iii) Worn outside wires.
    (iv) Corroded or broken wires at end connections.
    (v) Corroded, cracked, bent, worn, or improperly applied end 
connections.
    (vi) Severe kinking, crushing, cutting, or unstranding.
    (2) Other ropes. All rope which has been idle for a period of a 
month or more due to shutdown or storage of a crane on which it is 
installed shall be

[[Page 550]]

given a thorough inspection before it is used. This inspection shall be 
for all types of deterioration and shall be performed by an appointed 
person whose approval shall be required for further use of the rope. A 
certification record shall be available for inspection which includes 
the date of inspection, the signature of the person who performed the 
inspection and an identifier for the rope which was inspected.
    (n) Handling the load--(1) Size of load. The crane shall not be 
loaded beyond its rated load except for test purposes as provided in 
paragraph (k) of this section.
    (2) Attaching the load. (i) The hoist chain or hoist rope shall be 
free from kinks or twists and shall not be wrapped around the load.
    (ii) The load shall be attached to the load block hook by means of 
slings or other approved devices.
    (iii) Care shall be taken to make certain that the sling clears all 
obstacles.
    (3) Moving the load. (i) The load shall be well secured and properly 
balanced in the sling or lifting device before it is lifted more than a 
few inches.
    (ii) Before starting to hoist the following conditions shall be 
noted:
    (a) Hoist rope shall not be kinked.
    (b) Multiple part lines shall not be twisted around each other.
    (c) The hook shall be brought over the load in such a manner as to 
prevent swinging.
    (iii) During hoisting care shall be taken that:
    (a) There is no sudden acceleration or deceleration of the moving 
load.
    (b) The load does not contact any obstructions.
    (iv) Cranes shall not be used for side pulls except when 
specifically authorized by a responsible person who has determined that 
the stability of the crane is not thereby endangered and that various 
parts of the crane will not be overstressed.
    (v) While any employee is on the load or hook, there shall be no 
hoisting, lowering, or traveling.
    (vi) The employer shall require that the operator avoid carrying 
loads over people.
    (vii) The operator shall test the brakes each time a load 
approaching the rated load is handled. The brakes shall be tested by 
raising the load a few inches and applying the brakes.
    (viii) The load shall not be lowered below the point where less than 
two full wraps of rope remain on the hoisting drum.
    (ix) When two or more cranes are used to lift a load one qualified 
responsible person shall be in charge of the operation. He shall analyze 
the operation and instruct all personnel involved in the proper 
positioning, rigging of the load, and the movements to be made.
    (x) The employer shall insure that the operator does not leave his 
position at the controls while the load is suspended.
    (xi) When starting the bridge and when the load or hook approaches 
near or over personnel, the warning signal shall be sounded.
    (4) Hoist limit switch. (i) At the beginning of each operator's 
shift, the upper limit switch of each hoist shall be tried out under no 
load. Extreme care shall be exercised; the block shall be ``inched'' 
into the limit or run in at slow speed. If the switch does not operate 
properly, the appointed person shall be immediately notified.
    (ii) The hoist limit switch which controls the upper limit of travel 
of the load block shall never be used as an operating control.
    (o) Other requirements, general--(1) Ladders. (i) The employer shall 
insure that hands are free from encumbrances while personnel are using 
ladders.
    (ii) Articles which are too large to be carried in pockets or belts 
shall be lifted and lowered by hand line.
    (2) Cabs. (i) Necessary clothing and personal belongings shall be 
stored in such a manner as not to interfere with access or operation.
    (ii) Tools, oil cans, waste, extra fuses, and other necessary 
articles shall be stored in the tool box, and shall not be permitted to 
lie loose in or about the cab.
    (3) Fire extinguishers. The employer shall insure that operators are 
familiar with the operation and care of fire extinguishers provided.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 27400, June 27, 1975; 
49 FR 5322, Feb. 10, 1984; 51 FR 34560, Sept. 29, 1986; 55 FR 32015, 
Aug. 6, 1990; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]

[[Page 551]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.180  Crawler locomotive and truck cranes.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section. (1) A crawler crane 
consists of a rotating superstructure with power plant, operating 
machinery, and boom, mounted on a base, equipped with crawler treads for 
travel. Its function is to hoist and swing loads at various radii.
    (2) A locomotive crane consists of a rotating superstructure with 
power-plant, operating machinery and boom, mounted on a base or car 
equipped for travel on railroad track. It may be self-propelled or 
propelled by an outside source. Its function is to hoist and swing loads 
at various radii.
    (3) A truck crane consists of a rotating superstructure with 
powerplant, operating machinery and boom, mounted on an automotive truck 
equipped with a powerplant for travel. Its function is to hoist and 
swing loads at various radii.
    (4) A wheel mounted crane (wagon crane) consists of a rotating 
superstructure with powerplant, operating machinery and boom, mounted on 
a base or platform equipped with axles and rubber-tired wheels for 
travel. The base is usually propelled by the engine in the 
superstructure, but it may be equipped with a separate engine controlled 
from the superstructure. Its function is to hoist and swing loads at 
various radii.
    (5) An accessory is a secondary part or assembly of parts which 
contributes to the overall function and usefulness of a machine.
    (6) Appointed means assigned specific responsibilities by the 
employer or the employer's representative.
    (7) ANSI means the American National Standards Institute.
    (8) An angle indicator (boom) is an accessory which measures the 
angle of the boom to the horizontal.
    (9) The axis of rotation is the vertical axis around which the crane 
superstructure rotates.
    (10) Axle means the shaft or spindle with which or about which a 
wheel rotates. On truck- and wheel-mounted cranes it refers to an 
automotive type of axle assembly including housings, gearing, 
differential, bearings, and mounting appurtenances.
    (11) Axle (bogie) means two or more automotive-type axles mounted in 
tandem in a frame so as to divide the load between the axles and permit 
vertical oscillation of the wheels.
    (12) The base (mounting) is the traveling base or carrier on which 
the rotating superstructure is mounted such as a car, truck, crawlers, 
or wheel platform.
    (13) The boom (crane) is a member hinged to the front of the 
rotating superstructure with the outer end supported by ropes leading to 
a gantry or A-frame and used for supporting the hoisting tackle.
    (14) The boom angle is the angle between the longitudinal centerline 
of the boom and the horizontal. The boom longitudinal centerline is a 
straight line between the boom foot pin (heel pin) centerline and boom 
point sheave pin centerline.
    (15) The boom hoist is a hoist drum and rope reeving system used to 
raise and lower the boom. The rope system may be all live reeving or a 
combination of live reeving and pendants.
    (16) The boom stop is a device used to limit the angle of the boom 
at the highest position.
    (17) A brake is a device used for retarding or stopping motion by 
friction or power means.
    (18) A cab is a housing which covers the rotating superstructure 
machinery and/or operator's station. On truck-crane trucks a separate 
cab covers the driver's station.
    (19) The clutch is a friction, electromagnetic, hydraulic, 
pneumatic, or positive mechanical device for engagement or disengagement 
of power.
    (20) The counterweight is a weight used to supplement the weight of 
the machine in providing stability for lifting working loads.
    (21) Designated means selected or assigned by the employer or the 
employer's representative as being qualified to perform specific duties.
    (22) The drum is the cylindrical members around which ropes are 
wound for raising and lowering the load or boom.
    (23) Dynamic (loading) means loads introduced into the machine or 
its components by forces in motion.

[[Page 552]]

    (24) The gantry (A-frame) is a structural frame, extending above the 
superstructure, to which the boom support ropes are reeved.
    (25) A jib is an extension attached to the boom point to provide 
added boom length for lifting specified loads. The jib may be in line 
with the boom or offset to various angles.
    (26) Load (working) means the external load, in pounds, applied to 
the crane, including the weight of load-attaching equipment such as load 
blocks, shackles, and slings.
    (27) Load block (upper) means the assembly of hook or shackle, 
swivel, sheaves, pins, and frame suspended from the boom point.
    (28) Load block (lower) means the assembly of hook or shackle, 
swivel, sheaves, pins, and frame suspended by the hoisting ropes.
    (29) A load hoist is a hoist drum and rope reeving system used for 
hoisting and lowering loads.
    (30) Load ratings are crane ratings in pounds established by the 
manufacturer in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (31) Outriggers are extendable or fixed metal arms, attached to the 
mounting base, which rest on supports at the outer ends.
    (32) Rail clamp means a tong-like metal device, mounted on a 
locomotive crane car, which can be connected to the track.
    (33) Reeving means a rope system in which the rope travels around 
drums and sheaves.
    (34) Rope refers to a wire rope unless otherwise specified.
    (35) Side loading means a load applied at an angle to the vertical 
plane of the boom.
    (36) A standby crane is a crane which is not in regular service but 
which is used occasionally or intermittently as required.
    (37) A standing (guy) rope is a supporting rope which maintains a 
constant distance between the points of attachment to the two components 
connected by the rope.
    (38) Structural competence means the ability of the machine and its 
components to withstand the stresses imposed by applied loads.
    (39) Superstructure means the rotating upper frame structure of the 
machine and the operating machinery mounted thereon.
    (40) Swing means the rotation of the superstructure for movement of 
loads in a horizontal direction about the axis of rotation.
    (41) Swing mechanism means the machinery involved in providing 
rotation of the superstructure.
    (42) Tackle is an assembly of ropes and sheaves arranged for 
hoisting and pulling.
    (43) Transit means the moving or transporting of a crane from one 
jobsite to another.
    (44) Travel means the function of the machine moving from one 
location to another, on a jobsite.
    (45) The travel mechanism is the machinery involved in providing 
travel.
    (46) Wheelbase means the distance between centers of front and rear 
axles. For a multiple axle assembly the axle center for wheelbase 
measurement is taken as the midpoint of the assembly.
    (47) The whipline (auxiliary hoist) is a separate hoist rope system 
of lighter load capacity and higher speed than provided by the main 
hoist.
    (48) A winch head is a power driven spool for handling of loads by 
means of friction between fiber or wire rope and spool.
    (b) General requirements--(1) Application. This section applies to 
crawler cranes, locomotive cranes, wheel mounted cranes of both truck 
and self-propelled wheel type, and any variations thereof which retain 
the same fundamental characteristics. This section includes only cranes 
of the above types, which are basically powered by internal combustion 
engines or electric motors and which utilize drums and ropes. Cranes 
designed for railway and automobile wreck clearances are excepted. The 
requirements of this section are applicable only to machines when used 
as lifting cranes.
    (2) New and existing equipment. All new crawler, locomotive, and 
truck cranes constructed and utilized on or after August 31, 1971, shall 
meet the design specifications of the American National Standard Safety 
Code for Crawler, Locomotive, and Truck Cranes, ANSI B30.5-1968, which 
is incorporated

[[Page 553]]

by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. Crawler, locomotive, and truck 
cranes constructed prior to August 31, 1971, should be modified to 
conform to those design specifications by February 15, 1972, unless it 
can be shown that the crane cannot feasibly or economically be altered 
and that the crane substantially complies with the requirements of this 
section.
    (3) Designated personnel. Only designated personnel shall be 
permitted to operate a crane covered by this section.
    (c) Load ratings--(1) Load ratings--where stability governs lifting 
performance. (i) The margin of stability for determination of load 
ratings, with booms of stipulated lengths at stipulated working radii 
for the various types of crane mountings, is established by taking a 
percentage of the loads which will produce a condition of tipping or 
balance with the boom in the least stable direction, relative to the 
mounting. The load ratings shall not exceed the following percentages 
for cranes, with the indicated types of mounting under conditions 
stipulated in paragraphs (c)(1) (ii) and (iii) of this section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Maximum
                                                                 load
                                                                ratings
                   Type of crane mounting                      (percent
                                                              of tipping
                                                                loads)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Locomotive, without outriggers:
  Booms 60 feet or less.....................................      \1\ 85
  Booms over 60 feet........................................      \1\ 85
Locomotive, using outriggers fully extended.................          80
Crawler, without outriggers.................................          75
Crawler, using outriggers fully extended....................          85
Truck and wheel mounted without outriggers or using
 outriggers fully extended..................................          85
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Unless this results in less than 30,000 pound-feet net stabilizing
  moment about the rail, which shall be minimum with such booms.

    (ii) The following stipulations shall govern the application of the 
values in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section for locomotive cranes:
    (a) Tipping with or without the use of outriggers occurs when half 
of the wheels farthest from the load leave the rail.
    (b) The crane shall be standing on track which is level within 1 
percent grade.
    (c) Radius of the load is the horizontal distance from a projection 
of the axis of rotation to the rail support surface, before loading, to 
the center of vertical hoist line or tackle with load applied.
    (d) Tipping loads from which ratings are determined shall be applied 
under static conditions only, i.e., without dynamic effect of hoisting, 
lowering, or swinging.
    (e) The weight of all auxiliary handling devices such as hoist 
blocks, hooks, and slings shall be considered a part of the load rating.
    (iii) Stipulations governing the application of the values in 
paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section for crawler, truck, and wheel-
mounted cranes shall be in accordance with Crane Load-Stability Test 
Code, Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) J765, which is incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iv) The effectiveness of these preceding stability factors will be 
influenced by such additional factors as freely suspended loads, track, 
wind, or ground conditions, condition and inflation of rubber tires, 
boom lengths, proper operating speeds for existing conditions, and, in 
general, careful and competent operation. All of these shall be taken 
into account by the user.
    (2) Load rating chart. A substantial and durable rating chart with 
clearly legible letters and figures shall be provided with each crane 
and securely fixed to the crane cab in a location easily visible to the 
operator while seated at his control station.
    (d) Inspection classification--(1) Initial inspection. Prior to 
initial use all new and altered cranes shall be inspected to insure 
compliance with provisions of this section.
    (2) Regular inspection. Inspection procedure for cranes in regular 
service is divided into two general classifications based upon the 
intervals at which inspection should be performed. The intervals in turn 
are dependent upon the nature of the critical components of the crane 
and the degree of their exposure to wear, deterioration, or malfunction. 
The two general classifications are herein designated as ``frequent'' 
and ``periodic'', with respective intervals between inspections as 
defined below:
    (i) Frequent inspection: Daily to monthly intervals.

[[Page 554]]

    (ii) Periodic inspection: 1- to 12-month intervals, or as 
specifically recommended by the manufacturer.
    (3) Frequent inspection. Items such as the following shall be 
inspected for defects at intervals as defined in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of 
this section or as specifically indicated including observation during 
operation for any defects which might appear between regular 
inspections. Any deficiencies such as listed shall be carefully examined 
and determination made as to whether they constitute a safety hazard:
    (i) All control mechanisms for maladjustment interfering with proper 
operation: Daily.
    (ii) All control mechanisms for excessive wear of components and 
contamination by lubricants or other foreign matter.
    (iii) All safety devices for malfunction.
    (iv) Deterioration or leakage in air or hydraulic systems: Daily.
    (v) Crane hooks with deformations or cracks. For hooks with cracks 
or having more than 15 percent in excess of normal throat opening or 
more than 10 deg. twist from the plane of the unbent hook.
    (vi) Rope reeving for noncompliance with manufacturer's 
recommendations.
    (vii) Electrical apparatus for malfunctioning, signs of excessive 
deterioration, dirt, and moisture accumulation.
    (4) Periodic inspection. Complete inspections of the crane shall be 
performed at intervals as generally defined in paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of 
this section depending upon its activity, severity of service, and 
environment, or as specifically indicated below. These inspections shall 
include the requirements of paragraph (d)(3) of this section and in 
addition, items such as the following. Any deficiencies such as listed 
shall be carefully examined and determination made as to whether they 
constitute a safety hazard:
    (i) Deformed, cracked, or corroded members in the crane structure 
and boom.
    (ii) Loose bolts or rivets.
    (iii) Cracked or worn sheaves and drums.
    (iv) Worn, cracked, or distorted parts such as pins, bearings, 
shafts, gears, rollers and locking devices.
    (v) Excessive wear on brake and clutch system parts, linings, pawls, 
and ratchets.
    (vi) Load, boom angle, and other indicators over their full range, 
for any significant inaccuracies.
    (vii) Gasoline, diesel, electric, or other power plants for improper 
performance or noncompliance with safety requirements.
    (viii) Excessive wear of chain-drive sprockets and excessive chain 
stretch.
    (ix) Travel steering, braking, and locking devices, for malfunction.
    (x) Excessively worn or damaged tires.
    (5) Cranes not in regular use. (i) A crane which has been idle for a 
period of one month or more, but less than 6 months, shall be given an 
inspection conforming with requirements of paragraph (d)(3) of this 
section and paragraph (g)(2)(ii) of this section before placing in 
service.
    (ii) A crane which has been idle for a period of six months shall be 
given a complete inspection conforming with requirements of paragraphs 
(d) (3) and (4) of this section and paragraph (g)(2)(ii) of this section 
before placing in service.
    (iii) Standby cranes shall be inspected at least semiannually in 
accordance with requirements of paragraph (d)(3) of this section and 
paragraph (g)(2)(ii) of this section. Such cranes which are exposed to 
adverse environment should be inspected more frequently.
    (6) Inspection records. Certification records which include the date 
of inspection, the signature of the person who performed the inspection 
and the serial number, or other identifier, of the crane which was 
inspected shall be made monthly on critical items in use such as brakes, 
crane hooks, and ropes. This certification record shall be kept readily 
available.
    (e) Testing--(1) Operational tests. (i) In addition to prototype 
tests and quality-control measures, each new production crane shall be 
tested by the manufacturer to the extent necessary to insure compliance 
with the operational

[[Page 555]]

requirements of this paragraph including functions such as the 
following:
    (a) Load hoisting and lowering mechanisms.
    (b) Boom hoisting and lower mechanisms.
    (c) Swinging mechanism.
    (d) Travel mechanism.
    (e) Safety devices.
    (ii) Where the complete production crane is not supplied by one 
manufacturer such tests shall be conducted at final assembly.
    (iii) Certified production-crane test results shall be made 
available.
    (2) Rated load test. (i) Written reports shall be available showing 
test procedures and confirming the adequacy of repairs or alterations.
    (ii) Test loads shall not exceed 110 percent of the rated load at 
any selected working radius.
    (iii) Where rerating is necessary:
    (a) Crawler, truck, and wheel-mounted cranes shall be tested in 
accordance with SAE Recommended Practice, Crane Load Stability Test Code 
J765 (April 1961).
    (b) Locomotive cranes shall be tested in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(1) (i) and (ii) of this section.
    (c) Rerating test report shall be readily available.
    (iv) No cranes shall be rerated in excess of the original load 
ratings unless such rating changes are approved by the crane 
manufacturer or final assembler.
    (f) Maintenance procedure--General. After adjustments and repairs 
have been made the crane shall not be operated until all guards have 
been reinstalled, safety devices reactivated, and maintenance equipment 
removed.
    (g) Rope inspection--(1) Running ropes. A thorough inspection of all 
ropes in use shall be made at least once a month and a certification 
record which includes the date of inspection, the signature of the 
person who performed the inspection and an identifier for the ropes 
shall be prepared and kept on file where readily available. All 
inspections shall be performed by an appointed or authorized person. Any 
deterioration, resulting in appreciable loss of original strength shall 
be carefully observed and detemination made as to whether further use of 
the rope would constitute a safety hazard. Some of the conditions that 
could result in an appreciable loss of strength are the following:
    (i) Reduction of rope diameter below nominal diameter due to loss of 
core support, internal or external corrosion, or wear of outside wires.
    (ii) A number of broken outside wires and the degree of distribution 
of concentration of such broken wires.
    (iii) Worn outside wires.
    (iv) Corroded or broken wires at end connections.
    (v) Corroded, cracked, bent, worn, or improperly applied end 
connections.
    (vi) Severe kinking, crushing, cutting, or unstranding.
    (2) Other ropes. (i) Heavy wear and/or broken wires may occur in 
sections in contact with equalizer sheaves or other sheaves where rope 
travel is limited, or with saddles. Particular care shall be taken to 
inspect ropes at these locations.
    (ii) All rope which has been idle for a period of a month or more 
due to shutdown or storage of a crane on which it is installed shall be 
given a thorough inspection before it is used. This inspection shall be 
for all types of deterioration and shall be performed by an appointed or 
authorized person whose approval shall be required for further use of 
the rope. A certification record which includes the date of inspection, 
the signature of the person who performed the inspection, and an 
identifier for the rope which was inspected shall be prepared and kept 
readily available.
    (iii) Particular care shall be taken in the inspection of 
nonrotating rope.
    (h) Handling the load--(1) Size of load. (i) No crane shall be 
loaded beyond the rated load, except for test purposes as provided in 
paragraph (e) of this section.
    (ii) When loads which are limited by structural competence rather 
than by stability are to be handled, it shall be ascertained that the 
weight of the load has been determined within plus or minus 10 percent 
before it is lifted.
    (2) Attaching the load. (i) The hoist rope shall not be wrapped 
around the load.

[[Page 556]]

    (ii) The load shall be attached to the hook by means of slings or 
other approved devices.
    (3) Moving the load. (i) The employer shall assure that:
    (a) The crane is level and where necessary blocked properly.
    (b) The load is well secured and properly balanced in the sling or 
lifting device before it is lifted more than a few inches.
    (ii) Before starting to hoist, the following conditions shall be 
noted:
    (a) Hoist rope shall not be kinked.
    (b) Multiple part lines shall not be twisted around each other.
    (c) The hook shall be brought over the load in such a manner as to 
prevent swinging.
    (iii) During hoisting care shall be taken that:
    (a) There is no sudden acceleration or deceleration of the moving 
load.
    (b) The load does not contact any obstructions.
    (iv) Side loading of booms shall be limited to freely suspended 
loads. Cranes shall not be used for dragging loads sideways.
    (v) No hoisting, lowering, swinging, or traveling shall be done 
while anyone is on the load or hook.
    (vi) The operator should avoid carrying loads over people.
    (vii) On truck-mounted cranes, no loads shall be lifted over the 
front area except as approved by the crane manufacturer.
    (viii) The operator shall test the brakes each time a load 
approaching the rated load is handled by raising it a few inches and 
applying the brakes.
    (ix) Outriggers shall be used when the load to be handled at that 
particular radius exceeds the rated load without outriggers as given by 
the manufacturer for that crane. Where floats are used they shall be 
securely attached to the outriggers. Wood blocks used to support 
outriggers shall:
    (a) Be strong enough to prevent crushing.
    (b) Be free from defects.
    (c) Be of sufficient width and length to prevent shifting or 
toppling under load.
    (x) Neither the load nor the boom shall be lowered below the point 
where less than two full wraps of rope remain on their respective drums.
    (xi) Before lifting loads with locomotive cranes without using 
outriggers, means shall be applied to prevent the load from being 
carried by the truck springs.
    (xii) When two or more cranes are used to lift one load, one 
designated person shall be responsible for the operation. He shall be 
required to analyze the operation and instruct all personnel involved in 
the proper positioning, rigging of the load, and the movements to be 
made.
    (xiii) In transit the following additional precautions shall be 
exercised:
    (a) The boom shall be carried in line with the direction of motion.
    (b) The superstructure shall be secured against rotation, except 
when negotiating turns when there is an operator in the cab or the boom 
is supported on a dolly.
    (c) The empty hook shall be lashed or otherwise restrained so that 
it cannot swing freely.
    (xiv) Before traveling a crane with load, a designated person shall 
be responsible for determining and controlling safety. Decisions such as 
position of load, boom location, ground support, travel route, and speed 
of movement shall be in accord with his determinations.
    (xv) A crane with or without load shall not be traveled with the 
boom so high that it may bounce back over the cab.
    (xvi) When rotating the crane, sudden starts and stops shall be 
avoided. Rotational speed shall be such that the load does not swing out 
beyond the radii at which it can be controlled. A tag or restraint line 
shall be used when rotation of the load is hazardous.
    (xvii) When a crane is to be operated at a fixed radius, the boom-
hoist pawl or other positive locking device shall be engaged.
    (xviii) Ropes shall not be handled on a winch head without the 
knowledge of the operator.
    (xix) While a winch head is being used, the operator shall be within 
convenient reach of the power unit control lever.

[[Page 557]]

    (4) Holding the load. (i) The operator shall not be permitted to 
leave his position at the controls while the load is suspended.
    (ii) No person should be permitted to stand or pass under a load on 
the hook.
    (iii) If the load must remain suspended for any considerable length 
of time, the operator shall hold the drum from rotating in the lowering 
direction by activating the positive controllable means of the 
operator's station.
    (i) Other requirements--(1) Rail clamps. Rail clamps shall not be 
used as a means of restraining tipping of a locomotive crane.
    (2) Ballast or counterweight. Cranes shall not be operated without 
the full amount of any ballast or counterweight in place as specified by 
the maker, but truck cranes that have dropped the ballast or 
counterweight may be operated temporarily with special care and only for 
light loads without full ballast or counterweight in place. The ballast 
or counterweight in place specified by the manufacturer shall not be 
exceeded.
    (3) Cabs. (i) Necessary clothing and personal belongings shall be 
stored in such a manner as to not interfere with access or operation.
    (ii) Tools, oil cans, waste, extra fuses, and other necessary 
articles shall be stored in the tool box, and shall not be permitted to 
lie loose in or about the cab.
    (4) Refueling. (i) Refueling with small portable containers shall be 
done with an approved safety type can equipped with an automatic closing 
cap and flame arrester. Refer to Sec. 1910.155(c)(3) for definition of 
approved.
    (ii) Machines shall not be refueled with the engine running.
    (5) Fire extinguishers. (i) A carbon dioxide, dry chemical, or 
equivalent fire extinguisher shall be kept in the cab or vicinity of the 
crane.
    (ii) Operating and maintenance personnel shall be made familiar with 
the use and care of the fire extinguishers provided.
    (6) Swinging locomotive cranes. A locomotive crane shall not be 
swung into a position where railway cars on an adjacent track might 
strike it, until it has been ascertained that cars are not being moved 
on the adjacent track and proper flag protection has been established.
    (j) Operations near overhead lines. For operations near overhead 
electric lines, see Sec. 1910.333(c)(3).
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 51 
FR 34561, Sept. 29, 1986; 53 FR 12122, Apr. 12, 1988; 55 FR 32015, Aug 
6, 1990; 61 FR 9239, Mar. 7, 1996]'


<R05>
Sec. 1910.181  Derricks.

    (a) Definitions applicable to this section. (1) A derrick is an 
apparatus consisting of a mast or equivalent member held at the head by 
guys or braces, with or without a boom, for use with a hoisting 
mechanism and operating ropes.
    (2) A-frame derrick means a derrick in which the boom is hinged from 
a cross member between the bottom ends of two upright members spread 
apart at the lower ends and joined at the top; the boom point secured to 
the junction of the side members, and the side members are braced or 
guyed from this junction point.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.037

    (3) A basket derrick is a derrick without a boom, similar to a gin 
pole, with its base supported by ropes attached to corner posts or other 
parts of the structure. The base is at a lower elevation than its 
supports. The location of the base of a basket derrick can be changed by 
varying the length of the rope supports. The top of the pole is secured 
with multiple reeved guys to position the top of the pole to the desired 
location by varying the length of the upper guy lines. The load is 
raised and lowered by ropes through a sheave or block secured to the top 
of the pole.

[[Page 558]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.038


    (4) Breast derrick means a derrick without boom. The mast consists 
of two side members spread farther apart at the base than at the top and 
tied together at top and bottom by rigid members. The mast is prevented 
from tipping forward by guys connected to its top. The load is raised 
and lowered by ropes through a sheave or block secured to the top 
crosspiece.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.039

    (5) Chicago boom derrick means a boom which is attached to a 
structure, an outside upright member of the structure serving as the 
mast, and the boom being stepped in a fixed socket clamped to the 
upright. The derrick is complete with load, boom, and boom point swing 
line falls.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.040

    (6) A gin pole derrick is a derrick without a boom. Its guys are so 
arranged from its top as to permit leaning the mast in any direction. 
The load is raised and lowered by ropes reeved through sheaves or blocks 
at the top of the mast.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.041

    (7) Guy derrick means a fixed derrick consisting of a mast capable 
of being rotated, supported in a vertical position by guys, and a boom 
whose bottom end is hinged or pivoted to move in a vertical plane with a 
reeved rope between the head of the mast and the boom point for raising 
and lowering the boom, and a reeved rope from the boom point for raising 
and lowering the load.

[[Page 559]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.042


    (8) Shearleg derrick means a derrick without a boom and similar to a 
breast derrick. The mast, wide at the bottom and narrow at the top, is 
hinged at the bottom and has its top secured by a multiple reeved guy to 
permit handling loads at various radii by means of load tackle suspended 
from the mast top.
    (9) A stiffleg derrick is a derrick similar to a guy derrick except 
that the mast is supported or held in place by two or more stiff 
members, called stifflegs, which are capable of resisting either tensile 
or compressive forces. Sills are generally provided to connect the lower 
ends of the stifflegs to the foot of the mast.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.043

    (10) Appointed means assigned specific responsibilities by the 
employer or the employer's representative.
    (11) ANSI means the American National Standards Institute.
    (12) A boom is a timber or metal section or strut, pivoted or hinged 
at the heel (lower end) at a location fixed in height on a frame or mast 
or vertical member, and with its point (upper end) supported by chains, 
ropes, or rods to the upper end of the frame, mast, or vertical member. 
A rope for raising and lowering the load is reeved through sheaves or a 
block at the boom point. The length of the boom shall be taken as the 
straight line distance between the axis of the foot pin and the axis of 
the boom point sheave pin, or where used, the axis of the upper load 
block attachment pin.
    (13) Boom harness means the block and sheave arrangement on the boom 
point to which the topping lift cable is reeved for lowering and raising 
the boom.
    (14) The boom point is the outward end of the top section of the 
boom.
    (15) Derrick bullwheel means a horizontal ring or wheel, fastened to 
the foot of a derrick, for the purpose of turning the derrick by means 
of ropes leading from this wheel to a powered drum.
    (16) Designated means selected or assigned by the employer or 
employer's representative as being qualified to perform specific duties.
    (17) Eye means a loop formed at the end of a rope by securing the 
dead end to the live end at the base of the loop.
    (18) A fiddle block is a block consisting of two sheaves in the same 
plane held in place by the same cheek plates.
    (19) The foot bearing or foot block (sill block) is the lower 
support on which the mast rotates.
    (20) A gudgeon pin is a pin connecting the mast cap to the mast 
allowing rotation of the mast.
    (21) A guy is a rope used to steady or secure the mast or other 
member in the desired position.
    (22) Load, working means the external load, in pounds, applied to 
the derrick, including the weight of load attaching equipment such as 
load blocks, shackles, and slings.
    (23) Load block, lower means the assembly of sheaves, pins, and 
frame suspended by the hoisting rope.
    (24) Load block, upper means the assembly of sheaves, pins, and 
frame suspended from the boom.
    (25) Mast means the upright member of the derrick.
    (26) Mast cap (spider) means the fitting at the top of the mast to 
which the guys are connected.

[[Page 560]]

    (27) Reeving means a rope system in which the rope travels around 
drums and sheaves.
    (28) Rope refers to wire rope unless otherwise specified.
    (29) Safety Hook means a hook with a latch to prevent slings or load 
from accidentally slipping off the hook.
    (30) Side loading is a load applied at an angle to the vertical 
plane of the boom.
    (31) The sill is a member connecting the foot block and stiffleg or 
a member connecting the lower ends of a double member mast.
    (32) A standby derrick is a derrick not in regular service which is 
used occasionally or intermittently as required.
    (33) Stiffleg means a rigid member supporting the mast at the head.
    (34) Swing means rotation of the mast and/or boom for movements of 
loads in a horizontal direction about the axis of rotation.
    (b) General requirements--(1) Application. This section applies to 
guy, stiffleg, basket, breast, gin pole, Chicago boom and A-frame 
derricks of the stationary type, capable of handling loads at variable 
reaches and powered by hoists through systems of rope reeving, used to 
perform lifting hook work, single or multiple line bucket work, grab, 
grapple, and magnet work. Derricks may be permanently installed for 
temporary use as in construction work. The requirements of this section 
also apply to any modification of these types which retain their 
fundamental features, except for floating derricks.
    (2) New and existing equipment. All new derricks constructed and 
installed on or after August 31, 1971, shall meet the design 
specifications of the American National Standard Safety Code for 
Derricks, ANSI B30.6-1969, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (3) Designated personnel. Only designated personnel shall be 
permitted to operate a derrick covered by this section.
    (c) Load ratings--(1) Rated load marking. For permanently installed 
derricks with fixed lengths of boom, guy, and mast, a substantial, 
durable, and clearly legible rating chart shall be provided with each 
derrick and securely affixed where it is visible to personnel 
responsible for the safe operation of the equipment. The chart shall 
include the following data:
    (i) Manufacturer's approved load ratings at corresponding ranges of 
boom angle or operating radii.
    (ii) Specific lengths of components on which the load ratings are 
based.
    (iii) Required parts for hoist reeving. Size and construction of 
rope may be shown either on the rating chart or in the operating manual.
    (2) Nonpermanent installations. For nonpermanent installations, the 
manufacturer shall provide sufficient information from which capacity 
charts can be prepared for the particular installation. The capacity 
charts shall be located at the derricks or the jobsite office.
    (d) Inspection--(1) Inspection classification. (i) Prior to initial 
use all new and altered derricks shall be inspected to insure compliance 
with the provisions of this section.
    (ii) Inspection procedure for derricks in regular service is divided 
into two general classifications based upon the intervals at which 
inspection should be performed. The intervals in turn are dependent upon 
the nature of the critical components of the derrick and the degree of 
their exposure to wear, deterioration, or malfunction. The two general 
classifications are herein designated as frequent and periodic with 
respective intervals between inspections as defined below:
    (a) Frequent inspection--Daily to monthly intervals.
    (b) Periodic inspection--1- to 12-month intervals, or as specified 
by the manufacturer.
    (2) Frequent inspection. Items such as the following shall be 
inspected for defects at intervals as defined in paragraph (d)(1)(ii)(a) 
of this section or as specifically indicated, including observation 
during operation for any defects which might appear between regular 
inspections. Deficiencies shall be carefully examined for any safety 
hazard:
    (i) All control mechanisms: Inspect daily for adjustment, wear, and 
lubrication.
    (ii) All chords and lacing: Inspect daily, visually.
    (iii) Tension in guys: Daily.
    (iv) Plumb of the mast.

[[Page 561]]

    (v) Deterioration or leakage in air or hydraulic systems: Daily.
    (vi) Derrick hooks for deformations or cracks; for hooks with cracks 
or having more than 15 percent in excess of normal throat opening or 
more than 10 deg. twist from the plane of the unbent hook, refer to 
paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (vii) Rope reeving; visual inspection for noncompliance with derrick 
manufacturer's recommendations.
    (viii) Hoist brakes, clutches, and operating levers: check daily for 
proper functioning before beginning operations.
    (ix) Electrical apparatus for malfunctioning, signs of excessive 
deterioration, dirt, and moisture accumulation.
    (3) Periodic inspection. (i) Complete inspections of the derrick 
shall be performed at intervals as generally defined in paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii)(b) of this section depending upon its activity, severity of 
service, and environment, or as specifically indicated below. These 
inspections shall include the requirements of paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section and in addition, items such as the following. Deficiencies shall 
be carefully examined and a determination made as to whether they 
constitute a safety hazard:
    (a) Structural members for deformations, cracks, and corrosion.
    (b) Bolts or rivets for tightness.
    (c) Parts such as pins, bearings, shafts, gears, sheaves, drums, 
rollers, locking and clamping devices, for wear, cracks, and distortion.
    (d) Gudgeon pin for cracks, wear, and distortion each time the 
derrick is to be erected.
    (e) Powerplants for proper performance and compliance with 
applicable safety requirements.
    (f) Hooks.
    (ii) Foundation or supports shall be inspected for continued ability 
to sustain the imposed loads.
    (4) Derricks not in regular use. (i) A derrick which has been idle 
for a period of 1 month or more, but less than 6 months, shall be given 
an inspection conforming with requirements of paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section and paragraph (g)(3) of this section before placing in service.
    (ii) A derrick which has been idle for a period of over 6 months 
shall be given a complete inspection conforming with requirements of 
paragraphs (d) (2) and (3) of this section and paragraph (g)(3) of this 
section before placing in service.
    (iii) Standby derricks shall be inspected at least semiannually in 
accordance with requirements of paragraph (d)(2) of this section and 
paragraph (g)(3) of this section.
    (e) Testing--(1) Operational tests. Prior to initial use all new and 
altered derricks shall be tested to insure compliance with this section 
including the following functions:
    (i) Load hoisting and lowering.
    (ii) Boom up and down.
    (iii) Swing.
    (iv) Operation of clutches and brakes of hoist.
    (2) Anchorages. All anchorages shall be approved by the appointed 
person. Rock and hairpin anchorages may require special testing.
    (f) Maintenance--(1) Preventive maintenance. A preventive 
maintenance program based on the derrick manufacturer's recommendations 
shall be established.
    (2) Maintenance procedure. (i) Before adjustments and repairs are 
started on a derrick the following precautions shall be taken:
    (a) The derrick to be repaired shall be arranged so it will cause 
the least interference with other equipment and operations in the area.
    (b) All hoist drum dogs shall be engaged.
    (c) The main or emergency switch shall be locked in the open 
position, if an electric hoist is used.
    (d) Warning or out of order signs shall be placed on the derrick and 
hoist.
    (e) The repairs of booms of derricks shall either be made when the 
booms are lowered and adequately supported or safely tied off.
    (f) A good communication system shall be set up between the hoist 
operator and the appointed individual in charge of derrick operations 
before any work on the equipment is started.
    (ii) After adjustments and repairs have been made the derrick shall 
not be operated until all guards have been

[[Page 562]]

reinstalled, safety devices reactivated, and maintenance equipment 
removed.
    (3) Adjustments and repairs. (i) Any unsafe conditions disclosed by 
inspection shall be corrected before operation of the derrick is 
resumed.
    (ii) Adjustments shall be maintained to assure correct functioning 
of components.
    (iii) Repairs or replacements shall be provided promptly as needed 
for safe operation. The following are examples of conditions requiring 
prompt repair or replacement:
    (a) Hooks showing defects described in paragraph (d)(2)(vi) of this 
section shall be discarded.
    (b) All critical parts which are cracked, broken, bent, or 
excessively worn.
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) All replacement and repaired parts shall have at least the 
original safety factor.
    (g) Rope inspection--(1) Running ropes. A thorough inspection of all 
ropes in use shall be made at least once a month and a certification 
record which includes the date of inspection, the signature of the 
person who performed the inspection, and an identifier for the ropes 
which were inspected shall be prepared and kept on file where readily 
available. Any deterioration, resulting in appreciable loss of original 
strength shall be carefully observed and determination made as to 
whether further use of the rope would constitute a safety hazard. Some 
of the conditions that could result in an appreciable loss of strength 
are the following:
    (i) Reduction of rope diameter below nominal diameter due to loss of 
core support, internal or external corrosion, or wear of outside wires.
    (ii) A number of broken outside wires and the degree of distribution 
or concentration of such broken wires.
    (iii) Worn outside wires.
    (iv) Corroded or broken wires at end connections.
    (v) Corroded, cracked, bent, worn, or improperly applied end 
connections.
    (vi) Severe kinking, crushing, cutting, or unstranding.
    (2) Limited travel ropes. Heavy wear and/or broken wires may occur 
in sections in contact with equalizer sheaves or other sheaves where 
rope travel is limited, or with saddles. Particular care shall be taken 
to inspect ropes at these locations.
    (3) Idle ropes. All rope which has been idle for a period of a month 
or more due to shutdown or storage of a derrick on which it is installed 
shall be given a thorough inspection before it is used. This inspection 
shall be for all types of deterioration. A certification record shall be 
prepared and kept readily available which includes the date of 
inspection, the signature of the person who performed the inspection, 
and an identifier for the ropes which were inspected.
    (4) Nonrotating ropes. Particular care shall be taken in the 
inspection of nonrotating rope.
    (h) Operations of derricks. Derrick operations shall be directed 
only by the individual specifically designated for that purpose.
    (i) Handling the load--(1) Size of load. (i) No derrick shall be 
loaded beyond the rated load.
    (ii) When loads approach the maximum rating of the derrick, it shall 
be ascertained that the weight of the load has been determined within 
plus or minus 10 percent before it is lifted.
    (2) Attaching the load. (i) The hoist rope shall not be wrapped 
around the load.
    (ii) The load shall be attached to the hook by means of slings or 
other suitable devices.
    (3) Moving the load. (i) The load shall be well secured and properly 
balanced in the sling or lifting device before it is lifted more than a 
few inches.
    (ii) Before starting to hoist, the following conditions shall be 
noted:
    (a) Hoist rope shall not be kinked.
    (b) Multiple part lines shall not be twisted around each other.
    (c) The hook shall be brought over the load in such a manner as to 
prevent swinging.
    (iii) During hoisting, care shall be taken that:
    (a) There is no sudden acceleration or deceleration of the moving 
load.
    (b) Load does not contact any obstructions.
    (iv) A derrick shall not be used for side loading except when 
specifically authorized by a responsible person who

[[Page 563]]

has determined that the various structural components will not be 
overstressed.
    (v) No hoisting, lowering, or swinging shall be done while anyone is 
on the load or hook.
    (vi) The operator should avoid carrying loads over people.
    (vii) The operator shall test the brakes each time a load 
approaching the rated load is handled by raising it a few inches and 
applying the brakes.
    (viii) Neither the load nor boom shall be lowered below the point 
where less than two full wraps of rope remain on their respective drums.
    (ix) When rotating a derrick, sudden starts and stops shall be 
avoided. Rotational speed shall be such that the load does not swing out 
beyond the radius at which it can be controlled.
    (x) Boom and hoisting rope systems shall not be twisted.
    (4) Holding the load. (i) The operator shall not be allowed to leave 
his position at the controls while the load is suspended.
    (ii) People should not be permitted to stand or pass under a load on 
the hook.
    (iii) If the load must remain suspended for any considerable length 
of time, a dog, or pawl and ratchet, or other equivalent means, rather 
than the brake alone, shall be used to hold the load.
    (5) Use of winch heads. (i) Ropes shall not be handled on a winch 
head without the knowledge of the operator.
    (ii) While a winch head is being used, the operator shall be within 
convenient reach of the power unit control lever.
    (6) Securing boom. Dogs, pawls, or other positive holding mechanism 
on the hoist shall be engaged. When not in use, the derrick boom shall:
    (i) Be laid down;
    (ii) Be secured to a stationary member, as nearly under the head as 
possible, by attachment of a sling to the load block; or
    (iii) Be hoisted to a vertical position and secured to the mast.
    (j) Other requirements--(1) Guards. (i) Exposed moving parts, such 
as gears, ropes, setscrews, projecting keys, chains, chain sprockets, 
and reciprocating components, which constitute a hazard under normal 
operating conditions shall be guarded.
    (ii) Guards shall be securely fastened.
    (iii) Each guard shall be capable of supporting without permanent 
distortion, the weight of a 200-pound person unless the guard is located 
where it is impossible for a person to step on it.
    (2) Hooks. (i) Hooks shall meet the manufacturer's recommendations 
and shall not be overloaded.
    (ii) Safety latch type hooks shall be used wherever possible.
    (3) Fire extinguishers. (i) A carbon dioxide, dry chemical, or 
equivalent fire extinguisher shall be kept in the immediate vicinity of 
the derrick.
    (ii) Operating and maintenance personnel shall be familiar with the 
use and care of the fire extinguishers provided.
    (4) Refueling. (i) Refueling with portable containers shall be done 
with approved safety type containers equipped with automatic closing cap 
and flame arrester. Refer to Sec. 1910.155(c)(3) for definition of 
Approved.
    (ii) Machines shall not be refueled with the engine running.
    (5) Operations near overhead lines. For operations near overhead 
electric lines, see Sec. 1910.333(c)(3).
    (6) Cab or operating enclosure. (i) Necessary clothing and personal 
belongings shall be stored in such a manner as to not interfere with 
access or operation.
    (ii) Tools, oilcans, waste, extra fuses, and other necessary 
articles shall be stored in the toolbox, and shall not be permitted to 
lie loose in or about the cab or operating enclosure.
[37 FR 22102, Oct. 18, 1972, as amended at 38 FR 14373, June 1, 1973; 43 
FR 49750, Oct. 24, 1978; 49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 51 FR 34561, Sept. 
29, 1986; 53 FR 12122, Apr. 12, 1988; 55 FR 32015, Aug. 6, 1990; 61 FR 
9240, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.183  Helicopters.

    (a) Helicopter regulations. Helicopter cranes shall be expected to 
comply with any applicable regulations of the Federal Aviation 
Administration.
    (b) Briefing. Prior to each day's operation a briefing shall be 
conducted. This briefing shall set forth the plan of operation for the 
pilot and ground personnel.
    (c) Slings and tag lines. Loads shall be properly slung. Tag lines 
shall be of a length that will not permit their being

[[Page 564]]

drawn up into the rotors. Pressed sleeve, swedged eyes, or equivalent 
means shall be used for all freely suspended loads to prevent hand 
splices from spinning open or cable clamps from loosening.
    (d) Cargo hooks. All electrically operated cargo hooks shall have 
the electrical activating device so designed and installed as to prevent 
inadvertent operation. In addition, these cargo hooks shall be equipped 
with an emergency mechanical control for releasing the load. The 
employer shall ensure that the hooks are tested prior to each day's 
operation by a competent person to determine that the release functions 
properly, both electrically and mechanically.
    (e) Personal protective equipment. (1) Personal protective equipment 
shall be provided and the employer shall ensure its use by employees 
receiving the load. Personal protective equipment shall consist of 
complete eye protection and hardhats secured by chinstraps.
    (2) Loose-fitting clothing likely to flap in rotor downwash, and 
thus be snagged on the hoist line, may not be worn.
    (f) Loose gear and objects. The employer shall take all necessary 
precautions to protect employees from flying objects in the rotor 
downwash. All loose gear within 100 feet of the place of lifting the 
load or depositing the load, or within all other areas susceptible to 
rotor downwash, shall be secured or removed.
    (g) Housekeeping. Good housekeeping shall be maintained in all 
helicopter loading and unloading areas.
    (h) Load safety. The size and weight of loads, and the manner in 
which loads are connected to the helicopter shall be checked. A lift may 
not be made if the helicopter operator believes the lift cannot be made 
safely.
    (i) Hooking and unhooking loads. When employees perform work under 
hovering craft, a safe means of access shall be provided for employees 
to reach the hoist line hook and engage or disengage cargo slings. 
Employees may not be permitted to perform work under hovering craft 
except when necessary to hook or unhook loads.
    (j) Static charge. Static charge on the suspended load shall be 
dissipated with a grounding device before ground personnel touch the 
suspended load, unless protective rubber gloves are being worn by all 
ground personnel who may be required to touch the suspended load.
    (k) Weight limitation. The weight of an external load shall not 
exceed the helicopter manufacturer's rating.
    (l) Ground lines. Hoist wires or other gear, except for pulling 
lines or conductors that are allowed to ``pay out'' from a container or 
roll off a reel, shall not be attached to any fixed ground structure, or 
allowed to foul on any fixed structure.
    (m) Visibility. Ground personnel shall be instructed and the 
employer shall ensure that when visibility is reduced by dust or other 
conditions, they shall exercise special caution to keep clear of main 
and stabilizing rotors. Precautions shall also be taken by the employer 
to eliminate, as far as practical, the dust or other conditions reducing 
the visibility.
    (n) Signal systems. The employer shall instruct the aircrew and 
ground personnel on the signal systems to be used and shall review the 
system with the employees in advance of hoisting the load. This applies 
to both radio and hand signal systems. Hand signals, where used, shall 
be as shown in Figure N-1.
    (o) Approach distance. No employee shall be permitted to approach 
within 50 feet of the helicopter when the rotor blades are turning, 
unless his work duties require his presence in that area.
    (p) Approaching helicopter. The employer shall instruct employees, 
and shall ensure, that whenever approaching or leaving a helicopter 
which has its blades rotating, all employees shall remain in full view 
of the pilot and keep in a crouched position. No employee shall be 
permitted to work in the area from the cockpit or cabin rearward while 
blades are rotating, unless authorized by the helicopter operator to 
work there.
    (q) Personnel. Sufficient ground personnel shall be provided to 
ensure that helicopter loading and unloading operations can be performed 
safely.

[[Page 565]]

    (r) Communications. There shall be constant reliable communication 
between the pilot and a designated employee of the ground crew who acts 
as a signalman during the period of loading and unloading. The signalman 
shall be clearly distinguishable from other ground personnel.
    (s) Fires. Open fires shall not be permitted in areas where they 
could be spread by the rotor downwash.

[[Page 566]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.044

[40 FR 13440, Mar. 26, 1975]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.183 
was amended by removing and reserving paragraph (a), effective Aug. 17, 
1998.

[[Page 567]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.184  Slings.

    (a) Scope. This section applies to slings used in conjunction with 
other material handling equipment for the movement of material by 
hoisting, in employments covered by this part. The types of slings 
covered are those made from alloy steel chain, wire rope, metal mesh, 
natural or synthetic fiber rope (conventional three strand 
construction), and synthetic web (nylon, polyester, and polypropylene).
    (b) Definitions. Angle of loading is the inclination of a leg or 
branch of a sling measured from the horizontal or vertical plane as 
shown in Fig. N-184-5; provided that an angle of loading of five degrees 
or less from the vertical may be considered a vertical angle of loading.
    Basket hitch is a sling configuration whereby the sling is passed 
under the load and has both ends, end attachments, eyes or handles on 
the hook or a single master link.
    Braided wire rope is a wire rope formed by plaiting component wire 
ropes.
    Bridle wire rope sling is a sling composed of multiple wire rope 
legs with the top ends gathered in a fitting that goes over the lifting 
hook.
    Cable laid endless sling-mechanical joint is a wire rope sling made 
endless by joining the ends of a single length of cable laid rope with 
one or more metallic fittings.
    Cable laid grommet-hand tucked is an endless wire rope sling made 
from one length of rope wrapped six times around a core formed by hand 
tucking the ends of the rope inside the six wraps.
    Cable laid rope is a wire rope composed of six wire ropes wrapped 
around a fiber or wire rope core.
    Cable laid rope sling-mechanical joint is a wire rope sling made 
from a cable laid rope with eyes fabricated by pressing or swaging one 
or more metal sleeves over the rope junction.
    Choker hitch is a sling configuration with one end of the sling 
passing under the load and through an end attachment, handle or eye on 
the other end of the sling.
    Coating is an elastomer or other suitable material applied to a 
sling or to a sling component to impart desirable properties.
    Cross rod is a wire used to join spirals of metal mesh to form a 
complete fabric. (See Fig. N-184-2.)
    Designated means selected or assigned by the employer or the 
employer's representative as being qualified to perform specific duties.
    Equivalent entity is a person or organization (including an 
employer) which, by possession of equipment, technical knowledge and 
skills, can perform with equal competence the same repairs and tests as 
the person or organization with which it is equated.
    Fabric (metal mesh) is the flexible portion of a metal mesh sling 
consisting of a series of transverse coils and cross rods.
    Female handle (choker) is a handle with a handle eye and a slot of 
such dimension as to permit passage of a male handle thereby allowing 
the use of a metal mesh sling in a choker hitch. (See Fig. N-184-1.)
    Handle is a terminal fitting to which metal mesh fabric is attached. 
(See Fig. N-184-1.)
    Handle eye is an opening in a handle of a metal mesh sling shaped to 
accept a hook, shackle or other lifting device. (See Fig. N-184-1.)
    Hitch is a sling configuration whereby the sling is fastened to an 
object or load, either directly to it or around it.
    Link is a single ring of a chain.
    Male handle (triangle) is a handle with a handle eye.
    Master coupling link is an alloy steel welded coupling link used as 
an intermediate link to join alloy steel chain to master links. (See 
Fig. N-184-3.)
    Master link or gathering ring is a forged or welded steel link used 
to support all members (legs) of an alloy steel chain sling or wire rope 
sling. (See Fig. N-184-3.)
    Mechanical coupling link is a nonwelded, mechanically closed steel 
link used to attach master links, hooks, etc., to alloy steel chain.

[[Page 568]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.045



[[Page 569]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.046



[[Page 570]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.047


    Proof load is the load applied in performance of a proof test.
    Proof test is a nondestructive tension test performed by the sling 
manufacturer or an equivalent entity to verify construction and 
workmanship of a sling.
    Rated capacity or working load limit is the maximum working load 
permitted by the provisions of this section.
    Reach is the effective length of an alloy steel chain sling measured 
from the top bearing surface of the upper terminal component to the 
bottom bearing surface of the lower terminal component.
    Selvage edge is the finished edge of synthetic webbing designed to 
prevent unraveling.
    Sling is an assembly which connects the load to the material 
handling equipment.
    Sling manufacturer is a person or organization that assembles sling 
components into their final form for sale to users.
    Spiral is a single transverse coil that is the basic element from 
which metal mesh is fabricated. (See Fig. N-184-2.)
    Strand laid endless sling-mechanical joint is a wire rope sling made 
endless from one length of rope with the ends joined by one or more 
metallic fittings.
    Strand laid grommet-hand tucked is an endless wire rope sling made 
from one length of strand wrapped six times around a core formed by hand 
tucking the ends of the strand inside the six wraps.
    Strand laid rope is a wire rope made with strands (usually six or 
eight) wrapped around a fiber core, wire strand core, or independent 
wire rope core (IWRC).
    Vertical hitch is a method of supporting a load by a single, 
vertical part or leg of the sling. (See Fig. N-184-4.)
    (c) Safe operating practices. Whenever any sling is used, the 
following practices shall be observed:
    (1) Slings that are damaged or defective shall not be used.

[[Page 571]]

    (2) Slings shall not be shortened with knots or bolts or other 
makeshift devices.
    (3) Sling legs shall not be kinked.
    (4) Slings shall not be loaded in excess of their rated capacities.
    (5) Slings used in a basket hitch shall have the loads balanced to 
prevent slippage.
    (6) Slings shall be securely attached to their loads.
    (7) Slings shall be padded or protected from the sharp edges of 
their loads.
    (8) Suspended loads shall be kept clear of all obstructions.
    (9) All employees shall be kept clear of loads about to be lifted 
and of suspended loads.
    (10) Hands or fingers shall not be placed between the sling and its 
load while the sling is being tightened around the load.
    (11) Shock loading is prohibited.
    (12) A sling shall not be pulled from under a load when the load is 
resting on the sling.
    (d) Inspections. Each day before being used, the sling and all 
fastenings and attachments shall be inspected for damage or defects by a 
competent person designated by the employer. Additional inspections 
shall be performed during sling use, where service conditions warrant. 
Damaged or defective slings shall be immediately removed from service.
    (e) Alloy steel chain slings. (1) Sling identification. Alloy steel 
chain slings shall have permanently affixed durable identification 
stating size, grade, rated capacity, and reach.
    (2) Attachments. (i) Hooks, rings, oblong links, pear shaped links, 
welded or mechanical coupling links or other attachments shall have a 
rated capacity at least equal to that of the alloy steel chain with 
which they are used or the sling shall not be used in excess of the 
rated capacity of the weakest component.
    (ii) Makeshift links or fasteners formed from bolts or rods, or 
other such attachments, shall not be used.
    (3) Inspections. (i) In addition to the inspection required by 
paragraph (d) of this section, a thorough periodic inspection of alloy 
steel chain slings in use shall be made on a regular basis, to be 
determined on the basis of (A) frequency of sling use; (B) severity of 
service conditions; (C) nature of lifts being made; and (D) experience 
gained on the service life of slings used in similar circumstances. Such 
inspections shall in no event be at intervals greater than once every 12 
months.
    (ii) The employer shall make and maintain a record of the most 
recent month in which each alloy steel chain sling was thoroughly 
inspected, and shall make such record available for examination.
    (iii) The thorough inspection of alloy steel chain slings shall be 
performed by a competent person designated by the employer, and shall 
include a thorough inspection for wear, defective welds, deformation and 
increase in length. Where such defects or deterioration are present, the 
sling shall be immediately removed from service.
    (4) Proof testing. The employer shall ensure that before use, each 
new, repaired, or reconditioned alloy steel chain sling, including all 
welded components in the sling assembly, shall be proof tested by the 
sling manufacturer or equivalent entity, in accordance with paragraph 
5.2 of the American Society of Testing and Materials Specification A391-
65, which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6 (ANSI 
G61.1- 1968). The employer shall retain a certificate of the proof test 
and shall make it available for examination.
    (5) Sling use. Alloy steel chain slings shall not be used with loads 
in excess of the rated capacities prescribed in Table N-184-1. Slings 
not included in this table shall be used only in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recommendations.
    (6) Safe operating temperatures. Alloy steel chain slings shall be 
permanently removed from service if they are heated above 1000 deg. F. 
When exposed to service temperatures in excess of 600 deg. F, maximum 
working load limits permitted in Table N-184-1 shall be reduced in 
accordance with the chain or sling manufacturer's recommendations.
    (7) Repairing and reconditioning alloy steel chain slings. (i) Worn 
or damaged alloy steel chain slings or attachments shall not be used 
until repaired. When

[[Page 572]]

welding or heat testing is performed, slings shall not be used unless 
repaired, reconditioned and proof tested by the sling manufacturer or an 
equivalent entity.
    (ii) Mechanical coupling links or low carbon steel repair links 
shall not be used to repair broken lengths of chain.
    (8) Effects of wear. If the chain size at any point of any link is 
less than that stated in Table N-184-2, the sling shall be removed from 
service.
    (9) Deformed attachments. (i) Alloy steel chain slings with cracked 
or deformed master links, coupling links or other components shall be 
removed from service.

                Table N-184-1.--Rated Capacity (Working Load Limit), for Alloy Steel Chain Slings
                                   Rated Capacity (Working Load Limit), Pounds
                                    [Horizontal angles shown in parentheses]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Double sling vertical angle (1)   Triple and quadruple sling (3)
                                 Single branch ---------------------------------        vertical angle (1)
      Chain size, inches        sling--90 deg.                                  --------------------------------
                                    loading      30 deg.    45 deg.    60 deg.    30 deg.    45 deg.    60 deg.
                                                (60 deg.)  (45 deg.)  (30 deg.)  (60 deg.)  (45 deg.)  (30 deg.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.........................        3,250         5,650      4,550      3,250      8,400      6,800      4,900
\3/8\.........................        6,600        11,400      9,300      6,600     17,000     14,000      9,900
\1/2\.........................       11,250        19,500     15,900     11,250     29,000     24,000     17,000
\5/8\.........................       16,500        28,500     23,300     16,500     43,000     35,000     24,500
\3/4\.........................       23,000        39,800     32,500     23,000     59,500     48,500     34,500
\7/8\.........................       28,750        49,800     40,600     28,750     74,500     61,000     43,000
1.............................       38,750        67,100      5,800     38,750    101,000     82,000     58,000
1\1/8\........................       44,500        77,000     63,000     44,500    115,500     94,500     66,500
1\1/4\........................       57,500        99,500     61,000     57,500    149,000    121,500     86,000
1\3/8\........................       67,000       116,000     94,000     67,000    174,000    141,000    100,500
1\1/2\........................       80,000       138,000    112,900     80,000    207,000    169,000    119,500
1\3/4\........................      100,000       172,000    140,000    100,000    258,000    210,000    150,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Rating of multileg slings adjusted for angle of loading measured as the included angle between the inclined
  leg and the vertical as shown in Figure N-184-5.
(2) Rating of multileg slings adjusted for angle of loading between the inclined leg and the horizontal plane of
  the load, as shown in Figure N-184-5.
(3) Quadruple sling rating is same as triple sling because normal lifting practice may not distribute load
  uniformly to all 4 legs.


    Table N-184-2.--Minimum Allowable Chain Size At Any Point of Link
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Minimum allowable chain size,
         Chain size, inches                         inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\..............................                  \13/64\
\3/8\..............................                  \19/64\
\1/2\..............................                  \25/64\
\5/8\..............................                  \31/64\
\3/4\..............................                  \19/32\
\7/8\..............................                  4\5/64\
1..................................                  \13/16\
1\1/8\.............................                  \29/32\
1\1/4\.............................                        1
1\3/8\.............................                  1\3/32\
1\1/2\.............................                  1\3/16\
1\3/4\.............................                 1\13/32\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Slings shall be removed from service if hooks are cracked, have 
been opened more than 15 percent of the normal throat opening measured 
at the narrowest point or twisted more than 10 degrees from the plane of 
the unbent hook.
    (f) Wire rope slings. (1) Sling use. Wire rope slings shall not be 
used with loads in excess of the rated capacities shown in Tables N-184-
3 through N-184-14. Slings not included in these tables shall be used 
only in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
    (2) Minimum sling lengths. (i) Cable laid and 6 x 19 and 6 x 37 
slings shall have a minimum clear length of wire rope 10 times the 
component rope diameter between splices, sleeves or end fittings.
    (ii) Braided slings shall have a minimum clear length of wire rope 
40 times the component rope diameter between the loops or end fittings.
    (iii) Cable laid grommets, strand laid grommets and endless slings 
shall have a minimum circumferential length of 96 times their body 
diameter.
    (3) Safe operating temperatures. Fiber core wire rope slings of all 
grades shall be permanently removed from service if they are exposed to 
temperatures in excess of 200 deg.F. When nonfiber core wire rope slings 
of any grade are used at temperatures above 400 deg.F or below minus 
60 deg.F, recommendations of the sling manufacturer regarding use at 
that temperature shall be followed.

[[Page 573]]

    (4) End attachments. (i) Welding of end attachments, except covers 
to thimbles, shall be performed prior to the assembly of the sling.
    (ii) All welded end attachments shall not be used unless proof 
tested by the manufacturer or equivalent entity at twice their rated 
capacity prior to initial use. The employer shall retain a certificate 
of the proof test, and make it available for examination.

                             Table N-184-3.--Rated Capacities for Single Leg Slings
              6 x 19 and 6 x 37 Classification Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope With Fiber Core (FC)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Rope                                      Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Vertical                       Choker                  Vertical basket \1\
    Dia       Constr  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (inches)                  HT        MS         S        HT        MS         S        HT        MS         S
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.....    6 x 19       0.49       0.51      0.55      0.37      0.38      0.41      0.99       1.0       1.1
\5/16\....    6 x 19       0.76       0.79      0.85      0.57      0.59      0.64       1.5       1.6       1.7
\3/8\.....    6 x 19        1.1        1.1       1.2      0.80      0.85      0.91       2.1       2.2       2.4
\7/16\....    6 x 19        1.4        1.5       1.6       1.1       1.1       1.2       2.9       3.0       3.3
\1/2\.....    6 x 19        1.8        2.0       2.1       1.4       1.5      12.6       3.7       3.9       4.3
\9/16\....    6 x 19        2.3        2.5       2.7       1.7       1.9       2.0       4.6       5.0       5.4
\5/8\.....    6 x 19        2.8        3.1       3.3       2.1       2.3       2.5       5.6       6.2       6.7
\3/4\.....    6 x 19        3.9        4.4       4.8       2.9       3.3       3.6       7.8       8.8       9.5
\7/8\.....    6 x 19        5.1        5.9       6.4       3.9       4.5       4.8      10.0      12.0      13.0
1.........    6 x 19        6.7        7.7       8.4       5.0       5.8       6.3      13.0      15.0      17.0
1\1/8\....    6 x 19        8.4        9.5      10.0       6.3       7.1       7.9      17.0      19.0      21.0
1\1/4\....    6 x 37        9.8       11.0      12.0       7.4       8.3       9.2      20.0      22.0      25.0
1\3/8\....    6 x 37       12.0       13.0      15.0       8.9      10.0      11.0      24.0      27.0      30.0
1\1/2\....    6 x 37       14.0       16.0      15.0      10.0      12.0      13.0      28.0      32.0      35.0
1\5/8\....    6 x 37       16.0       18.0      21.0      12.0      14.0      15.0      33.0      27.0      41.0
1\3/4\....    6 x 37       19.0       21.0      24.0      14.0      16.0      18.0      38.0      43.0      48.0
2.........    6 x 37       25.0       28.0      31.0      18.0      21.0      23.0      49.0      55.0      62.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HT=Hand Tucked Splice and Hidden Tuck Splice. For hidden tuck splice (IWRC) use values in HT columns.
MS=Mechanical Splice.
S=Swaged or Zinc Poured Socket.
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d ratio for HT slings is 10 or greater, and for MS and S slings is 20 or
  greater where: D=Diameter of curvature around which the body of the sling is bent; d=Diameter of rope.


                             Table N-184-4.--Rated Capacities for Single Leg Slings
     6 x 19 and 6 x 37 Classification Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope With Independent Wire Rope Core (IWRC)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Rope                                      Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Vertical                       Choker                  Vertical basket \1\
    Dia       Constr  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (inches)                  HT        MS         S        HT        MS         S        HT        MS         S
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.....    6 x 19       0.53       0.56      0.59      0.40      0.42      0.44       1.0       1.1       1.2
\5/16\....    6 x 19       0.81       0.87      0.92      0.61      0.65      0.69       1.6       1.7       1.8
\3/8\.....    6 x 19        1.1        1.2       1.3      0.86      0.93      0.98       2.3       2.5       2.6
\7/16\....    6 x 19        1.5        1.7       1.8       1.2       1.3       1.3       3.1       3.4       3.5
\1/2\.....    6 x 19        2.0        2.2       2.3       1.5       1.6       1.7       3.9       4.4       4.6
\9/16\....    6 x 19        2.5        2.7       2.9       1.8       2.1       2.2       4.9       5.5       5.8
\5/8\.....    6 x 19        3.0        3.4       3.6       2.2       2.5       2.7       6.0       6.8       7.2
\3/4\.....    6 x 19        4.2        4.9       5.1       3.1       3.6       3.8       8.4       9.7      10.0
\7/8\.....    6 x 19        5.5        6.6       6.9       4.1       4.9       5.2      11.0      13.0      14.0
1.........    6 x 19        7.2        8.5       9.0       5.4       6.4       6.7      14.0      17.0      18.0
1\1/8\....    6 x 19        9.0       10.0      11.0       6.8       7.8       8.5      18.0      21.0      23.0
1\1/4\....    6 x 37       10.0       12.0      13.0       7.9       9.2       9.9      21.0      24.0      26.0
1\3/8\....    6 x 37       13.0       15.0      16.0       9.6      11.0      12.0      25.0      29.0      32.0
1\1/2\....    6 x 37       15.0       17.0      19.0      11.0      13.0      14.0      30.0      35.0      38.0
1\5/8\....    6 x 37       18.0       20.0      22.0      13.0      15.0      17.0      35.0      41.0      44.0
1\3/4\....    6 x 37       20.0       24.0      26.0      15.0      18.0      19.0      41.0      47.0      51.0
2.........    6 x 37       26.0       30.0      33.0      20.0      23.0      25.0      53.0      61.0      66.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HT=Hand Tucked Splice. For hidden tuck splice (IWRC) use Table I values in HT column.
MS=Mechanical Splice.
S=Swaged or Zinc Poured Socket.
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d ratio for HT slings is 10 or greater, and for MS and S Slings is 20 or
  greater where: D=Diameter of curvature around which the body of the sling is bent; d=Diameter of rope.

[[Page 574]]



                             Table N-184-5.--Rated Capacities for Single Leg Slings
                                     Cable Laid Rope--Mechanical Splice Only
                          7 x 7 x 7&7 x 19 Constructions Galvanized Aircraft Grade Rope
                           7 x 6 x 19 IWRC Construction Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Rope                                       Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Vertical
               Dia (inches)                              Constr                Vertical     Choker    basket \1\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.....................................  7 x 7 x 7.......................        0.50        0.38         1.0
\3/8\.....................................  7 x 7 x 7.......................         1.1        0.81         2.0
\1/2\.....................................  7 x 7 x 7.......................         1.8         1.4         3.7
\5/8\.....................................  7 x 7 x 7.......................         2.8         2.1         5.5
\3/4\.....................................  7 x 7 x 7.......................         3.8         2.9         7.6
\5/8\.....................................  7 x 7 x 19......................         2.9         2.2         5.8
\3/4\.....................................  7 x 7 x 19......................         4.1         3.0         8.1
\7/8\.....................................  7 x 7 x 19......................         5.4         4.0        11.0
1.........................................  7 x 7 x 19......................         6.9         5.1        14.0
1\1/8\....................................  7 x 7 x 19......................         8.2         6.2        16.0
1\1/4\....................................  7 x 7 x 19......................         9.9         7.4        20.0
\3/4\.....................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................         3.8         2.8         7.6
\7/8\.....................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................         5.0         3.8        10.0
1.........................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................         6.4         4.8        13.0
1\1/8\....................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................         7.7         5.8        15.0
1\1/4\....................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................         9.2         6.9        18.0
1\5/16\...................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................        10.0         7.5        20.0
1\3/8\....................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................        11.0         8.2        22.0
1\1/2\....................................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC.................        13.0         9.6        26.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d ratio is 10 or greater where: D=Diameter of curvature around which the
  body of the sling is bent; d=Diameter of rope.


                             Table N-184-6.--Rated Capacities for Single Leg Slings
                                         8-Part and 6-Part Braided Rope
                          6 x 7 and 6 x 19 Construction Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
                                7 x 7 Construction Galvanized Aircraft Grade Rope
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Component ropes                                 Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Vertical           Choker       Basket, vertical
                                                           ------------------------------------  to 30 deg. \1\
                Diameter (inches)                   Constr                                     -----------------
                                                             8-Part   6-Part   8-Part   6-Part   8-Part   6-Part
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3/32\...........................................    6 x 7     0.42     0.32     0.32     0.24     0.74     0.55
\1/8\............................................    6 x 7     0.75     0.57     0.57     0.42      1.3     0.98
\3/16\...........................................    6 x 7      1.7      1.3      1.3     0.94      2.9      2.2
\3/32\...........................................    7 x 7     0.51     0.39     0.38     0.29     0.89     0.67
\1/8\............................................    7 x 7     0.95      0.7     0.71     0.53      1.6      1.2
\3/16\...........................................    7 x 7      2.1      1.5      1.5      1.2      3.6      2.7
\3/16\...........................................   6 x 19      1.7      1.3      1.3     0.98      3.0      2.2
\1/4\............................................   6 x 19      3.1      2.3      2.3      1.7      5.3      4.0
\5/16\...........................................   6 x 19      4.8      3.6      3.6      2.7      8.3      6.2
\3/8\............................................   6 x 19      6.8      5.1      5.1      3.8     12.0      8.9
\7/16\...........................................   6 x 19      9.3      6.9      6.9      5.2     16.0     12.0
\1/2\............................................   6 x 19     12.0      9.0      9.0      6.7     21.0     15.0
\9/16\...........................................   6 x 19     15.0     11.0     11.0      8.5     26.0     20.0
\5/8\............................................   6 x 19     19.0     14.0     14.0     10.0     32.0     24.0
\3/4\............................................   6 x 19     27.0     20.0     20.0     15.0     46.0     35.0
\7/8\............................................   6 x 19     36.0     27.0     27.0     20.0     62.0     47.0
1................................................   6 x 19     47.0     35.0     35.0     26.0     81.0     61.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d ratio is 20 or greater where: D=Diameter of curvature around which the
  body of the sling is bent; d=Diameter of component rope.

[[Page 575]]



                       Table N-184-7.--Rated Capacities for 2-Leg and 3-Leg Bridle Slings
              6 x 19 and 6 x 37 Classification Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope With Fiber Core (FC)
                                    [Horizontal angles shown in parentheses]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Rope                                       Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                2-Leg bridle slings                             3-Leg bridle slings
                 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Dia               30 deg. (60    45 deg. angle    60 deg. (30     30 deg. (60    45 deg. angle    60 deg. (30
 (in.)    Constr       deg.)     ----------------      deg.)           deg.)     ----------------      deg.)
                 ----------------                --------------------------------                ---------------
                    HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\..  6 x 19     0.85    0.83    0.70    0.72    0.49    0.51     1.3     1.3     1.0     1.1    0.74    0.76
\5/16\.  6 x 19      1.3     1.4     1.1     1.1    0.76    0.79     2.0     2.0     1.6     1.7     1.1     1.2
\3/8\..  6 x 19      1.8     1.9     1.5     1.6     1.1     1.1     2.8     2.9     2.3     2.4     1.6     1.7
\7/16\.  6 x 19      2.5     2.6     2.0     2.2     1.4     1.5     3.7     4.0     3.0     3.2     2.1     2.3
\1/2\..  6 x 19      3.2     3.4     2.6     2.8     1.8     2.0     4.8     5.1     3.9     4.2     2.8     3.0
\9/16\.  6 x 19      4.0     4.3     3.2     3.5     2.3     2.5     6.0     6.5     4.9     5.3     3.4     3.7
\5/8\..  6 x 19      4.8     5.3     4.0     4.4     2.8     3.1     7.3     8.0     5.9     6.5     4.2     4.6
\3/4\..  6 x 19      6.8     7.6     5.5     6.2     3.9     4.4    10.0    11.0     8.3     9.3     5.8     6.6
\7/8\..  6 x 19      8.9    10.0     7.3     8.4     5.1     5.9    13.0    15.0    11.0    13.0     7.7     8.9
1......  6 x 19     11.0    13.0     9.4    11.0     6.7     7.7    17.0    20.0    14.0    16.0    10.0    11.0
1\1/8\.  6 x 19     14.0    16.0    12.0    13.0     8.4     9.3    22.0    24.0    18.0    20.0    13.0    14.0
1\1/4\.  6 x 37     17.0    19.0    14.0    16.0     9.8    11.0    25.0    29.0    21.0    23.0    15.0    17.0
1\3/8\.  6 x 37     20.0    23.0    17.0    19.0    12.0    13.0    31.0    35.0    25.0    28.0    18.0    20.0
1\1/2\.  6 x 37     24.0    27.0    20.0    22.0    14.0    16.0    36.0    41.0    30.0    33.0    21.0    24.0
1\5/8\.  6 x 37     28.0    32.0    23.0    26.0    16.0    18.0    43.0    48.0    35.0    39.0    25.0    28.0
1\3/4\.  6 x 37     33.0    37.0    27.0    30.0    19.0    21.0    49.0    56.0    40.0    45.0    28.0    32.0
2......  6 x 37     43.0    48.0    35.0    39.0    25.0    28.0    64.0    72.0    52.0    59.0    37.0    41.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HT=Hand Tucked Splice.    MS=Mechanical Splice.


                       Table N-184-8.--Rated Capacities for 2-Leg and 3-Leg Bridle Slings
     6 x 19 and 6 x 37 Classification Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope With Independent Wire Rope Core (IWRC)
                                    [Horizontal angles shown in parentheses]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Rope                                       Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                2-Leg bridle slings                             3-Leg bridle slings
                 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Dia               30 deg. (60    45 deg. angle    60 deg. (30     30 deg. (60    45 deg. angle    60 deg. (30
 (in.)    Constr       deg.)     ----------------      deg.)           deg.)     ----------------      deg.)
                 ----------------                --------------------------------                ---------------
                    HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS      HT      MS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\..  6 x 19     0.92    0.97    0.75    0.79    0.53    0.56     1.4     1.4     1.1     1.2    0.79    0.84
\5/16\.  6 x 19      1.4     1.5     1.1     1.2    0.81    0.87     2.1     2.3     1.7     1.8     1.2     1.3
\3/8\..  6 x 19      2.0     2.1     1.6     1.8     1.1     1.2     3.0     3.2     2.4     2.6     1.7     1.9
\7/16\.  6 x 19      2.7     2.9     2.2     2.4     1.5     1.7     4.0     4.4     3.3     3.6     2.3     2.5
\1/2\..  6 x 19      3.4     3.8     2.8     3.1     2.0     2.2     5.1     5.7     4.2     4.6     3.0     3.3
\9/16\.  6 x 19      4.3     4.8     3.5     3.9     2.5     2.7     6.4     7.1     5.2     5.8     3.7     4.1
\5/8\..  6 x 19      5.2     5.9     4.2     4.8     3.0     3.4     7.8     8.8     6.4     7.2     4.5     5.1
\3/4\..  6 x 19      7.3     8.4     5.9     6.9     4.2     4.9    11.0    13.0     8.9    10.0     6.3     7.3
\7/8\..  6 x 19      9.6    11.0     7.8     9.3     5.5     6.6    14.0    17.0    12.0    14.0     8.3     9.9
1......  6 x 19     12.0    15.0    10.0    12.0     7.2     8.5    19.0    22.0    15.0    18.0    11.0    13.0
1\1/8\.  6 x 19     16.0    18.0    13.0    15.0     9.0    10.0    23.0    27.0    19.0    22.0    13.0    16.0
1\1/4\.  6 x 37     18.0    21.0    15.0    17.0    10.0    12.0    27.0    32.0    22.0    26.0    16.0    18.0
1\3/8\.  6 x 37     22.0    25.0    18.0    21.0    13.0    15.0    33.0    38.0    27.0    31.0    19.0    22.0
1\1/2\.  6 x 37     26.0    30.0    21.0    25.0    15.0    17.0    39.0    45.0    32.0    37.0    23.0    26.0
1\5/8\.  6 x 37     31.0    35.0    25.0    29.0    18.0    20.0    46.0    53.0    38.0    43.0    27.0    31.0
1\3/4\.  6 x 37     35.0    41.0    29.0    33.0    20.0    24.0    53.0    61.0    43.0    50.0    31.0    35.0
2......  6 x 37     46.0    53.0    37.0    43.0    26.0    30.0    68.0    79.0    56.0    65.0    40.0    46.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HT=Hand Tucked Splice.    MS=Mechanical Splice.


                       Table N-184-9.--Rated Capacities for 2-Leg and 3-Leg Bridle Slings
                                     Cable Laid Rope--Mechanical Splice Only
                      7 x 7 x 7 and 7 x 7 x 19 Constructions Galvanized Aircraft Grade Rope
                           7 x 6 x 19 IWRC Construction Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
                                    [Horizontal angles shown in parentheses]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Rope                                       Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          2-Leg bridle sling             3-Leg bridle sling
                                                   -------------------------------------------------------------
          Dia (inches)                 Constr        30 deg.   45 deg.   60 deg.    30 deg.   45 deg.   60 deg.
                                                    (60 deg.)   angle   (30 deg.)  (60 deg.)   angle   (30 deg.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\..........................  7 x 7 x 7........      0.87      0.71      0.50        1.3       1.1      0.75

[[Page 576]]

\3/8\..........................  7 x 7 x 7........       1.9       1.5       1.1        2.8       2.3       1.6
\1/2\..........................  7 x 7 x 7........       3.2       2.6       1.8        4.8       3.9       2.8
\5/8\..........................  7 x 7 x 7........       4.8       3.9       2.8        7.2       5.9       4.2
\3/4\..........................  7 x 7 x 7........       6.6       5.4       3.8        9.9       8.1       3.7
\5/8\..........................  7 x 7 x 19.......       5.0       4.1       2.9        7.5       6.1       4.3
\3/4\..........................  7 x 7 x 19.......       7.0       5.7       4.1       10.0       8.6       6.1
\7/8\..........................  7 x 7 x 19.......       9.3       7.6       5.4       14.0      11.0       8.1
1..............................  7 x 7 x 19.......      12.0       9.7       6.9       18.0      14.0      10.0
1\1/8\.........................  7 x 7 x 19.......      14.0      12.0       8.2       21.0      17.0      12.0
1\1/4\.........................  7 x 7 x 19.......      17.0      14.0       9.9       26.0      21.0      15.0
\3/4\..........................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..       6.6       5.4       3.8        9.9       8.0       5.7
\7/8\..........................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..       8.7       7.1       5.0       13.0      11.0       7.5
1..............................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..      11.0       9.0       6.4       17.0      13.0       9.6
1\1/8\.........................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..      13.0      11.0       7.7       20.0      16.0      11.0
1\1/4\.........................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..      16.0      13.0       9.2       24.0      20.0      14.0
1\5/16\........................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..      17.0      14.0      10.0       26.0      21.0      15.0
1\3/8\.........................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..      19.0      15.0      11.0       28.0      23.0      16.0
1\1/2\.........................  7 x 6 x 19 IWRC..      22.0      18.0      13.0       33.0      27.0      19.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                       Table N-184-10.--Rated Capacities for 2-Leg and 3-Leg Bridle Slings
                                         8-Part and 6-Part Braided Rope
                          6 x 7 and 6 x 19 Construction Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
                                7 x 7 Construction Galvanized Aircraft Grade Rope
                                    [Horizontal angles shown in parentheses]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Rope                                      Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               2-Leg bridle slings                             3-Leg bridle slings
                ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   30 deg. (60    45 deg. angle    60 deg. (30     30 deg. (60     45 deg. angle     60 deg. (30
  Dia    Constr       deg.)     ----------------      deg.)           deg.)     -------------------     deg.)
 (in.)          ----------------                --------------------------------                   -------------
                                 8-Part  6-Part                                   8-Part    6-Part    8-     6-
                 8-Part  6-Part                  8-Part  6-Part  8-Part  6-Part                      Part   Part
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3/32\   6 x 7     0.74    0.55    0.60    0.45    0.42    0.32     1.1    0.83      0.90     0.68   0.64   0.48
\1/8\.   6 x 7      1.3    0.98     1.1    0.80    0.76    0.57     2.0     1.5       1.6      1.2    1.1   0.85
\3/16\   6 x 7      2.9     2.2     2.4     1.8     1.7     1.3     4.4     3.3       3.6      2.7    2.5    1.9
\3/32\   7 x 7     0.89    0.67    0.72    0.55    0.51    0.39     1.3     1.0       1.1     0.82   0.77   0.58
\1/8\.   7 x 7      1.6     1.2     1.3     1.0    0.95    0.71     2.5     1.8       2.0      1.5    1.4    1.1
\3/16\   7 x 7      3.6     2.7     2.9     2.2     2.1     1.5     5.4     4.0       4.4      3.3    3.1    2.3
\3/16\  6 x 19      3.0     2.2     2.4     1.8     1.7     1.3     4.5     3.4       3.7      2.8    2.6    1.9
\1/4\.  6 x 19      5.3     4.0     4.3     3.2     3.1     2.3     8.0     6.0       6.5      4.9    4.6    3.4
\5/16\  6 x 19      8.3     6.2     6.7     5.0     4.8     3.6    12.0     9.3      10.0      7.6    7.1    5.4
\3/8\.  6 x 19     12.0     8.9     9.7     7.2     6.8     5.1    18.0    13.0      14.0     11.0   10.0    7.7
\7/16\  6 x 19     16.0    12.0    13.0     9.8     9.3     6.9    24.0    18.0      20.0     15.0   14.0   10.0
\1/2\.  6 x 19     21.0    15.0    17.0    13.0    12.0     9.0    31.0    23.0      25.0     19.0   18.0   13.0
\9/16\  6 x 19     26.0    20.0    21.0    16.0    15.0    11.0    39.0    29.0      32.0     24.0   23.0   17.0
\5/8\.  6 x 19     32.0    24.0    26.0    20.0    10.0    14.0    48.0    36.0      40.0     30.0   28.0   21.0
\3/4\.  6 x 19     46.0    35.0    38.0    28.0    27.0    20.0    69.0    52.0      56.0     42.0   40.0   30.0
\7/8\.  6 x 19     62.0    47.0    51.0    38.0    36.0    27.0    94.0    70.0      76.0     57.0   54.0   40.0
1.....  6 x 19     81.0    61.0    66.0    50.0    47.0    35.0   122.0    91.0      99.0     74.0   70.0   53.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 577]]


 Table N-184-11.--Rated Capacities for Strand Laid Grommet--Hand Tucked
                     Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Rope body                Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Vertical basket
 Dia (inches)      Constr       Vertical       Choker          \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.........    7 x 19          0.85          0.64            1.7
\5/16\........    7 x 19           1.3           1.0            2.6
\3/8\.........    7 x 19           1.9           1.4            3.8
\7/16\........    7 x 19           2.6           1.9            5.2
\1/2\.........    7 x 19           3.3           2.5            6.7
\9/16\........    7 x 19           4.2           3.1            8.4
\5/8\.........    7 x 19           5.2           3.9           10.0
\3/4\.........    7 x 19           7.4           5.6           15.0
\7/8\.........    7 x 19          10.0           7.5           20.0
1  ...........    7 x 19          13.0           9.7           26.0
1\1/8\........    7 x 19          16.0          12.0           32.0
1\1/4\........    7 x 37          18.0          14.0           37.0
1\3/8\........    7 x 37          22.0          16.0           44.0
1\1/2\........    7 x 37          26.0          19.0           52.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d ratio is 5 or greater where:
  D=Diameter of curvature around which rope is bent. d=Diameter of rope
  body.


  Table N-184-12.--Rated Capacities for Cable Laid Grommet--Hand Tucked
  7 x 6 x 7 and 7 x 6 x 19 Constructions Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
          7 x 7 x 7 Construction Galvanized Aircraft Grade Rope
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Cable body               Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Vertical basket
 Dia (inches)      Constr       Vertical       Choker          \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3/8\.........  7 x 6 x 7          1.3          0.95            2.5
\9/16\........  7 x 6 x 7          2.8           2.1            5.6
\5/8\.........  7 x 6 x 7          3.8           2.8            7.6
\3/8\.........  7 x 7 x 7          1.6           1.2            3.2
\9/16\........  7 x 7 x 7          3.5           2.6            6.9
\5/8\.........  7 x 7 x 7          4.5           3.4            9.0
\5/8\.........  7 x 6 x 19         3.9           3.0            7.9
\3/4\.........  7 x 6 x 19         5.1           3.8           10.0
\15/16\.......  7 x 6 x 19         7.9           5.9           16.0
1\1/8\........  7 x 6 x 19        11.0           8.4           22.0
1\5/16\.......  7 x 6 x 19        15.0          11.0           30.0
1\1/2\........  7 x 6 x 19        19.0          14.0           39.0
1\11/16\......  7 x 6 x 19        24.0          18.0           49.0
1\7/8\........  7 x 6 x 19        30.0          22.0           60.0
2\1/4\........  7 x 6 x 19        42.0          31.0           84.0
2\5/8\........  7 x 6 x 19        56.0          42.0          112.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d ratio is 5 or greater where:
  D=Diameter of curvature around which cable body is bent. d=Diameter of
  cable body.


   Table N-184-13.--Rated Capacities for Strand Laid Endless Slings--
                            Mechanical Joint
                     Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Rope body                Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Vertical basket
 Dia (inches)      Constr       Vertical       Choker          \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.........  \2\ 6 x 19        0.92          0.69            1.8
\3/8\.........  \2\ 6 x 19         2.0           1.5            4.1
\1/2\.........  \2\ 6 x 19         3.6           2.7            7.2
\5/8\.........  \2\ 6 x 19         5.6           4.2           11.0
\3/4\.........  \2\ 6 x 19         8.0           6.0           16.0
\7/8\.........  \2\ 6 x 19        11.0           8.1           21.0
1.............  \2\ 6 x 19        14.0          10.0           28.0
1\1/8\........  \2\ 6 x 19        18.0          13.0           35.0
1\1/4\........  \2\ 6 x 37        21.0          15.0           41.0
1\3/8\........  \2\ 6 x 37        25.0          19.0           50.0
1\1/2\........  \2\ 6 x 37        29.0          22.0           59.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d ratio is 5 or greater where:
  D=Diameter of curvature around which rope is bent. d=Diameter of rope
  body.
\2\ IWRC.


    Table N-184-14.--Rated Capacities for Cable Laid Endless Slings--
                            Mechanical Joint
  7 x 7 x 7 and 7 x 7 x 19 Constructions Galvanized Aircraft Grade Rope
       7 x 6 x 19 IWRC Construction Improved Plow Steel Grade Rope
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Cable body               Rated capacities, tons (2,000 lb)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Vertical basket
 Dia (inches)      Constr       Vertical       Choker          \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/4\.........  7 x 7 x 7         0.83          0.62            1.6
\3/8\.........  7 x 7 x 7          1.8           1.3            3.5
\1/2\.........  7 x 7 x 7          3.0           2.3            6.1
\5/8\.........  7 x 7 x 7          4.5           3.4            9.1
\3/4\.........  7 x 7 x 7          6.3           4.7           12.0
\5/8\.........  7 x 7 x 19         4.7           3.5            9.5
\3/4\.........  7 x 7 x 19         6.7           5.0           13.0
\7/8\.........  7 x 7 x 19         8.9           6.6           18.0
1.............  7 x 7 x 19        11.0           8.5           22.0
1\1/8\........  7 x 7 x 19        14.0          10.0           28.0
1\1/4\........  7 x 7 x 19        17.0          12.0           33.0
\3/4\.........  \2\ 7 x 6 x
                      19           6.2           4.7           12.0
\7/8\.........  \2\ 7 x 6 x
                      19           8.3           6.2           16.0
1.............  \2\ 7 x 6 x
                      19          10.0           7.9           21.0
1\1/8\........  \2\ 7 x 6 x
                      19          13.0           9.7           26.0
1\1/4\........  \2\ 7 x 6 x
                      19          16.0          12.0           31.0
1\3/8\........  \2\ 7 x 6 x
                      19          18.0          14.0           37.0
1\1/2\........  \2\ 7 x 6 x
                      19          22.0          16.0           43.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These values only apply when the D/d value is 5 or greater where:
  D=Diameter of curvature around which cable body is bent. d=Diameter of
  cable body.
\2\ IWRC.

    (5) Removal from service. Wire rope slings shall be immediately 
removed from service if any of the following conditions are present:
    (i) Ten randomly distributed broken wires in one rope lay, or five 
broken wires in one strand in one rope lay.
    (ii) Wear or scraping of one-third the original diameter of outside 
individual wires.
    (iii) Kinking, crushing, bird caging or any other damage resulting 
in distortion of the wire rope structure.
    (iv) Evidence of heat damage.
    (v) End attachments that are cracked, deformed or worn.

[[Page 578]]

    (vi) Hooks that have been opened more than 15 percent of the normal 
throat opening measured at the narrowest point or twisted more than 10 
degrees from the plane of the unbent hook.
    (vii) Corrosion of the rope or end attachments.
    (g) Metal mesh slings--(1) Sling marking. Each metal mesh sling 
shall have permanently affixed to it a durable marking that states the 
rated capacity for vertical basket hitch and choker hitch loadings.
    (2) Handles. Handles shall have a rated capacity at least equal to 
the metal fabric and exhibit no deformation after proof testing.
    (3) Attachments of handles to fabric. The fabric and handles shall 
be joined so that:
    (i) The rated capacity of the sling is not reduced.
    (ii) The load is evenly distributed across the width of the fabric.
    (iii) Sharp edges will not damage the fabric.
    (4) Sling coatings. Coatings which diminish the rated capacity of a 
sling shall not be applied.
    (5) Sling testing. All new and repaired metal mesh slings, including 
handles, shall not be used unless proof tested by the manufacturer or 
equivalent entity at a minimum of 1\1/2\ times their rated capacity. 
Elastomer impregnated slings shall be proof tested before coating.
    (6) Proper use of metal mesh slings. Metal mesh slings shall not be 
used to lift loads in excess of their rated capacities as prescribed in 
Table N-184-15. Slings not included in this table shall be used only in 
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
    (7) Safe operating temperatures. Metal mesh slings which are not 
impregnated with elastomers may be used in a temperature range from 
minus 20 deg. F to plus 550 deg. F without decreasing the working load 
limit. Metal mesh slings impregnated with polyvinyl chloride or neoprene 
may be used only in a temperature range from zero degrees to plus 
200 deg. F. For operations outside these temperature ranges or for metal 
mesh slings impregnated with other materials, the sling manufacturer's 
recommendations shall be followed.
    (8) Repairs. (i) Metal mesh slings which are repaired shall not be 
used unless repaired by a metal mesh sling manufacturer or an equivalent 
entity.
    (ii) Once repaired, each sling shall be permanently marked or 
tagged, or a written record maintained, to indicate the date and nature 
of the repairs and the person or organization that performed the 
repairs. Records of repairs shall be made available for examination.
    (9) Removal from service. Metal mesh slings shall be immediately 
removed from service if any of the following conditions are present:
    (i) A broken weld or broken brazed joint along the sling edge.
    (ii) Reduction in wire diameter of 25 per cent due to abrasion or 15 
per cent due to corrosion.
    (iii) Lack of flexibility due to distortion of the fabric.

                    Table N-184-15.--Rated Capacities
           Carbon Steel and Stainless Steel Metal Mesh Slings
                [Horizontal angles shown in parentheses]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Effect of angle on rated capacities
  Sling                                       in basket hitch
 width in   Vertical    Vertical  --------------------------------------
  inches    or choker    basket    30 deg. (60  45 deg. (45  60 deg. (30
                                      deg.)        deg.)        deg.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Heavy Duty-10 Ga 35 Spirals/Ft of sling width
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2........     1,500       3,000        2,600        2,100        1,500
3........     2,700       5,400        4,700        3,800        2,700
4........     4,000       8,000        6,900        5,600        4,000
6........     6,000      12,000       10,400        8,400        6,000
8........     8,000      16,000       13,800       11,300        8,000
10.......    10,000      20,000       17,000       14,100       10,000
12.......    12,000      24,000       20,700       16,900       12,000
14.......    14,000      28,000       24,200       19,700       14,000
16.......    16,000      32,000       27,700       22,600       16,000
18.......    18,000      36,000       31,100       25,400       18,000
20.......    20,000      40,000       34,600       28,200       20,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Medium Duty-12 Ga 43 Spirals/Ft of sling width
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2........     1,350       2,700        2,300        1,900        1,400
3........     2,000       4,000        3,500        2,800        2,000
4........     2,700       5,400        4,700        3,800        2,700
6........     4,500       9,000        7,800        6,400        4,500
8........     6,000      12,000       10,400        8,500        6,000
10.......     7,500      15,000       13,000       10,600        7,500
12.......     9,000      18,000       15,600       12,700        9,000
14.......    10,500      21,000       18,200       14,800       10,500
16.......    12,000      24,000       20,800       17,000       12,000
18.......    13,500      27,000       23,400       19,100       13,500
20.......    15,000      30,000       26,000       21,200       15,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Light Duty-14 Ga 59 Spirals/Ft of sling width
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2........       900       1,800        1,600        1,300          900
3........     1,400       2,800        2,400        2,000        1,400
4........     2,000       4,000        3,500        2,800        2,000
6........     3,000       6,000        5,200        4,200        3,000

[[Page 579]]

8........     4,000       8,000        6,900        5,700        4,000
10.......     5,000      10,000        8,600        7,100        5,000
12.......     6,000      12,000       10,400        8,500        6,000
14.......     7,000      14,000       12,100        9,900        7,000
16.......     8,000      16,000       13,900       11,300        8,000
18.......     9,000      18,000       15,600       12,700        9,000
20.......    10,000      20,000       17,300       14,100       10,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iv) Distortion of the female handle so that the depth of the slot 
is increased more than 10 per cent.
    (v) Distortion of either handle so that the width of the eye is 
decreased more than 10 per cent.
    (vi) A 15 percent reduction of the original cross sectional area of 
metal at any point around the handle eye.
    (vii) Distortion of either handle out of its plane.
    (h) Natural and synthetic fiber rope slings--(1) Sling use. (i) 
Fiber rope slings made from conventional three strand construction fiber 
rope shall not be used with loads in excess of the rated capacities 
prescribed in Tables N-184-16 through N-184-19.
    (ii) Fiber rope slings shall have a diameter of curvature meeting at 
least the minimums specified in Figs. N-184-4 and N-184-5.
    (iii) Slings not included in these tables shall be used only in 
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.

[[Page 580]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.048



[[Page 581]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.049



[[Page 582]]


                                                           Table N-184-16.--Manila Rope Slings
                                                    [Angle of rope to vertical shown in parentheses]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Eye and eye sling                                                    Endless sling
  Rope     Nominal -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  dia.     wt. per                         Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal                          Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal
 nominal   100 ft    Vertical   Choker  -----------------------------------------------  Vertical   Choker  --------------------------------------------
   in        in       hitch      hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.     45 deg.     30 deg.     hitch      hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.    45 deg.    30 deg.
 inches    pounds                         (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)   (45 deg.)   (60 deg.)                        (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)  (45 deg.)  (60 deg.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/2\...       7.5       480        240       960         830         680         480        865        430     1,730       1,500      1,220        865
\9/16\..      10.4       620        310     1,240       1,070         875         620      1,120        560     2,230       1,930      1,580      1,120
\5/8\...      13.3       790        395     1,580       1,370       1,120         790      1,420        710     2,840       2,460      2,010      1,420
\3/4\...      16.7       970        485     1,940       1,680       1,370         970      1,750        875     3,490       3,020      2,470      1,750
\13/16\.      19.5     1,170        585     2,340       2,030       1,650       1,170      2,110      1,050     4,210       3,650      2,980      2,110
\7/8\...      22.5     1,390        695     2,780       2,410       1,970       1,390      2,500      1,250     5,000       4,330      3,540      2,500
1.......      27.0     1,620        810     3,240       2,810       2,290       1,620      2,920      1,460     5,830       5,050      4,120      2,920
1\1/16\.      31.3     1,890        945     3,780       3,270       2,670       1,890      3,400      1,700     6,800       5,890      4,810      3,400
1\1/8\..      36.0     2,160      1,080     4,320       3,740       3,050       2,160      3,890      1,940     7,780       6,730      5,500      3,890
1\1/4\..      41.7     2,430      1,220     4,860       4,210       3,440       2,430      4,370      2,190     8,750       7,580      6,190      4,370
1\5/16\.      47.9     2,700      1,350     5,400       4,680       3,820       2,700      4,860      2,430     9,720       8,420      6,870      4,860
1\1/2\..      59.9     3,330      1,670     6,660       5,770       4,710       3,330      5,990      3,000    12,000      10,400      8,480      5,990
1\5/8\..      74.6     4,050      2,030     8,100       7,010       5,730       4,050      7,290      3,650    14,600      12,600     10,300      7,290
1\3/4\..      89.3     4,770      2,390     9,540       8,260       6,740       4,770      8,590      4,290    17,200      14,900     12,100      8,590
2.......     107.5     5,580      2,790    11,200       9,660       7,890       5,580     10,000      5,020    20,100      17,400     14,200     10,000
2\1/8\..     125.0     6,480      3,240    13,000      11,200       9,160       6,480     11,700      5,830    23,300     2,0,200     16,500     11,700
2\1/4\..     146.0     7,380      3,690    14,800      12,800      10,400       7,380     13,300      6,640    26,600      23,000     18,800     13,300
2\1/2\..     166.7     8,370      4,190    16,700      14,500      11,800       8,370     15,100      7,530    30,100      26,100     21,300     15,100
2\5/8\..     190.8     9,360      4,680    18,700      16,200      13,200       9,360     16,800      8,420    33,700      29,200     23,800     16,800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See Figs. N-184-4 and N-184-5 for sling configuration descriptions.


                                                           Table N-184-17.--Nylon Rope Slings
                                                    [Angle of rope to vertical shown in parentheses]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Eye and eye sling                                                    Endless sling
  Rope     Nominal -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  dia.     wt. per                         Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal                          Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal
 nominal   100 ft    Vertical   Choker  -----------------------------------------------  Vertical   Choker  --------------------------------------------
   in        in       hitch      hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.     45 deg.     30 deg.     hitch      hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.    45 deg.    30 deg.
 inches    pounds                         (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)   (45 deg.)   (60 deg.)                        (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)  (45 deg.)  (60 deg.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/2\...       6.5       635        320     1,270       1,100         900         635      1,140        570     2,290       1,980      1,620      1,140
\9/16\..       8.3       790        395     1,580       1,370       1,120         790      1,420        710     2,840       2,460      2,010      1,420
\5/8\...      10.5     1,030        515     2,060       1,780       1,460       1,030      1,850        925     3,710       3,210      2,620      1,850
\3/4\...      14.5     1,410        705     2,820       2,440       1,990       1,410      2,540      1,270     5,080       4,400      3,590      2,540
\13/16\.      17.0     1,680        840     3,360       2,910       2,380       1,680      3,020      1,510     6,050       5,240      4,280      3,020
\7/8\...      20.0     1,980        990     3,960       3,430       2,800       1,980      3,560      1,780     7,130       6,170      5,040      3,560
1.......      26.0     2,480      1,240     4,960       4,300       3,510       2,480      4,460      2,230     8,930       7,730      6,310      4,460
1\1/16\.      29.0     2,850      1,430     5,700       4,940       4,030       2,850      5,130      2,570    10,300       8,890      7,260      5,130
1\1/8\..      34.0     3,270      1,640     6,540       5,660       4,620       3,270      5,890      2,940    11,800      10,200      8,330      5,890
1\1/4\..      40.0     3,710      1,860     7,420       6,430       5,250       3,710      6,680      3,340    13,400      11,600      9,450      6,680
1\5/16\.      45.0     4,260      2,130     8,520       7,380       6,020       4,260      7,670      3,830    15,300      13,300     10,800      7,670

[[Page 583]]

1\1/2\..      55.0     5,250      2,630    10,500       9,090       7,420       5,250      9,450      4,730    18,900      16,400     13,400      9,450
1\5/8\..      68.0     6,440      3,220    12,900      11,200       9,110       6,440     11,600      5,800    23,200      20,100     16,400     11,600
1\3/4\..      83.0     7,720      3,860    15,400      13,400      10,900       7,720     13,900      6,950    27,800      24,100     19,700     13,900
2.......      95.0     9,110      4,560    18,200      15,800      12,900       9,110     16,400      8,200    32,800      28,400     23,200     16,400
2\1/8\..     109.0    10,500      5,250    21,000      18,200      14,800      10,500     18,900      9,450    37,800      32,700     26,700     18,900
2\1/4\..     129.0    12,400      6,200    24,800      21,500      17,500      12,400     22,300     11,200    44,600      38,700     31,600     22,300
2\1/2\..     149.0    13,900      6,950    27,800      24,100      19,700      13,900     25,000     12,500    50,000      43,300     35,400     25,000
2\5/8\..     168.0    16,000      8,000    32,000      27,700      22,600      16,000     28,800     14,400    57,600      49,900     40,700     28,800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See Figs. N-184-4 and N-184-5 for sling configuration descriptions.


                                                         Table N-184-18.--Polyester Rope Slings
                                                    [Angle of rope to vertical shown in parentheses]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Eye and eye sling                                                    Endless sling
  Rope     Nominal -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  dia.     wt. per                         Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal                          Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal
 nominal   100 ft    Vertical   Choker  -----------------------------------------------  Vertical   Choker  --------------------------------------------
   in        in       hitch      hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.     45 deg.     30 deg.     hitch      hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.    45 deg.    30 deg.
 inches    pounds                         (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)   (45 deg.)   (60 deg.)                        (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)  (45 deg.)  (60 deg.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/2\...       8.0       635        320     1,270       1,100         900         635      1,140        570     2,290       1,980      1,620      1,140
\9/16\..      10.2       790        395     1,580       1,370       1,120         790      1,420        710     2,840       2,460      2,010      1,420
\5/8\...      13.0       990        495     1,980       1,710       1,400         990      1,780        890     3,570       3,090      2,520      1,780
\3/4\...      17.5     1,240        620     2,480       2,150       1,750       1,240      2,230      1,120     4,470       3,870      3,160      2,230
\13/16\.      21.0     1,540        770     3,080       2,670       2,180       1,540      2,770      1,390     5,540       4,800      3,920      2,770
\7/8\...      25.0     1,780        890     3,560       3,080       2,520       1,780      3,200      1,600     6,410       5,550      4,530      3,200
1.......      30.5     2,180      1,090     4,360       3,780       3,080       2,180      3,920      2,960     7,850       6,800      5,550      3,920
1\1/16\.      34.5     2,530      1,270     5,060       4,380       3,580       2,530      4,550      2,280     9,110       7,990      6,440      4,550
1\1/8\..      40.0     2,920      1,460     5,840       5,060       4,130       2,920      5,260      2,630    10,500       9,100      7,440      5,260
1\1/4\..      46.3     3,290      1,650     6,580       5,700       4,650       3,290      5,920      2,960    11,800      10,300      8,380      5,920
1\5/16\.      52.5     3,710      1,860     7,420       6,430       5,250       3,710      6,680      3,340    13,400      11,600      9,450      6,680
1\1/2\..      66.8     4,630      2,320     9,260       8,020       6,550       4,630      8,330      4,170    16,700      14,400     11,800      8,330
1\5/8\..      82.0     5,640      2,820    11,300       9,770       7,980       5,640     10,200      5,080    20,300      17,600     14,400     10,200
1\3/4\..      98.0     6,710      3,360    13,400      11,600       9,490       6,710     12,100      6,040    24,200      20,900     17,100     12,100
2.......     118.0     7,920      3,960    15,800      13,700      11,200       7,920     14,300      7,130    28,500      24,700     20,200     14,300
2\1/8\..     135.0     9,110      4,460    18,200      15,800      12,900       9,110     16,400      8,200    32,800      28,400     23,200     16,400
2\1/4\..     157.0    10,600      5,300    21,200      18,400      15,000      10,600     19,100      9,540    38,200      33,100     27,000     19,100
2\1/2\..     181.0    12,100      6,050    24,200      21,000      17,100      12,100     21,800     10,900    43,600      37,700     30,800     21,800
2\5/8\..     205.0    13,600      6,800    27,200      23,600      19,200      13,600     24,500     12,200    49,000      42,400     34,600     24,500
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See Figs. N-184-4 and N-184-5 for sling configuration descriptions.

[[Page 584]]



                                                       Table N-184-19.--Polypropylene Rope Slings
                                                    [Angle of rope to vertical shown in parentheses]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Eye and eye sling                                                    Endless sling
  Rope     Nominal -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  dia.     wt. per                        Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal                          Basket hitch; Angle of rope to horizontal
 nominal   100 ft    Vertical   Choker -----------------------------------------------  Vertical   Choker ----------------------------------------------
   in        in       hitch     hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.     45 deg.     30 deg.     hitch     hitch    90 deg.     60 deg.     45 deg.     30 deg.
 inches    pounds                        (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)   (45 deg.)   (60 deg.)                       (0 deg.)   (30 deg.)   (45 deg.)   (60 deg.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/2\...      4.7        645       325     1,290      1,120         910         645       1,160       580     2,320      2,010       1,640       1,160
\9/16\..      6.1        780       390     1,560      1,350       1,100         780       1,400       700     2,810      2,430       1,990       1,400
\5/8\...      7.5        950       475     1,900      1,650       1,340         950       1,710       855     3,420      2,960       2,420       1,710
\3/4\...     10.7      1,300       650     2,600      2,250       1,840       1,300       2,340     1,170     4,680      4,050       3,310       2,340
\13/16\.     12.7      1,520       760     3,040      2,630       2,150       1,520       2,740     1,370     5,470      4,740       3,870       2,740
\7/8\...     15.0      1,760       880     3,520      3,050       2,490       1,760       3,170     1,580     6,340      5,490       4,480       3,170
1.......     18.0      2,140     1,070     4,280      3,700       3,030       2,140       3,850     1,930     7,700      6,670       5,450       3,860
1\1/16\.     20.4      2,450     1,230     4,900      4,240       3,460       2,450       4,410     2,210     8,820      7,640       6,240       4,410
1\1/8\..     23.7      2,800     1,400     5,600      4,850       3,960       2,800       5,040     2,520    10,100      8,730       7,130       5,040
1\1/4\..     27.0      3,210     1,610     6,420      5,560       4,540       3,210       5,780     2,890    11,600     10,000       8,170       5,780
1\5/16\.     30.5      3,600     1,800     7,200      6,240       5,090       3,600       6,480     3,240    13,000     11,200       9,170       6,480
1\1/2\..     38.5      4,540     2,270     9,080      7,860       6,420       4,540       8,170     4,090    16,300     14,200      11,600       8,170
1\5/8\..     47.5      5,510     2,760    11,000      9,540       7,790       5,510       9,920     4,960    19,800     17,200      14,000       9,920
1\3/4\..     57.0      6,580     3,290    13,200     11,400       9,300       6,580      11,800     5,920    23,700     20,500      16,800      11,800
2.......     69.0      7,960     3,980    15,900     13,800      11,300       7,960      14,300     7,160    28,700     24,800      20,300      14,300
2\1/8\..     80.0      9,330     4,670    18,700     16,200      13,200       9,330      16,800     8,400    33,600     29,100      23,800      16,800
2\1/4\..     92.0     10,600     5,300    21,200     18,400      15,000      10,600      19,100     9,540    38,200     33,100      27,000      19,100
2\1/2\..    107.0     12,200     6,100    24,400     21,100      17,300      12,200      22,000    11,000    43,900     38,000      31,100      22,000
2\5/8\..    120.0     13,800     6,900    27,600     23,900      19,600      13,800      24,800    12,400    49,700     43,000      35,100      24,800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See Figs. N-184-4 and N-184-5 for sling configuration descriptions.

    (2) Safe operating temperatures. Natural and synthetic fiber rope 
slings, except for wet frozen slings, may be used in a temperature range 
from minus 20 deg.F to plus 180 deg.F without decreasing the working 
load limit. For operations outside this temperature range and for wet 
frozen slings, the sling manufacturer's recommendations shall be 
followed.
    (3) Splicing. Spliced fiber rope slings shall not be used unless 
they have been spliced in accordance with the following minimum 
requirements and in accordance with any additional recommendations of 
the manufacturer:
    (i) In manila rope, eye splices shall consist of at least three full 
tucks, and short splices shall consist of at least six full tucks, three 
on each side of the splice center line.
    (ii) In synthetic fiber rope, eye splices shall consist of at least 
four full tucks, and short splices shall consist of at least eight full 
tucks, four on each side of the center line.
    (iii) Strand end tails shall not be trimmed flush with the surface 
of the rope immediately adjacent to the full tucks. This applies to all 
types of fiber rope and both eye and short splices. For fiber rope under 
one inch in diameter, the tail shall project at least six rope diameters 
beyond the last full tuck. For fiber rope one inch in diameter and 
larger, the tail shall project at least six inches beyond the last full 
tuck. Where a projecting tail interferes with the use of the sling, the 
tail shall be tapered and spliced into the body of the rope using at 
least two additional tucks (which will require a tail length of 
approximately six rope diameters beyond the last full tuck).
    (iv) Fiber rope slings shall have a minimum clear length of rope 
between eye splices equal to 10 times the rope diameter.
    (v) Knots shall not be used in lieu of splices.
    (vi) Clamps not designed specifically for fiber ropes shall not be 
used for splicing.
    (vii) For all eye splices, the eye shall be of such size to provide 
an included angle of not greater than 60 degrees at the splice when the 
eye is placed over the load or support.
    (4) End attachments. Fiber rope slings shall not be used if end 
attachments in contact with the rope have sharp edges or projections.
    (5) Removal from service. Natural and synthetic fiber rope slings 
shall be immediately removed from service if any of the following 
conditions are present:

[[Page 585]]

    (i) Abnormal wear.
    (ii) Powdered fiber between strands.
    (iii) Broken or cut fibers.
    (iv) Variations in the size or roundness of strands.
    (v) Discoloration or rotting.
    (vi) Distortion of hardware in the sling.
    (6) Repairs. Only fiber rope slings made from new rope shall be 
used. Use of repaired or reconditioned fiber rope slings is prohibited.
    (i) Synthetic web slings--(1) Sling identification. Each sling shall 
be marked or coded to show the rated capacities for each type of hitch 
and type of synthetic web material.
    (2) Webbing. Synthetic webbing shall be of uniform thickness and 
width and selvage edges shall not be split from the webbing's width.
    (3) Fittings. Fittings shall be:
    (i) Of a minimum breaking strength equal to that of the sling; and
    (ii) Free of all sharp edges that could in any way damage the 
webbing.
    (4) Attachment of end fittings to webbing and formation of eyes. 
Stitching shall be the only method used to attach end fittings to 
webbing and to form eyes. The thread shall be in an even pattern and 
contain a sufficient number of stitches to develop the full breaking 
strength of the sling.
    (5) Sling use. Synthetic web slings illustrated in Fig. N-184-6 
shall not be used with loads in excess of the rated capacities specified 
in Tables N-184-20 through N-184-22. Slings not included in these tables 
shall be used only in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendations.
    (6) Environmental conditions. When synthetic web slings are used, 
the following precautions shall be taken:
    (i) Nylon web slings shall not be used where fumes, vapors, sprays, 
mists or liquids of acids or phenolics are present.
    (ii) Polyester and polypropylene web slings shall not be used where 
fumes, vapors, sprays, mists or liquids of caustics are present.
    (iii) Web slings with aluminum fittings shall not be used where 
fumes, vapors, sprays, mists or liquids of caustics are present.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.050


[[Page 586]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.051



[[Page 587]]


                                                        Table N-184-20.--Synthetic Web Slings--1,000 Pounds per Inch of Width--Single-Ply
                                                                                   [Rated capacity in pounds]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Triangle--Choker slings, type I: Triangle--                    Endless slings, type V                            Return eye slings, type VI
                                        Triangle slings, type II: Eye and eye with flat  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      eye slings, type III: Eye and eye with twisted eye
      Sling body width, inches                          slings, type IV
                                     ----------------------------------------------------  Vert.   Choker   Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.   Vert.  Choker   Vert.  30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.
                                                       Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.                    basket   basket   basket   basket                  basket   basket   basket   basket
                                       Vert.  Choker   basket   basket   basket   basket
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...................................   1,000     750    2,000    1,700    1,400    1,000   1,600    1,300    3,200    2,800    2,300    1,600     800     650   1,600    1,400    1,150      800
2...................................   2,000   1,500    4,000    3,500    2,800    2,000   3,200    2,600    6,400    5,500    4,500    3,200   1,600   1,300   3,200    2,800    2,300    1,600
3...................................   3,000   2,200    6,000    5,200    4,200    3,000   4,800    3,800    9,600    8,300    6,800    4,800   2,400   1,950   4,800    4,150    3,400    2,400
4...................................   4,000   3,000    8,000    6,900    5,700    4,000   6,400    5,100   12,800   11,100    9,000    6,400   3,200   2,600   6,400    5,500    4,500    3,200
5...................................   5,000   3,700   10,000    8,700    7,100    5,000   8,000    6,400   16,000   13,900   11,300    8,000   4,000   3,250   8,000    6,900    5,650    4,000
6...................................   6,000   4,500   12,000   10,400    8,500    6,000   9,600    7,700   19,200   16,600   13,600    9,600   4,800   3,800   9,600    8,300    6,800    4,800
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes: 1. All angles shown are measured from the vertical.
2. Capacities for intermediate widths not shown may be obtained by interpolation.


                                                        Table N-184-21.--Synthetic Web Slings--1,200 Pounds per Inch of Width--Single-ply
                                                                                   [Rated capacity in pounds]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Triangle--Choker slings, type I: Triangle--Triangle                 Endless slings, type V                              Return eye slings, type VI
                                  slings, type II: Eye and eye with flat eye slings, -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 type III: Eye and eye with twisted eye slings, type
    Sling body width, inches                              IV
                                -----------------------------------------------------  Vert.    Choker   Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.   Vert.    Choker   Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.
                                                   Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.                     basket   basket   basket   basket                     basket   basket   basket   basket
                                  Vert.   Choker   basket   basket   basket   basket
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..............................   1,200      900    2,400    2,100    1,700    1,200    1,900    1,500    3,800    3,300    2,700    1,900      950      750    1,900    1,650    1,350      950
2..............................   2,400    1,800    4,800    4,200    3,400    2,400    3,800    3,000    7,600    6,600    5,400    3,800    1,900    1,500    3,800    3,300    2,700    1,900
3..............................   3,600    2,700    7,200    6,200    5,100    3,600    5,800    4,600   11,600   10,000    8,200    5,800    2,850    2,250    5,700    4,950    4,050    2,850
4..............................   4,800    3,600    9,600    8,300    6,800    4,800    7,700    6,200   15,400   13,300   10,900    7,700    3,800    3,000    7,600    6,600    5,400    3,800
5..............................   6,000    4,500   12,000   10,400    8,500    6,000    9,600    7,700   19,200   16,600   13,600    9,600    4,750    3,750    9,500    8,250    6,750    4,750
6..............................   7,200    5,400   14,400   12,500   10,200    7,200   11,500    9,200   23,000   19,900   16,300   11,500    5,800    4,600   11,600   10,000    8,200    5,800
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes: 1. All angles shown are measured from the vertical.
2. Capacities for intermediate widths not shown may be obtained by interpolation.


                                                        TABLE N-184-22.--Synthetic Web Slings--1,600 Pounds per Inch of Width--Single-Ply
                                                                                   [Rated capacity in pounds]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Triangle--Choker slings, type I: Triangle--                    Endless slings, type V                              Return eye slings, type VI
                                    Triangle slings, type II: Eye and eye with flat  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  eye slings, type III: Eye and eye with twisted eye
    Sling body width, inches                        slings, type IV
                                 ----------------------------------------------------  Vert.    Choker   Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.   Vert.    Choker   Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.
                                                   Vert.   30 deg.  45 deg.  60 deg.                     basket   basket   basket   basket                     basket   basket   basket   basket
                                   Vert.  Choker   basket   basket   basket   basket
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...............................   1,600   1,200    3,200    2,800    2,300    1,600    2,600    2,100    5,200    4,500    3,700    2,600    1,050    1,050    2,600    2,250    1,850    1,300

[[Page 588]]

2...............................   3,200   2,400    6,400    5,500    4,500    3,200    5,100    4,100   10,200    8,800    7,200    5,100    2,600    2,100    5,200    4,500    3,700    2,600
3...............................   4,800   3,600    9,600    8,300    6,800    4,800    7,700    6,200   15,400   13,300   10,900    7,700    3,900    3,150    7,800    6,750    5,500    3,900
4...............................   6,400   4,800   12,800   11,100    9,000    6,400   10,100    8,200   20,400   17,700   14,400   10,200    5,100    4,100   10,200    8,800    7,200    5,100
5...............................   8,000   6,000   16,000   13,800   11,300    8,000   12,800   10,200   25,600   22,200   18,100   12,800    6,400    5,150   12,800   11,050    9,050    6,400
6...............................   9,600   7,200   19,200   16,600   13,600    9,600   15,400   12,300   30,800   26,700   21,800   15,400    7,700    6,200   15,400   13,300   10,900    7,700
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes: 1. All angles shown are measured from the vertical.
2. Capacities for intermediate widths not shown may be obtained by interpolation.

[[Page 589]]


    (7) Safe operating temperatures. Synthetic web slings of polyester 
and nylon shall not be used at temperatures in excess of 180 deg.F. 
Polypropylene web slings shall not be used at temperatures in excess of 
200 deg.F.
    (8) Repairs. (i) Synthetic web slings which are repaired shall not 
be used unless repaired by a sling manufacturer or an equivalent entity.
    (ii) Each repaired sling shall be proof tested by the manufacturer 
or equivalent entity to twice the rated capacity prior to its return to 
service. The employer shall retain a certificate of the proof test and 
make it available for examination.
    (iii) Slings, including webbing and fittings, which have been 
repaired in a temporary manner shall not be used.
    (9) Removal from service. Synthetic web slings shall be immediately 
removed from service if any of the following conditions are present:
    (i) Acid or caustic burns;
    (ii) Melting or charring of any part of the sling surface;
    (iii) Snags, punctures, tears or cuts;
    (iv) Broken or worn stitches; or
    (v) Distortion of fittings.
[40 FR 27369, June 27, 1975, as amended at 40 FR 31598, July 28, 1975; 
41 FR 13353, Mar. 30, 1976; 58 FR 35309, June 30, 1993; 61 FR 9240, Mar. 
7, 1996]


<R04>
                Subpart O--Machinery and Machine Guarding

    Authority: Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 1-90 
(55 FR 9033), as applicable; 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.211  Definitions.

    (a) As used in Secs. 1910.213 and 1910.214 unless the context 
clearly requires otherwise, the following woodworking machinery terms 
shall have the meaning prescribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Point of operations means that point at which cutting, shaping, 
boring, or forming is accomplished upon the stock.
    (2) Push stick means a narrow strip of wood or other soft material 
with a notch cut into one end and which is used to push short pieces of 
material through saws.
    (3) Block means a short block of wood, provided with a handle 
similar to that of a plane and a shoulder at the rear end, which is used 
for pushing short stock over revolving cutters.
    (b) As used in Sec. 1910.215 unless the context clearly requires 
otherwise, the following abrasive wheel machinery terms shall have the 
meanings prescribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Type 1 straight wheels means wheels having diameter, thickness, 
and hole size dimensions, and they should be used only on the periphery. 
Type 1 wheels shall be mounted between flanges.

    Limitation: Hole dimension (H) should not be greater than two-thirds 
of wheel diameter dimension (D) for precision, cylindrical, centerless, 
or surface grinding applications. Maximum hole size for all other 
applications should not exceed one-half wheel diameter.
<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

EC27OC91.052
                         Type 1--Straight Wheel.

    Peripheral grinding wheel having a diameter, thickness and hole.

    (2) Type 2 cylinder wheels means wheels having diameter, wheel 
thickness, and rim thickness dimensions. Grinding is performed on the 
rim face only, dimension W. Cylinder wheels may be plain, plate mounted, 
inserted nut, or of the projecting stud type.

    Limitation: Rim height, T dimension, is generally equal to or 
greater than rim thickness, W dimension.
      

[[Page 590]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>


EC27OC91.053
                         Type 2--Cylinder Wheel
Side grinding wheel having a diameter, thickness and wall--wheel is 
mounted on the diameter.

    (3) Type 6 straight cup wheels means wheels having diameter, 
thickness, hole size, rim thickness, and back thickness dimensions. 
Grinding is always performed on rim face, W dimension.

    Limitation: Minimum back thickness, E dimension, should not be less 
than one-fourth T dimension. In addition, when unthreaded hole wheels 
are specified, the inside flat, K dimension, must be large enough to 
accommodate a suitable flange.
<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

EC27OC91.054
                       Type 6--Straight-cup Wheel
Side grinding wheel having a diameter, thickness and hole with one side 
straight or flat and the opposite side recessed. This type, however, 
differs from Type 5 in that the grinding is performed on the wall of the 
abrasive created by the difference between the diameter of the recess 
and the outside diameter of the wheel. Therefore, the wall dimension 
``W'' takes precedence over the diameter of the recess as an essential 
intermediate dimension to describe this shape type.

    (4) Type 11 flaring cup wheels mean wheels having double diameter 
dimensions D and J, and in addition have thickness, hole size, rim and 
back thickness dimensions. Grinding is always performed on rim face, W 
dimension. Type 11 wheels are subject to all limitations of use and 
mounting listed for type 6 straight sided cup wheels definition.

    Limitation: Minimum back thickness, E dimension, should not be less 
than one-fourth T dimension. In addition when unthreaded hole wheels are 
specified the inside flat, K dimension, shall be large enough to 
accommodate a suitable flange.
<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

EC27OC91.055
                       Type 11--Flaring-cup Wheel
Side grinding wheel having a wall flared or tapered outward from the 
back. Wall thickness at the back is normally greater than at the 
grinding face (W).

    (5) Modified types 6 and 11 wheels (terrazzo) mean some type 6 and 
11 cup wheels used in the terrazzo trade having tapered K dimensions to 
match a special tapered flange furnished by the machine builder.

    Limitation: These wheels shall be mounted only with a special 
tapered flange.
<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

EC27OC91.056
 Typical examples of modified types 6 and 11 wheels (terrazzo) showing 
                          tapered K dimensions.
    (6) Types 27 and 28 depressed center wheels mean wheels having 
diameter, thickness, and hole size dimensions. Both types are 
reinforced, organic bonded wheels having offset hubs which

[[Page 591]]

permit side and peripheral grinding operations without interference with 
the mounting. Type 27 wheels are manufactured with flat grinding rims 
permitting notching and cutting operations. Type 28 wheels have saucer 
shaped grinding rims.
    (i) Limitations: Special supporting, back adapter and inside flange 
nuts are required for the proper mounting of these types of wheels 
subject to limitations of Sec. 1910.215(c)(4) (i) and (ii).
    (ii) Mounts which are affixed to the wheel by the manufacturer may 
not require an inside nut and shall not be reused.
    (7) Type 27A depressed center, cutting-off wheels mean wheels having 
diameter, thickness, and hole size dimensions. They are reinforced, 
organic bonded, offset hub type wheels, usually 16 inches diameter and 
larger, specially designed for use on cutting-off machines where 
mounting nut or outer flange interference cannot be tolerated.

    Limitations: See Sec. 1910.215(c)(1).

    (8) Surface feet per minute (s.f.p.m.) means the distance in feet 
any one abrasive grain on the peripheral surface of a grinding wheel 
travels in 1 minute.

Surface Feet Per Minute= 3.1416 x diameter in inches x r.p.m.<divide>12 
          or .262 x diameter in inches x r.p.m.

    Examples: (a) 24-inch diameter wheel, 1,000 revolutions per minute. 
Surface Feet per minute .262 x 24 x 1,000=6,288 s.f.p.m.
    (b) 12-inch diameter wheel, 1,000 revolutions per minute. Surface 
Feet per minute .262 x 12 x 1,000=3,144 s.f.p.m.

    (9) Flanges means collars, discs or plates between which wheels are 
mounted and are referred to as adaptor, sleeve, or back up type. See 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1910.215 for full description.
    (10) Snagging means grinding which removes relatively large amounts 
of material without regard to close tolerances or surface finish 
requirements.
    (11) Off-hand grinding means the grinding of any material or part 
which is held in the operator's hand.
    (12) Safety guard means an enclosure designed to restrain the pieces 
of the grinding wheel and furnish all possible protection in the event 
that the wheel is broken in operation. See paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1910.215.
    (13) Cutting off wheels means wheels having diameter thickness and 
hole size dimensions and are subject to all limitations of mounting and 
use listed for type 1 wheels, the definition in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph and paragraph (d) of Sec. 1910.215. They may be steel 
centered, diamond abrasive or organic bonded abrasive of the plain or 
reinforced type.
    (i) Limitation: Cutting off wheels are recommended only for use on 
specially designed and fully guarded machines and are subject to the 
following maximum thickness and hole size limitations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Max.
                       Wheel diameter                          thickness
                                                                (inch)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6 inch and smaller..........................................      \3/18\
Larger than 6 inches to 12 inches...........................       \1/4\
Larger than 12 inches to 23 inches..........................       \3/8\
Larger than 23 inches.......................................       \1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Maximum hole size for cutting-off wheels should not be larger 
than \1/4\-wheel diameter.
    (14) Abrasive wheel means a cutting tool consisting of abrasive 
grains held together by organic or inorganic bonds. Diamond and 
reinforced wheels are included.
    (15) Organic wheels means wheels which are bonded by means of an 
organic material such as resin, rubber, shellac, or other similar 
bonding agent.
    (16) Inorganic wheels means wheels which are bonded by means of 
inorganic material such as clay, glass, porcelain, sodium silicate, 
magnesium oxychloride, or metal. Wheels bonded with clay, glass, 
porcelain or related ceramic materials are characterized as vitrified 
bonded wheels.
    (c) As used in Sec. 1910.216, unless the context clearly requires 
otherwise, the following mills and calenders in the rubber and plastic 
industries terms shall have the meanings prescribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Bite means the nip point between any two inrunning rolls.
    (2) Calender means a machine equipped with two or more metal rolls 
revolving in opposite directions and used for continuously sheeting or 
plying up rubber and plastics compounds

[[Page 592]]

and for frictioning or coating materials with rubber and plastics 
compounds.
    (3) Mill means a machine consisting of two adjacent metal rolls, set 
horizontally, which revolve in opposite directions (i.e., toward each 
other as viewed from above) used for the mechanical working of rubber 
and plastics compounds.
    (d) As used in Sec. 1910.217, unless the context clearly requires 
otherwise, the following power press terms shall have the meaning 
prescribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Antirepeat means the part of the clutch/brake control system 
designed to limit the press to a single stroke if the tripping means is 
held operated. Antirepeat requires release of all tripping mechanisms 
before another stroke can be initiated. Antirepeat is also called single 
stroke reset or reset circuit.
    (2) Brake means the mechanism used on a mechanical power press to 
stop and/or hold the crankshaft, either directly or through a gear 
train, when the clutch is disengaged.
    (3) Bolster plate means the plate attached to the top of the bed of 
the press having drilled holes or T-slots for attaching the lower die or 
die shoe.
    (4) Clutch means the coupling mechanism used on a mechanical power 
press to couple the flywheel to the crankshaft, either directly or 
through a gear train.
    (5) Full revolution clutch means a type of clutch that, when 
tripped, cannot be disengaged until the crankshaft has completed a full 
revolution and the press slide a full stroke.
    (6) Part revolution clutch means a type of clutch that can be 
disengaged at any point before the crankshaft has completed a full 
revolution and the press slide a full stroke.
    (7) Direct drive means the type of driving arrangement wherein no 
clutch is used; coupling and decoupling of the driving torque is 
accomplished by energization and deenergization of a motor. Even though 
not employing a clutch, direct drives match the operational 
characteristics of ``part revolution clutches'' because the driving 
power may be disengaged during the stroke of the press.
    (8) Concurrent means acting in conjunction, and is used to describe 
a situation wherein two or more controls exist in an operated condition 
at the same time.
    (9) Continuous means uninterrupted multiple strokes of the slide 
without intervening stops (or other clutch control action) at the end of 
individual strokes.
    (10) Counterbalance means the mechanism that is used to balance or 
support the weight of the connecting rods, slide, and slide attachments.
    (11) Device means a press control or attachment that:
    (i) Restrains the operator from inadvertently reaching into the 
point of operation, or
    (ii) Prevents normal press operation if the operator's hands are 
inadvertently within the point of operation, or
    (iii) Automatically withdraws the operator's hands if the operator's 
hands are inadvertently within the point of operation as the dies close, 
or
    (iv) Prevents the initiation of a stroke, or stops of stroke in 
progress, when there is an intrusion through the sensing field by any 
part of the operator's body or by any other object.
    (12) Presence sensing device means a device designed, constructed 
and arranged to create a sensing field or area that signals the clutch/
brake control to deactivate the clutch and activate the brake of the 
press when any part of the operator's body or a hand tool is within such 
field or area.
    (13) Gate or movable barrier device means a movable barrier arranged 
to enclose the point of operation before the press stroke can be 
started.
    (14) Holdout or restraint device means a mechanism, including 
attachments for operator's hands, that when anchored and adjusted 
prevent the operator's hands from entering the point of operation.
    (15) Pull-out device means a mechanism attached to the operator's 
hands and connected to the upper die or slide of the press, that is 
designed, when properly adjusted, to withdraw the operator's hands as 
the dies close, if the operator's hands are inadvertently within the 
point of operation.
    (16) Sweep device means a single or double arm (rod) attached to the 
upper

[[Page 593]]

die or slide of the press and designed to move the operator's hands to a 
safe position as the dies close, if the operator's hands are 
inadvertently within the point of operation.
    (17) Two hand control device means a two hand trip that further 
requires concurrent pressure from both hands of the operator during a 
substantial part of the die-closing portion of the stroke of the press.
    (18) Die means the tooling used in a press for cutting or forming 
material. An upper and a lower die make a complete set.
    (19) Die builder means any person who builds dies for power presses.
    (20) Die set means a tool holder held in alignment by guide posts 
and bushings and consisting of a lower shoe, an upper shoe or punch 
holder, and guide posts and bushings.
    (21) Die setter means an individual who places or removes dies in or 
from mechanical power presses, and who, as a part of his duties, makes 
the necessary adjustments to cause the tooling to function properly and 
safely.
    (22) Die setting means the process of placing or removing dies in or 
from a mechanical power press, and the process of adjusting the dies, 
other tooling and safeguarding means to cause them to function properly 
and safely.
    (23) Die shoe means a plate or block upon which a die holder is 
mounted. A die shoe functions primarily as a base for the complete die 
assembly, and, when used, is bolted or clamped to the bolster plate or 
the face of slide.
    (24) Ejector means a mechanism for removing work or material from 
between the dies.
    (25) Face of slide means the bottom surface of the slide to which 
the punch or upper die is generally attached.
    (26) Feeding means the process of placing or removing material 
within or from the point of operation.
    (27) Automatic feeding means feeding wherein the material or part 
being processed is placed within or removed from the point of operation 
by a method or means not requiring action by an operator on each stroke 
of the press.
    (28) Semiautomatic feeding means feeding wherein the material or 
part being processed is placed within or removed from the point of 
operation by an auxiliary means controlled by operator on each stroke of 
the press.
    (29) Manual feeding means feeding wherein the material or part being 
processed is handled by the operator on each stroke of the press.
    (30) Foot control means the foot operated control mechanism designed 
to be used with a clutch or clutch/brake control system.
    (31) Foot pedal means the foot operated lever designed to operate 
the mechanical linkage that trips a full revolution clutch.
    (32) Guard means a barrier that prevents entry of the operator's 
hands or fingers into the point of operation.
    (33) Die enclosure guard means an enclosure attached to the die shoe 
or stripper, or both, in a fixed position.
    (34) Fixed barrier guard means a die space barrier attached to the 
press frame.
    (35) Interlocked press barrier guard means a barrier attached to the 
press frame and interlocked so that the press stroke cannot be started 
normally unless the guard itself, or its hinged or movable sections, 
enclose the point of operation.
    (36) Adjustable barrier guard means a barrier requiring adjustment 
for each job or die setup.
    (37) Guide post means the pin attached to the upper or lower die 
shoe operating within the bushing on the opposing die shoe, to maintain 
the alignment of the upper and lower dies.
    (38) Hand feeding tool means any hand held tool designed for placing 
or removing material or parts to be processed within or from the point 
of operation.
    (39) Inch means an intermittent motion imparted to the slide (on 
machines using part revolution clutches) by momentary operation of the 
Inch operating means. Operation of the Inch operating means engages the 
driving clutch so that a small portion of one stroke or indefinite 
stroking can occur, depending upon the length of time the Inch operating 
means is held operated. Inch is a function used by the die setter for 
setup of dies and tooling, but is not intended for use during production 
operations by the operator.

[[Page 594]]

    (40) Jog means an intermittent motion imparted to the slide by 
momentary operation of the drive motor, after the clutch is engaged with 
the flywheel at rest.
    (41) Knockout means a mechanism for releasing material from either 
die.
    (42) Liftout means the mechanism also known as knockout.
    (43) Operator's station means the complete complement of controls 
used by or available to an operator on a given operation for stroking 
the press.
    (44) Pinch point means any point other than the point of operation 
at which it is possible for a part of the body to be caught between the 
moving parts of a press or auxiliary equipment, or between moving and 
stationary parts of a press or auxiliary equipment or between the 
material and moving part or parts of the press or auxiliary equipment.
    (45) Point of operation means the area of the press where material 
is actually positioned and work is being performed during any process 
such as shearing, punching, forming, or assembling.
    (46) Press means a mechanically powered machine that shears, 
punches, forms or assembles metal or other material by means of cutting, 
shaping, or combination dies attached to slides. A press consists of a 
stationary bed or anvil, and a slide (or slides) having a controlled 
reciprocating motion toward and away from the bed surface, the slide 
being guided in a definite path by the frame of the press.
    (47) Repeat means an unintended or unexpected successive stroke of 
the press resulting from a malfunction.
    (48) Safety block means a prop that, when inserted between the upper 
and lower dies or between the bolster plate and the face of the slide, 
prevents the slide from falling of its own deadweight.
    (49) Single stroke means one complete stroke of the slide, usually 
initiated from a full open (or up) position, followed by closing (or 
down), and then a return to the full open position.
    (50) Single stroke mechanism means an arrangement used on a full 
revolution clutch to limit the travel of the slide to one complete 
stroke at each engagement of the clutch.
    (51) Slide means the main reciprocating press member. A slide is 
also called a ram, plunger, or platen.
    (52) Stop control means an operator control designed to immediately 
deactivate the clutch control and activate the brake to stop slide 
motion.
    (53) Stripper means a mechanism or die part for removing the parts 
or material from the punch.
    (54) Stroking selector means the part of the clutch/brake control 
that determines the type of stroking when the operating means is 
actuated. The stroking selector generally includes positions for ``Off'' 
(Clutch Control), ``Inch,'' ``Single Stroke,'' and ``Continuous'' (when 
Continuous is furnished).
    (55) Trip or (tripping) means activation of the clutch to ``run'' 
the press.
    (56) Turnover bar means a bar used in die setting to manually turn 
the crankshaft of the press.
    (57) Two-hand trip means a clutch actuating means requiring the 
concurrent use of both hands of the operator to trip the press.
    (58) Unitized tooling means a type of die in which the upper and 
lower members are incorporated into a selfcontained unit so arranged as 
to hold the die members in alignment.
    (59) Control system means sensors, manual input and mode selection 
elements, interlocking and decision-making circuitry, and output 
elements to the press operating mechanism.
    (60) Brake monitor means a sensor designed, constructed, and 
arranged to monitor the effectiveness of the press braking system.
    (61) Presence sensing device initiation means an operating mode of 
indirect manual initiation of a single stroke by a presence sensing 
device when it senses that work motions of the operator, related to 
feeding and/or removing parts, are completed and all parts of the 
operator's body or hand tools are safely clear of the point of 
operation.
    (62) Safety system means the integrated total system, including the 
pertinent elements of the press, the controls, the safeguarding and any 
required supplemental safeguarding, and their interfaces with the 
operator, and the environment, designed, constructed and arranged to 
operate together as a

[[Page 595]]

unit, such that a single failure or single operating error will not 
cause injury to personnel due to point of operation hazards.
    (63) Authorized person means one to whom the authority and 
responsibility to perform a specific assignment has been given by the 
employer.
    (64) Certification or certify means, in the case of design 
certification/validation, that the manufacturer has reviewed and tested 
the design and manufacture, and in the case of installation 
certification/validation and annual recertification/revalidation, that 
the employer has reviewed and tested the installation, and concludes in 
both cases that the requirements of Sec. 1910.217 (a) through (h) and 
appendix A have been met. The certifications are made to the validation 
organization.
    (65) Validation or validate means for PSDI safety systems that an 
OSHA recognized third-party validation organization:
    (i) For design certification/validation has reviewed the 
manufacturer's certification that the PSDI safety system meets the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.217 (a) through (h) and appendix A and the 
underlying tests and analyses performed by the manufacturer, has 
performed additional tests and analyses which may be required by 
Sec. 1910.217 (a) through (h) and appendix A, and concludes that the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.217 (a) through (h) and appendix A have been 
met; and
    (ii) For installation certification/validation and annual 
recertification/revalidation has reviewed the employer's certification 
that the PSDI safety system meets the requirements of Sec. 1910.217 (a) 
through (h) and appendix A and the underlying tests performed by the 
employer, has performed additional tests and analyses which may be 
required by Sec. 1910.217 (a) through (h) and appendix A, and concludes 
that the requirements of Sec. 1910.217 (a) through (h) and appendix A 
have been met.
    (66) Certification/validation and certify/validate means the 
combined process of certification and validation.
    (e) As used in Sec. 1910.218, unless the context clearly requires 
otherwise, the following forging and hot metal terms shall have the 
meaning prescribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Forging means the product of work on metal formed to a desired 
shape by impact or pressure in hammers, forging machines (upsetters), 
presses, rolls, and related forming equipment. Forging hammers, 
counterblow equipment and high-energy-rate forging machines impart 
impact to the workpiece, while most other types of forging equipment 
impart squeeze pressure in shaping the stock. Some metals can be forged 
at room temperature, but the majority of metals are made more plastic 
for forging by heating.
    (2) Open framehammers (or blacksmith hammers) mean hammers used 
primarily for the shaping of forgings by means of impact with flat dies. 
Open frame hammers generally are so constructed that the anvil assembly 
is separate from the operating mechanism and machine supports; it rests 
on its own independent foundation. Certain exceptions are forging 
hammers made with frame mounted on the anvil; e.g., the smaller, single-
frame hammers are usually made with the anvil and frame in one piece.
    (3) Steam hammers mean a type of drop hammer where the ram is raised 
for each stroke by a double-action steam cylinder and the energy 
delivered to the workpiece is supplied by the velocity and weight of the 
ram and attached upper die driven downward by steam pressure. Energy 
delivered during each stroke may be varied.
    (4) Gravity hammers mean a class of forging hammer wherein energy 
for forging is obtained by the mass and velocity of a freely falling ram 
and the attached upper die. Examples: board hammers and air-lift 
hammers.
    (5) Forging presses mean a class of forging equipment wherein the 
shaping of metal between dies is performed by mechanical or hydraulic 
pressure, and usually is accomplished with a single workstroke of the 
press for each die station.
    (6) Trimming presses mean a class of auxiliary forging equipment 
which removes flash or excess metal from a forging. This trimming 
operation can also be done cold, as can coining, a product sizing 
operation.
    (7) High-energy-rate forging machines mean a class of forging 
equipment wherein high ram velocities resulting

[[Page 596]]

from the sudden release of a compressed gas against a free piston impart 
impact to the workpiece.
    (8) Forging rolls mean a class of auxiliary forging equipment 
wherein stock is shaped between power driven rolls bearing contoured 
dies. Usually used for preforming, roll forging is often employed to 
reduce thickness and increase length of stock.
    (9) Ring rolls mean a class for forging equipment used for shaping 
weldless rings from pierced discs or thick-walled, ring-shaped blanks 
between rolls which control wall thickness, ring diameter, height and 
contour.
    (10) Bolt-headers mean the same as an upsetter or forging machine 
except that the diameter of stock fed into the machine is much smaller, 
i.e., commonly three-fourths inch or less.
    (11) Rivet making machines mean the same as upsetters and 
boltheaders when producing rivets with stock diameter of 1-inch or more. 
Rivet making with less than 1-inch diameter is usually a cold forging 
operation, and therefore not included in this subpart.
    (12) Upsetters (or forging machines, or headers) type of forging 
equipment, related to the mechanical press, in which the main forming 
energy is applied horizontally to the workpiece which is gripped and 
held by prior action of the dies.
    (f) As used in Sec. 1910.219, unless the context clearly requires 
otherwise, the following mechanical power-transmission guarding terms 
shall have the meaning prescribed in this paragraph.
    (1) Belts include all power transmission belts, such as flat belts, 
round belts, V-belts, etc., unless otherwise specified.
    (2) Belt shifter means a device for mechanically shifting belts from 
tight to loose pulleys or vice versa, or for shifting belts on cones of 
speed pulleys.
    (3) Belt pole (sometimes called a belt shipper or shipper pole,) 
means a device used in shifting belts on and off fixed pulleys on line 
or countershaft where there are no loose pulleys.
    (4) Exposed to contact means that the location of an object is such 
that a person is likely to come into contact with it and be injured.
    (5) Flywheels include flywheels, balance wheels, and flywheel 
pulleys mounted and revolving on crankshaft of engine or other shafting.
    (6) Maintenance runway means any permanent runway or platform used 
for oiling, maintenance, running adjustment, or repair work, but not for 
passageway.
    (7) Nip-point belt and pulley guard means a device which encloses 
the pulley and is provided with rounded or rolled edge slots through 
which the belt passes.
    (8) Point of operation means that point at which cutting, shaping, 
or forming is accomplished upon the stock and shall include such other 
points as may offer a hazard to the operator in inserting or 
manipulating the stock in the operation of the machine.
    (9) Prime movers include steam, gas, oil, and air engines, motors, 
steam and hydraulic turbines, and other equipment used as a source of 
power.
    (10) Sheaves mean grooved pulleys, and shall be so classified unless 
used as flywheels.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 39 FR 41846, Dec. 3, 1974; 53 
FR 8353, Mar. 14, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.212  General requirements for all machines.

    (a) Machine guarding--(1) Types of guarding. One or more methods of 
machine guarding shall be provided to protect the operator and other 
employees in the machine area from hazards such as those created by 
point of operation, ingoing nip points, rotating parts, flying chips and 
sparks. Examples of guarding methods are--barrier guards, two-hand 
tripping devices, electronic safety devices, etc.
    (2) General requirements for machine guards. Guards shall be affixed 
to the machine where possible and secured elsewhere if for any reason 
attachment to the machine is not possible. The guard shall be such that 
it does not offer an accident hazard in itself.
    (3) Point of operation guarding. (i) Point of operation is the area 
on a machine where work is actually performed upon the material being 
processed.
    (ii) The point of operation of machines whose operation exposes an 
employee to injury, shall be guarded. The guarding device shall be in 
conformity

[[Page 597]]

with any appropriate standards therefor, or, in the absence of 
applicable specific standards, shall be so designed and constructed as 
to prevent the operator from having any part of his body in the danger 
zone during the operating cycle.
    (iii) Special handtools for placing and removing material shall be 
such as to permit easy handling of material without the operator placing 
a hand in the danger zone. Such tools shall not be in lieu of other 
guarding required by this section, but can only be used to supplement 
protection provided.
    (iv) The following are some of the machines which usually require 
point of operation guarding:
    (a) Guillotine cutters.
    (b) Shears.
    (c) Alligator shears.
    (d) Power presses.
    (e) Milling machines.
    (f) Power saws.
    (g) Jointers.
    (h) Portable power tools.
    (i) Forming rolls and calenders.
    (4) Barrels, containers, and drums. Revolving drums, barrels, and 
containers shall be guarded by an enclosure which is interlocked with 
the drive mechanism, so that the barrel, drum, or container cannot 
revolve unless the guard enclosure is in place.
    (5) Exposure of blades. When the periphery of the blades of a fan is 
less than seven (7) feet above the floor or working level, the blades 
shall be guarded. The guard shall have openings no larger than one-half 
(\1/2\) inch.
    (b) Anchoring fixed machinery. Machines designed for a fixed 
location shall be securely anchored to prevent walking or moving.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.213  Woodworking machinery requirements.

    (a) Machine construction general. (1) Each machine shall be so 
constructed as to be free from sensible vibration when the largest size 
tool is mounted and run idle at full speed.
    (2) Arbors and mandrels shall be constructed so as to have firm and 
secure bearing and be free from play.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Any automatic cutoff saw that strokes continuously without the 
operator being able to control each stroke shall not be used.
    (5) Saw frames or tables shall be constructed with lugs cast on the 
frame or with an equivalent means to limit the size of the saw blade 
that can be mounted, so as to avoid overspeed caused by mounting a saw 
larger than intended.
    (6) Circular saw fences shall be so constructed that they can be 
firmly secured to the table or table assembly without changing their 
alignment with the saw. For saws with tilting tables or tilting arbors 
the fence shall be so constructed that it will remain in a line parallel 
with the saw, regardless of the angle of the saw with the table.
    (7) Circular saw gages shall be so constructed as to slide in 
grooves or tracks that are accurately machined, to insure exact 
alignment with the saw for all positions of the guide.
    (8) Hinged saw tables shall be so constructed that the table can be 
firmly secured in any position and in true alignment with the saw.
    (9) All belts, pulleys, gears, shafts, and moving parts shall be 
guarded in accordance with the specific requirements of Sec. 1910.219.
    (10) It is recommended that each power-driven woodworking machine be 
provided with a disconnect switch that can be locked in the off 
position.
    (11) The frames and all exposed, noncurrent-carrying metal parts of 
portable electric woodworking machinery operated at more than 90 volts 
to ground shall be grounded and other portable motors driving electric 
tools which are held in the hand while being operated shall be grounded 
if they operate at more than 90 volts to ground. The ground shall be 
provided through use of a separate ground wire and polarized plug and 
receptacle.
    (12) For all circular saws where conditions are such that there is a 
possibility of contact with the portion of the saw either beneath or 
behind the table, that portion of the saw shall be covered with an 
exhaust hood, or, if no exhaust system is required, with a guard that 
shall be so arranged as to prevent accidental contact with the saw.
    (13) Revolving double arbor saws shall be fully guarded in 
accordance

[[Page 598]]

with all the requirements for circular crosscut saws or with all the 
requirements for circular ripsaws, according to the kind of saws mounted 
on the arbors.
    (14) No saw, cutter head, or tool collar shall be placed or mounted 
on a machine arbor unless the tool has been accurately machined to size 
and shape to fit the arbor.
    (15) Combs (featherboards) or suitable jigs shall be provided at the 
workplace for use when a standard guard cannot be used, as in dadoing, 
grooving, jointing, moulding, and rabbeting.
    (b) Machine controls and equipment. (1) A mechanical or electrical 
power control shall be provided on each machine to make it possible for 
the operator to cut off the power from each machine without leaving his 
position at the point of operation.
    (2) On machines driven by belts and shafting, a locking-type belt 
shifter or an equivalent positive device shall be used.
    (3) On applications where injury to the operator might result if 
motors were to restart after power failures, provision shall be made to 
prevent machines from automatically restarting upon restoration of 
power.
    (4) Power controls and operating controls should be located within 
easy reach of the operator while he is at his regular work location, 
making it unnecessary for him to reach over the cutter to make 
adjustments. This does not apply to constant pressure controls used only 
for setup purposes.
    (5) On each machine operated by electric motors, positive means 
shall be provided for rendering such controls or devices inoperative 
while repairs or adjustments are being made to the machines they 
control.
    (6) Each operating treadle shall be protected against unexpected or 
accidental tripping.
    (7) Feeder attachments shall have the feed rolls or other moving 
parts so covered or guarded as to protect the operator from hazardous 
points.
    (c) Hand-fed ripsaws. (1) Each circular hand-fed ripsaw shall be 
guarded by a hood which shall completely enclose that portion of the saw 
above the table and that portion of the saw above the material being 
cut. The hood and mounting shall be arranged so that the hood will 
automatically adjust itself to the thickness of and remain in contact 
with the material being cut but it shall not offer any considerable 
resistance to insertion of material to saw or to passage of the material 
being sawed. The hood shall be made of adequate strength to resist blows 
and strains incidental to reasonable operation, adjusting, and handling, 
and shall be so designed as to protect the operator from flying 
splinters and broken saw teeth. It shall be made of material that is 
soft enough so that it will be unlikely to cause tooth breakage. The 
hood shall be so mounted as to insure that its operation will be 
positive, reliable, and in true alignment with the saw; and the mounting 
shall be adequate in strength to resist any reasonable side thrust or 
other force tending to throw it out of line.
    (2) Each hand-fed circular ripsaw shall be furnished with a spreader 
to prevent material from squeezing the saw or being thrown back on the 
operator. The spreader shall be made of hard tempered steel, or its 
equivalent, and shall be thinner than the saw kerf. It shall be of 
sufficient width to provide adequate stiffness or rigidity to resist any 
reasonable side thrust or blow tending to bend or throw it out of 
position. The spreader shall be attached so that it will remain in true 
alignment with the saw even when either the saw or table is tilted. The 
provision of a spreader in connection with grooving, dadoing, or 
rabbeting is not required. On the completion of such operations, the 
spreader shall be immediately replaced.
    (3) Each hand-fed circular ripsaw shall be provided with nonkickback 
fingers or dogs so located as to oppose the thrust or tendency of the 
saw to pick up the material or to throw it back toward the operator. 
They shall be designed to provide adequate holding power for all the 
thicknesses of materials being cut.
    (d) Hand-fed crosscut table saws. (1) Each circular crosscut table 
saw shall be guarded by a hood which shall meet all the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section for hoods for circular ripsaws.
    (2) [Reserved]

[[Page 599]]

    (e) Circular resaws. (1) Each circular resaw shall be guarded by a 
hood or shield of metal above the saw. This hood or shield shall be so 
designed as to guard against danger from flying splinters or broken saw 
teeth.
    (2) Each circular resaw (other than self-feed saws with a roller or 
wheel at back of the saw) shall be provided with a spreader fastened 
securely behind the saw. The spreader shall be slightly thinner than the 
saw kerf and slightly thicker than the saw disk.
    (f) Self-feed circular saws. (1) Feed rolls and saws shall be 
protected by a hood or guard to prevent the hands of the operator from 
coming in contact with the in-running rolls at any point. The guard 
shall be constructed of heavy material, preferably metal, and the bottom 
of the guard shall come down to within three-eighths inch of the plane 
formed by the bottom or working surfaces of the feed rolls. This 
distance (three-eighths inch) may be increased to three-fourths inch, 
provided the lead edge of the hood is extended to be not less than 5\1/
2\ inches in front of the nip point between the front roll and the work.
    (2) Each self-feed circular ripsaw shall be provided with sectional 
non-kickback fingers for the full width of the feed rolls. They shall be 
located in front of the saw and so arranged as to be in continual 
contact with the wood being fed.
    (g) Swing cutoff saws. The requirements of this paragraph are also 
applicable to sliding cutoff saws mounted above the table.
    (1) Each swing cutoff saw shall be provided with a hood that will 
completely enclose the upper half of the saw, the arbor end, and the 
point of operation at all positions of the saw. The hood shall be 
constructed in such a manner and of such material that it will protect 
the operator from flying splinters and broken saw teeth. Its hood shall 
be so designed that it will automatically cover the lower portion of the 
blade, so that when the saw is returned to the back of the table the 
hood will rise on top of the fence, and when the saw is moved forward 
the hood will drop on top of and remain in contact with the table or 
material being cut.
    (2) Each swing cutoff saw shall be provided with an effective device 
to return the saw automatically to the back of the table when released 
at any point of its travel. Such a device shall not depend for its 
proper functioning upon any rope, cord, or spring. If there is a 
counterweight, the bolts supporting the bar and counterweight shall be 
provided with cotter pins; and the counterweight shall be prevented from 
dropping by either a bolt passing through both the bar and 
counterweight, or a bolt put through the extreme end of the bar, or, 
where the counterweight does not encircle the bar, a safety chain 
attached to it.
    (3) Limit chains or other equally effective devices shall be 
provided to prevent the saw from swinging beyond the front or back edges 
of the table, or beyond a forward position where the gullets of the 
lowest saw teeth will rise above the table top.
    (4) Inverted swing cutoff saws shall be provided with a hood that 
will cover the part of the saw that protrudes above the top of the table 
or above the material being cut. It shall automatically adjust itself to 
the thickness of and remain in contact with the material being cut.
    (h) Radial saws. (1) The upper hood shall completely enclose the 
upper portion of the blade down to a point that will include the end of 
the saw arbor. The upper hood shall be constructed in such a manner and 
of such material that it will protect the operator from flying 
splinters, broken saw teeth, etc., and will deflect sawdust away from 
the operator. The sides of the lower exposed portion of the blade shall 
be guarded to the full diameter of the blade by a device that will 
automatically adjust itself to the thickness of the stock and remain in 
contact with stock being cut to give maximum protection possible for the 
operation being performed.
    (2) Each radial saw used for ripping shall be provided with 
nonkickback fingers or dogs located on both sides of the saw so as to 
oppose the thrust or tendency of the saw to pick up the material or to 
throw it back toward the operator. They shall be designed to provide 
adequate holding power for all the thicknesses of material being cut.

[[Page 600]]

    (3) An adjustable stop shall be provided to prevent the forward 
travel of the blade beyond the position necessary to complete the cut in 
repetitive operations.
    (4) Installation shall be in such a manner that the front end of the 
unit will be slightly higher than the rear, so as to cause the cutting 
head to return gently to the starting position when released by the 
operator.
    (5) Ripping and ploughing shall be against the direction in which 
the saw turns. The direction of the saw rotation shall be conspicuously 
marked on the hood. In addition, a permanent label not less than 1\1/2\ 
inches by \3/4\ inch shall be affixed to the rear of the guard at 
approximately the level of the arbor, reading as follows: ``Danger: Do 
Not Rip or Plough From This End''.
    (i) Bandsaws and band resaws. (1) All portions of the saw blade 
shall be enclosed or guarded, except for the working portion of the 
blade between the bottom of the guide rolls and the table. Bandsaw 
wheels shall be fully encased. The outside periphery of the enclosure 
shall be solid. The front and back of the band wheels shall be either 
enclosed by solid material or by wire mesh or perforated metal. Such 
mesh or perforated metal shall be not less than 0.037 inch (U.S. Gage 
No. 20), and the openings shall be not greater than three-eighths inch. 
Solid material used for this purpose shall be of an equivalent strength 
and firmness. The guard for the portion of the blade between the sliding 
guide and the upper-saw-wheel guard shall protect the saw blade at the 
front and outer side. This portion of the guard shall be self-adjusting 
to raise and lower with the guide. The upper-wheel guard shall be made 
to conform to the travel of the saw on the wheel.
    (2) Each bandsaw machine shall be provided with a tension control 
device to indicate a proper tension for the standard saws used on the 
machine, in order to assist in the elimination of saw breakage due to 
improper tension.
    (3) Feed rolls of band resaws shall be protected with a suitable 
guard to prevent the hands of the operator from coming in contact with 
the in-running rolls at any point. The guard shall be constructed of 
heavy material, preferably metal, and the edge of the guard shall come 
to within three-eighths inch of the plane formed by the inside face of 
the feed roll in contact with the stock being cut.
    (j) Jointers. (1) Each hand-fed planer and jointer with horizontal 
head shall be equipped with a cylindrical cutting head, the knife 
projection of which shall not exceed one-eighth inch beyond the 
cylindrical body of the head.
    (2) The opening in the table shall be kept as small as possible. The 
clearance between the edge of the rear table and the cutter head shall 
be not more than one-eighth inch. The table throat opening shall be not 
more than 2\1/2\ inches when tables are set or aligned with each other 
for zero cut.
    (3) Each hand-fed jointer with a horizontal cutting head shall have 
an automatic guard which will cover all the section of the head on the 
working side of the fence or gage. The guard shall effectively keep the 
operator's hand from coming in contact with the revolving knives. The 
guard shall automatically adjust itself to cover the unused portion of 
the head and shall remain in contact with the material at all times.
    (4) Each hand-fed jointer with horizontal cutting head shall have a 
guard which will cover the section of the head back of the gage or 
fence.
    (5) Each wood jointer with vertical head shall have either an 
exhaust hood or other guard so arranged as to enclose completely the 
revolving head, except for a slot of such width as may be necessary and 
convenient for the application of the material to be jointed.
    (k) Tenoning machines. (1) Feed chains and sprockets of all double 
end tenoning machines shall be completely enclosed, except for that 
portion of chain used for conveying the stock.
    (2) At the rear ends of frames over which feed conveyors run, 
sprockets and chains shall be guarded at the sides by plates projecting 
beyond the periphery of sprockets and the ends of lugs.
    (3) Each tenoning machine shall have all cutting heads, and saws if 
used, covered by metal guards. These guards shall cover at least the 
unused part of the periphery of the cutting head. If such a guard is 
constructed of sheet metal, the material used shall be not

[[Page 601]]

less than one-sixteenth inch in thickness, and if cast iron is used, it 
shall be not less than three-sixteenths inch in thickness.
    (4) Where an exhaust system is used, the guard shall form part or 
all of the exhaust hood and shall be constructed of metal of a thickness 
not less than that specified in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph.
    (l) Boring and mortising machines. (1) Safety-bit chucks with no 
projecting set screws shall be used.
    (2) Boring bits should be provided with a guard that will enclose 
all portions of the bit and chuck above the material being worked.
    (3) The top of the cutting chain and driving mechanism shall be 
enclosed.
    (4) If there is a counterweight, one of the following or equivalent 
means shall be used to prevent its dropping:
    (i) It shall be bolted to the bar by means of a bolt passing through 
both bar and counterweight;
    (ii) A bolt shall be put through the extreme end of the bar;
    (iii) Where the counterweight does not encircle the bar, a safety 
chain shall be attached to it;
    (iv) Other types of counterweights shall be suspended by chain or 
wire rope and shall travel in a pipe or other suitable enclosure 
wherever they might fall and cause injury.
    (5) Universal joints on spindles of boring machines shall be 
completely enclosed in such a way as to prevent accidental contact by 
the operator.
    (6) Each operating treadle shall be covered by an inverted U-shaped 
metal guard, fastened to the floor, and of adequate size to prevent 
accidental tripping.
    (m) Wood shapers and similar equipment. (1) The cutting heads of 
each wood shaper, hand-fed panel raiser, or other similar machine not 
automatically fed, shall be enclosed with a cage or adjustable guard so 
designed as to keep the operator's hand away from the cutting edge. The 
diameter of circular shaper guards shall be not less than the greatest 
diameter of the cutter. In no case shall a warning device of leather or 
other material attached to the spindle be acceptable.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) All double-spindle shapers shall be provided with a spindle 
starting and stopping device for each spindle.
    (n) Planing, molding, sticking, and matching machines. (1) Each 
planing, molding, sticking, and matching machine shall have all cutting 
heads, and saws if used, covered by a metal guard. If such guard is 
constructed of sheet metal, the material used shall be not less than \1/
16\ inch in thickness, and if cast iron is used, it shall be not less 
than three-sixteenths inch in thickness.
    (2) Where an exhaust system is used, the guards shall form part or 
all of the exhaust hood and shall be constructed of metal of a thickness 
not less than that specified in paragraph (h)(1) of this section.
    (3) Feed rolls shall be guarded by a hood or suitable guard to 
prevent the hands of the operator from coming in contact with the in-
running rolls at any point. The guard shall be fastened to the frame 
carrying the rolls so as to remain in adjustment for any thickness of 
stock.
    (4) Surfacers or planers used in thicknessing multiple pieces of 
material simultaneously shall be provided with sectional infeed rolls 
having sufficient yield in the construction of the sections to provide 
feeding contact pressure on the stock, over the permissible range of 
variation in stock thickness specified or for which the machine is 
designed. In lieu of such yielding sectional rolls, suitable section 
kickback finger devices shall be provided at the infeed end.
    (o) Profile and swing-head lathes and wood heel turning machine. (1) 
Each profile and swing-head lathe shall have all cutting heads covered 
by a metal guard. If such a guard is constructed of sheet metal, the 
material used shall be not less than one-sixteenth inch in thickness; 
and if cast iron is used, it shall not be less than three-sixteenths 
inch in thickness.
    (2) Cutting heads on wood-turning lathes, whether rotating or not, 
shall be covered as completely as possible by hoods or shields.
    (3) Shoe last and spoke lathes, doweling machines, wood heel turning 
machines, and other automatic wood-turning lathes of the rotating knife

[[Page 602]]

type shall be equipped with hoods enclosing the cutter blades completely 
except at the contact points while the stock is being cut.
    (4) Lathes used for turning long pieces of wood stock held only 
between the two centers shall be equipped with long curved guards 
extending over the tops of the lathes in order to prevent the work 
pieces from being thrown out of the machines if they should become 
loose.
    (5) Where an exhaust system is used, the guard shall form part or 
all of the exhaust hood and shall be constructed of metal of a thickness 
not less than that specified in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph.
    (p) Sanding machines. (1) Feed rolls of self-feed sanding machines 
shall be protected with a semicylindrical guard to prevent the hands of 
the operator from coming in contact with the in-running rolls at any 
point. The guard shall be constructed of heavy material, preferably 
metal, and firmly secured to the frame carrying the rolls so as to 
remain in adjustment for any thickness of stock. The bottom of the guard 
should come down to within three-eighths inch of a plane formed by the 
bottom or contact face of the feed roll where it touches the stock.
    (2) Each drum sanding machine shall have an exhaust hood, or other 
guard if no exhaust system is required, so arranged as to enclose the 
revolving drum, except for that portion of the drum above the table, if 
a table is used, which may be necessary and convenient for the 
application of the material to be finished.
    (3) Each disk sanding machine shall have the exhaust hood, or other 
guard if no exhaust system is required, so arranged as to enclose the 
revolving disk, except for that portion of the disk above the table, if 
a table is used, which may be necessary for the application of the 
material to be finished.
    (4) Belt sanding machines shall be provided with guards at each nip 
point where the sanding belt runs on to a pulley. These guards shall 
effectively prevent the hands or fingers of the operator from coming in 
contact with the nip points. The unused run of the sanding belt shall be 
guarded against accidental contact.
    (q) Veneer cutters and wringers. (1) Veneer slicer knives shall be 
guarded to prevent accidental contact with knife edge, at both front and 
rear.
    (2) Veneer clippers shall have automatic feed or shall be provided 
with a guard which will make it impossible to place a finger or fingers 
under the knife while feeding or removing the stock.
    (3) Sprockets on chain or slat-belt conveyors shall be enclosed.
    (4) Where practicable, hand and footpower guillotine veneer cutters 
shall be provided with rods or plates or other satisfactory means, so 
arranged on the feeding side that the hands cannot reach the cutting 
edge of the knife while feeding or holding the stock in place.
    (5) Power-driven guillotine veneer cutters, except continuous feed 
trimmers, shall be equipped with:
    (i) Starting devices which require the simultaneous action of both 
hands to start the cutting motion and of at least one hand on a control 
during the complete stroke of the knife; or
    (ii) An automatic guard which will remove the hands of the operator 
from the danger zone at every descent of the blade, used in conjunction 
with one-hand starting devices which require two distinct movements of 
the device to start the cutting motion, and so designed as to return 
positively to the nonstarting position after each complete cycle of the 
knife.
    (6) Where two or more workers are employed at the same time on the 
same power-driven guillotine veneer cutter equipped with two-hand 
control, the device shall be so arranged that each worker shall be 
required to use both hands simultaneously on the controls to start the 
cutting motion, and at least one hand on a control to complete the cut.
    (7) Power-driven guillotine veneer cutters, other than continuous 
trimmers, shall be provided, in addition to the brake or other stopping 
mechanism, with an emergency device which will prevent the machine from 
operating in the event of failure of the brake when the starting 
mechanism is in the nonstarting position.
    (r) Miscellaneous woodworking machines. (1) The feed rolls of roll 
type

[[Page 603]]

glue spreaders shall be guarded by a semicylindrical guard. The bottom 
of the guard shall come to within three-eighths inch of a plane formed 
by bottom or contact face of the feed roll where it touches the stock.
    (2) Drag saws shall be so located as to give at least a 4-foot 
clearance for passage when the saw is at the extreme end of the stroke; 
or if such clearance is not obtainable, the saw and its driving 
mechanism shall be provided with a standard enclosure.
    (3) For combination or universal woodworking machines each point of 
operation of any tool shall be guarded as required for such a tool in a 
separate machine.
    (4) The mention of specific machines in paragraphs (a) thru (q) and 
this paragraph (r) of this section, inclusive, is not intended to 
exclude other woodworking machines from the requirement that suitable 
guards and exhaust hoods be provided to reduce to a minimum the hazard 
due to the point of operation of such machines.
    (s) Inspection and maintenance of woodworking machinery. (1) Dull, 
badly set, improperly filed, or improperly tensioned saws shall be 
immediately removed from service, before they begin to cause the 
material to stick, jam, or kick back when it is fed to the saw at normal 
speed. Saws to which gum has adhered on the sides shall be immediately 
cleaned.
    (2) All knives and cutting heads of woodworking machines shall be 
kept sharp, properly adjusted, and firmly secured. Where two or more 
knives are used in one head, they shall be properly balanced.
    (3) Bearings shall be kept free from lost motion and shall be well 
lubricated.
    (4) Arbors of all circular saws shall be free from play.
    (5) Sharpening or tensioning of saw blades or cutters shall be done 
only by persons of demonstrated skill in this kind of work.
    (6) Emphasis is placed upon the importance of maintaining 
cleanliness around woodworking machinery, particularly as regards the 
effective functioning of guards and the prevention of fire hazards in 
switch enclosures, bearings, and motors.
    (7) All cracked saws shall be removed from service.
    (8) The practice of inserting wedges between the saw disk and the 
collar to form what is commonly known as a ``wobble saw'' shall not be 
permitted.
    (9) Push sticks or push blocks shall be provided at the work place 
in the several sizes and types suitable for the work to be done.
    (10)-(11) [Reserved]
    (12) The knife blade of jointers shall be so installed and adjusted 
that it does not protrude more than one-eighth inch beyond the 
cylindrical body of the head. Push sticks or push blocks shall be 
provided at the work place in the several sizes and types suitable for 
the work to be done.
    (13) Whenever veneer slicers or rotary veneer-cutting machines have 
been shutdown for the purpose of inserting logs or to make adjustments, 
operators shall make sure that machine is clear and other workmen are 
not in a hazardous position before starting the machine.
    (14) Operators shall not ride the carriage of a veneer slicer.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49750, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.214  Cooperage machinery. [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.215  Abrasive wheel machinery.

    (a) General requirements--(1) Machine guarding. Abrasive wheels 
shall be used only on machines provided with safety guards as defined in 
the following paragraphs of this section, except:
    (i) Wheels used for internal work while within the work being 
ground;
    (ii) Mounted wheels, used in portable operations, 2 inches and 
smaller in diameter; and
    (iii) Types 16, 17, 18, 18R, and 19 cones, plugs, and threaded hole 
pot balls where the work offers protection.
    (2) Guard design. The safety guard shall cover the spindle end, nut, 
and flange projections. The safety guard shall be mounted so as to 
maintain proper alignment with the wheel, and the strength of the 
fastenings shall exceed the strength of the guard, except:
    (i) Safety guards on all operations where the work provides a 
suitable

[[Page 604]]

measure of protection to the operator, may be so constructed that the 
spindle end, nut, and outer flange are exposed; and where the nature of 
the work is such as to entirely cover the side of the wheel, the side 
covers of the guard may be omitted; and
    (ii) The spindle end, nut, and outer flange may be exposed on 
machines designed as portable saws.
    (3) Flanges. Grinding machines shall be equipped with flanges in 
accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (4) Work rests. On offhand grinding machines, work rests shall be 
used to support the work. They shall be of rigid construction and 
designed to be adjustable to compensate for wheel wear. Work rests shall 
be kept adjusted closely to the wheel with a maximum opening of one-
eighth inch to prevent the work from being jammed between the wheel and 
the rest, which may cause wheel breakage. The work rest shall be 
securely clamped after each adjustment. The adjustment shall not be made 
with the wheel in motion.
    (5) Excluded machinery. Natural sandstone wheels and metal, wooden, 
cloth, or paper discs, having a layer of abrasive on the surface are not 
covered by this section.
    (b) Guarding of abrasive wheel machinery--(1) Cup wheels. Cup wheels 
(Types 6 and 11) shall be protected by:
    (i) Safety guards as specified in paragraphs (b) (1) through (10) of 
this section;
    (ii) Band type guards as specified in paragraph (b)(11) of this 
section; and
    (iii) Special ``Revolving Cup Guards'' which mount behind the wheel 
and turn with it. They shall be made of steel or other material with 
adequate strength and shall enclose the wheel sides upward from the back 
for one-third of the wheel thickness. The mounting features shall 
conform with all requirements of this section. It is necessary to 
maintain clearance between the wheel side and the guard. This clearance 
shall not exceed one-sixteenth inch.
    (2) Guard exposure angles. The maximum exposure angles specified in 
paragraphs (b) (3) through (8) of this section shall not be exceeded. 
Visors or other accessory equipment shall not be included as a part of 
the guard when measuring the guard opening, unless such equipment has 
strength equal to that of the guard.
    (3) Bench and floor stands. The angular exposure of the grinding 
wheel periphery and sides for safety guards used on machines known as 
bench and floor stands should not exceed 90 deg. or one-fourth of the 
periphery. This exposure shall begin at a point not more than 65 deg. 
above the horizontal plane of the wheel spindle. (See Figures O-6 and O-
7 and paragraph (b)(9) of this section.)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.057

                   Figure No. O-6      Figure No. O-7

Wherever the nature of the work requires contact with the wheel below 
the horizontal plane of the spindle, the exposure shall not exceed 
125 deg.. (See Figures O-8 and O-9.)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.058

                   Figure No. O-8      Figure No. O-9
    (4) Cylindrical grinders. The maximum angular exposure of the 
grinding wheel periphery and sides for safety guards used on cylindrical 
grinding machines shall not exceed 180 deg.. This exposure shall begin 
at a point not more than 65 deg. above the horizontal plane of the wheel 
spindle. (See Figures O-10 and O-11 and subparagraph (9) of this 
paragraph.)

[[Page 605]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.059


                  Figure No. O-10      Figure No. O-11
    (5) Surface grinders and cutting-off machines. The maximum angular 
exposure of the grinding wheel periphery and sides for safety guards 
used on cutting-off machines and on surface grinding machines which 
employ the wheel periphery shall not exceed 150 deg.. This exposure 
shall begin at a point not less than 15 deg. below the horizontal plane 
of the wheel spindle. (See Figures O-12 and O-13)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.060

                  Figure No. O-12      Figure No. O-13
    (6) Swing frame grinders. The maximum angular exposure of the 
grinding wheel periphery and sides for safety guards used on machines 
known as swing frame grinding machines shall not exceed 180 deg., and 
the top half of the wheel shall be enclosed at all times. (See Figures 
O-14 and O-15.)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.061

                  Figure No. O-14      Figure No. O-15
    (7) Automatic snagging machines. The maximum angular exposure of the 
grinding wheel periphery and sides for safety guards used on grinders 
known as automatic snagging machines shall not exceed 180 deg. and the 
top half of the wheel shall be enclosed at all times. (See Figures O-14 
and O-15.)
    (8) Top grinding. Where the work is applied to the wheel above the 
horizontal centerline, the exposure of the grinding wheel periphery 
shall be as small as possible and shall not exceed 60 deg.. (See Figures 
O-16 and O-17.)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.062

                  Figure No. O-16      Figure No. O-17
    (9) Exposure adjustment. Safety guards of the types described in 
subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this paragraph, where the operator stands 
in front of the opening, shall be constructed so that the peripheral 
protecting member can be adjusted to the constantly decreasing diameter 
of the wheel. The maximum angular exposure above the horizontal plane of 
the wheel spindle as specified in paragraphs (b) (3) and (4) of this 
section shall never be exceeded, and the distance between the wheel 
periphery and the adjustable tongue or the end of the peripheral member 
at the top shall never exceed one-fourth inch. (See Figures O-18, O-19, 
O-20, O-21, O-22, and O-23.)
    (10) Material requirements and minimum dimensions. (i) See Figures 
O-36 and O-37 and Table O-9 for minimum basic thickness of peripheral 
and side members for various types of safety guards and classes of 
service.
    (ii) If operating speed does not exceed 8,000 surface feet per 
minute cast iron safety guards, malleable iron guards or other guards as 
described in paragraph (b)(10)(iii) of this section shall be used.
    (iii) Cast steel, or structural steel, safety guards as specified in 
Figures O-36 and O-37 and Table O-9 shall be used where operating speeds 
of wheels are faster than 8,000 surface feet per minute up to a maximum 
of 16,000 surface feet per minute.
    (iv) For cutting-off wheels 16 inches diameter and smaller and where 
speed does not exceed 16,000 surface feet per minute, cast iron or 
malleable iron safety guards as specified in Figures O-

[[Page 606]]

36 and O-37, and in Table O-9 shall be used.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.063

                  Figure No. O-18      Figure No. O-19

                                 correct

Showing adjustable tongue giving required angular protection for all 
sizes of wheel used.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.064

                  Figure No. O-20      Figure No. O-21

                                 correct

Showing movable guard with opening small enough to give required 
protection for smallest size wheel used.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.065

                  Figure No. O-22      Figure No. O-23

                                incorrect

Showing movable guard with size of opening correct for full size wheel 
but too large for smaller wheels.

    (v) For cutting-off wheels larger than 16 inches diameter and where 
speed does not exceed 14,200 surface feet per minute, safety guards as 
specified in Figures O-27 and O-28, and in Table O-1 shall be used.
    (vi) For thread grinding wheels not exceeding 1 inch in thickness 
cast iron or malleable iron safety guards as specified in Figures O-36 
and O-37, and in Table O-9 shall be used.
    (11) Band type guards--general specifications. Band type guards 
shall conform to the following general specifications:
    (i) The bands shall be of steel plate or other material of equal or 
greater strength. They shall be continuous, the ends being either 
riveted, bolted, or welded together in such a manner as to leave the 
inside free from projections.
    (ii) The inside diameter of the band shall not be more than 1 inch 
larger than the outside diameter of the wheel, and shall be mounted as 
nearly concentric with the wheel as practicable.
    (iii) The band shall be of sufficient width and its position kept so 
adjusted that at no time will the wheel protrude beyond the edge of the 
band a distance greater than that indicated in Figure O-29 and in Table 
O-2 or the wall thickness (W), whichever is smaller.
    (12) Guard design specifications. Abrasive wheel machinery guards 
shall meet the design specifications of the American National Standard 
Safety Code for the Use, Care, and Protection of Abrasive Wheels, ANSI 
B7.1-1970, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6. This requirement shall not apply to natural sandstone 
wheels or metal, wooden, cloth, or paper discs, having a layer of 
abrasive on the surface.
    (c) Flanges--(1) General requirements. All abrasive wheels shall be 
mounted between flanges which shall not be less than one-third the 
diameter of the wheel.
    (i) Exceptions:
    (a) Mounted wheels.
    (b) Portable wheels with threaded inserts or projecting studs.
    (c) Abrasive discs (inserted nut, inserted washer and projecting 
stud type).
    (d) Plate mounted wheels.
    (e) Cylinders, cup, or segmental wheels that are mounted in chucks.
    (f) Types 27 and 28 wheels.
    (g) Certain internal wheels.
    (h) Modified types 6 and 11 wheels (terrazzo).
    (i) Cutting-off wheels, Types 1 and 27A (see paragraphs (c)(1) (ii) 
and (iii) of this section).

[[Page 607]]

    (ii) Type 1 cutting-off wheels are to be mounted between properly 
relieved flanges which have matching bearing surfaces. Such flanges 
shall be at least one-fourth the wheel diameter.
    (iii) Type 27A cutting-off wheels are designed to be mounted by 
means of flat, not relieved, flanges having matching bearing surfaces 
and which may be less than one-third but shall not be less than one-
fourth the wheel diameter. (See Figure O-24 for one such type of 
mounting.)
    (iv) There are three general types of flanges:
    (a) Straight relieved flanges (see Figure O-32);
    (b) Straight unrelieved flanges (see Figure O-30);
    (c) Adaptor flanges (see Figures O-33 and O-34);
    (v) Regardless of flange type used, the wheel shall always be 
guarded. Blotters shall be used in accordance with paragraph (c)(6) of 
this section.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.066

                             Figure No. O-24
The Type 27 A Wheel is mounted between flat non-relieved flanges of 
equal bearing surfaces.

    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Finish and balance. Flanges shall be dimensionally accurate and 
in good balance. There shall be no rough surfaces or sharp edges.
    (4) Uniformity of diameter. (i) Both flanges, of any type, between 
which a wheel is mounted, shall be of the same diameter and have equal 
bearing surface. Exceptions are set forth in the remaining subdivisions 
of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Type 27 and Type 28 wheels, because of their shape and usage, 
require specially designed adaptors. The back flange shall extend beyond 
the central hub or raised portion and contact the wheel to counteract 
the side pressure on the wheel in use. The adaptor nut which is less 
than the minimum one-third diameter of wheel fits in the depressed side 
of wheel to prevent interference in side grinding and serves to drive 
the wheel by its clamping force against the depressed portion of the 
back flange. The variance in flange diameters, the adaptor nut being 
less than one-third wheel diameter, and the use of side pressure in 
wheel operation limits the use to reinforced organic bonded wheels. 
Mounts which are affixed to the wheel by the manufacturer shall not be 
reused. Type 27 and Type 28 wheels shall be used only with a safety 
guard located between wheel and operator during use. (See Figure O-24-
A.)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.067

                            Figure No. O-24-A
Types 27 and 28 wheels, because of their shape, require specially 
designed adaptors.

    (iii) Modified Types 6 and 11 wheels (terrazzo) with tapered K 
dimension.
    (5) Recess and undercut. (i) Straight relieved flanges made 
according to Table O-6 and Figure O-32 shall be recessed at least one-
sixteenth inch on the side next to the wheel for a distance as specified 
in Table O-6.
    (ii) Straight flanges of the adaptor or sleeve type (Table O-7 and 
Figures O-33 and O-34) shall be undercut so that there will be no 
bearing on the sides of

[[Page 608]]

the wheel within one-eighth inch of the arbor hole.
    (6) Blotters. (i) Blotters (compressible washers) shall always be 
used between flanges and abrasive wheel surfaces to insure uniform 
distribution of flange pressure. (See paragraph (d)(5) of this section.)
    (ii) Exception:
    (a) Mounted wheels.
    (b) Abrasive discs (inserted nut, inserted washer, and projecting 
stud type).
    (c) Plate mounted wheels.
    (d) Cylinders, cups, or segmental wheels that are mounted in chucks.
    (e) Types 27 and 28 wheels.
    (f) Certain Type 1 and Type 27A cutting-off wheels.
    (g) Certain internal wheels.
    (h) Type 4 tapered wheels.
    (i) Diamond wheels, except certain vitrified diamond wheels.
    (j) Modified Types 6 and 11 wheel (terrazzo)--blotters applied flat 
side of wheel only.
    (7) Driving flange. The driving flange shall be securely fastened to 
the spindle and the bearing surface shall run true. When more than one 
wheel is mounted between a single set of flanges, wheels may be cemented 
together or separated by specially designed spacers. Spacers shall be 
equal in diameter to the mounting flanges and have equal bearing 
surfaces. (See paragraph (d)(6) of this section.)
    (8) Dimensions. (i) Tables O-4 and O-6 and Figures O-30 and O-32 
show minimum dimensions for straight relieved and unrelieved flanges for 
use with wheels with small holes that fit directly on the machine 
spindle. Dimensions of such flanges shall never be less than indicated.
    (ii) Table O-5, and Table O-7 and Figures O-31, O-33, O-34 show 
minimum dimensions for straight adaptor flanges for use with wheels 
having holes larger than the spindle. Dimensions of such adaptor flanges 
shall never be less than indicated.
    (iii) Table O-8 and Figure O-35 show minimum dimensions for straight 
flanges that are an integral part of wheel sleeves which are frequently 
used on precision grinding machines. Dimensions of such flanges shall 
never be less than indicated.
    (9) Repairs and maintenance. All flanges shall be maintained in good 
condition. When the bearing surfaces become worn, warped, sprung, or 
damaged they should be trued or refaced. When refacing or truing, care 
shall be exercised to make sure that proper relief and rigidity is 
maintained as specified in paragraphs (c) (2) and (5) of this section 
and they shall be replaced when they do not conform to these 
subparagraphs and Table O-4, Figure O-30, Table O-5, Figure O-31, Table 
O-6, Figure O-32, and Table O-8, Figure O-35. Failure to observe these 
rules might cause excessive flange pressure around the hole of the 
wheel. This is especially true of wheel-sleeve or adaptor flanges.
    (d) Mounting--(1) Inspection. Immediately before mounting, all 
wheels shall be closely inspected and sounded by the user (ring test) to 
make sure they have not been damaged in transit, storage, or otherwise. 
The spindle speed of the machine shall be checked before mounting of the 
wheel to be certain that it does not exceed the maximum operating speed 
marked on the wheel. Wheels should be tapped gently with a light 
nonmetallic implement, such as the handle of a screwdriver for light 
wheels, or a wooden mallet for heavier wheels. If they sound cracked 
(dead), they shall not be used. This is known as the ``Ring Test''.
    (i) Wheels must be dry and free from sawdust when applying the ring 
test, otherwise the sound will be deadened. It should also be noted that 
organic bonded wheels do not emit the same clear metallic ring as do 
vitrified and silicate wheels.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.068

                  Figure No. O-25      Figure No. O-26

[[Page 609]]

    (ii) ``Tap'' wheels about 45 deg. each side of the vertical 
centerline and about 1 or 2 inches from the periphery as indicated by 
the spots in Figure O-25 and Figure O-26. Then rotate the wheel 45 deg. 
and repeat the test. A sound and undamaged wheel will give a clear 
metallic tone. If cracked, there will be a dead sound and not a clear 
``ring.''
    (2) Arbor size. Grinding wheels shall fit freely on the spindle and 
remain free under all grinding conditions. A controlled clearance 
between the wheel hole and the machine spindle (or wheel sleeves or 
adaptors) is essential to avoid excessive pressure from mounting and 
spindle expansion. To accomplish this, the machine spindle shall be made 
to nominal (standard) size plus zero minus .002 inch, and the wheel hole 
shall be made suitably oversize to assure safety clearance under the 
conditions of operating heat and pressure.
    (3) Surface condition. All contact surfaces of wheels, blotters and 
flanges shall be flat and free of foreign matter.
    (4) Bushing. When a bushing is used in the wheel hole it shall not 
exceed the width of the wheel and shall not contact the flanges.
    (5) Blotters. When blotters or flange facings of compressible 
material are required, they shall cover entire contact area of wheel 
flanges. Blotters need not be used with the following types of wheels:
    (i) Mounted wheels.
    (ii) Abrasive discs (inserted nut, inserted washer, and projecting-
stud type).
    (iii) Plate mounted wheels.
    (iv) Cylinders, cups, or segmental wheels that are mounted in 
chucks.
    (v) Types 27 and 28 wheels.
    (vi) Certain Type 1 and Type 27A cutting-off wheels.
    (vii) Certain internal wheels.
    (viii) Type 4 tapered wheels.
    (ix) Diamond wheels, except certain vitrified diamond wheels.
    (6) Multiple wheel mounting. When more than one wheel is mounted 
between a single set of flanges, wheels may be cemented together or 
separated by specially designed spacers. Spacers shall be equal in 
diameter to the mounting flanges and have equal bearing surfaces. When 
mounting wheels which have not been cemented together, or ones which do 
not utilize separating spacers, care must be exercised to use wheels 
specially manufactured for that purpose.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.069


[[Page 610]]



                    Table O-1--Minimum Basic Thickness for Peripheral and Side Members for Safety Guards Used With Cutting-Off Wheels
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                         Cutting off wheel diameters
                                                                                   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Material used in construction of    Maximum thickness of                             6 to 11     Over 11 to    Over 20 to    Over 30 to    Over 48 to
               guard                    cutting off wheel     Speed not to exceed      inches       20 inches     30 inches     48 inches     72 inches
                                                                                   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                      A      B      A      B      A      B      A      B      A      B
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Structural steel (min. tensile       \1/2\ inch or less....  14,200 SFPM..........    \1/    \1/    \3/    \3/  \1/8\  \1/8\    \3/    \3/  \1/4\  \1/4\
 strength 60,000 p.s.i.).                                                             16\    16\    32\    32\                  16\    16\
                                     \1/2\ inch or less....  16,000 SFPM..........    \3/  \1/8\  \1/8\  \1/8\    \3/  \1/8\  \1/4\    \3/    \5/  \1/4\
                                                                                      32\                         16\                  16\    16\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                                                                                                   [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.070
                                                                                                                                                   

                              Table O-3--Guide for Construction of Band Type Guards
                                        [Maximum Wheel Speed 7,000 SFPM]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                        Maximum
                                                                                Minimum     Minimum    distance
     Minimum material specifications               Diameter of wheel           thickness   diameter     between
                                                                               of band A   of rivets  centers of
                                                                                                        rivets
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Inches
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hot rolled steel SAE 1008................  Under 8..........................      \1/16\      \3/16\       \3/4\
                                           8 to 24..........................       \1/8\       \1/4\           1
                                           Over 24 to 30....................       \1/4\       \3/8\      1\1/4\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                                                      [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.071
                                                                                                      

[[Page 611]]


  Table O-5--Minimum Dimensions for Straight Adaptor Flange--for Organic Bonded Wheels Over 1\1/4\ Inches Thick
                                                       \1\
                                                   [In inches]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                        E--Minimum
                                                                B--Minimum  D--Minimun   thickness  F \1\--(D-E)
                  Wheel diameter                    Wheel hole    flange     thickness   of flange     minimum
                                                     diameter    diameter    of flange  at edge of    thickness
                                                                              at bore    undercut
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12 to 14..........................................           4           6       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
                                                             5           7       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
                                                             6           8       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
Larger than 14 to 18..............................           4           6       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
                                                             5           7       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
                                                             6           8       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
                                                             7           9       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
                                                             8          10       \7/8\       \3/8\        \1/2\
Larger than 18 to 24..............................           6           8           1       \1/2\        \1/2\
                                                             7           9           1       \1/2\        \1/2\
                                                             8          10           1       \1/2\        \1/2\
                                                            10          12           1       \1/2\        \1/2\
                                                            12          14           1       \1/2\        \1/2\
Larger than 24 to 30..............................          12          15           1       \1/2\        \1/2\
Larger than 30 to 36..............................          12          15      1\3/8\       \7/8\        \1/2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For wheels under 1\1/4\ inches thick F dimension shall not exceed 40 percent of wheel thickness.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.072


                         Table O-6--Minimum Dimensions for Straight Relieved Flanges \1\
                                                   [In inches]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    C--Radial width of                E--Minimum
                                                      B--Minimum      bearing surface     D--Minimum   thickness
                A--Diameter of wheel                    outside  ------------------------  thickness   of flange
                                                       diameter                            of flange  at edge of
                                                      of flanges    Minimum     Maximum     at bore     recess
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...................................................       \3/8\      \1/16\       \1/8\      \1/16\      \1/16\
2...................................................       \3/4\       \1/8\      \3/16\       \1/8\      \3/32\
3...................................................           1       \1/8\      \3/16\      \3/16\      \3/32\
4...................................................      1\3/8\       \1/8\      \3/16\      \3/16\       \1/8\
5...................................................      1\3/4\      \3/16\       \1/4\       \1/4\       \1/8\
6...................................................           2       \1/4\       \1/2\       \3/8\      \3/16\
7...................................................      2\1/2\       \1/4\       \1/2\       \3/8\      \3/16\
8...................................................           3       \1/4\       \1/2\       \3/8\      \3/16\
10..................................................      3\1/2\      \5/16\       \5/8\       \3/8\       \1/4\
12..................................................           4      \5/16\       \5/8\       \1/2\      \5/16\
14..................................................      4\1/2\       \3/8\       \3/4\       \1/2\      \5/16\
16..................................................      5\1/2\       \1/2\           1       \1/2\      \5/16\
18..................................................           6       \1/2\           1       \5/8\       \3/8\
20..................................................           7       \5/8\      1\1/4\       \5/8\       \3/8\
22..................................................      7\1/2\       \5/8\      1\1/4\       \5/8\      \7/16\
24..................................................           8       \3/4\      1\1/4\       \5/8\      \7/16\
26..................................................      8\1/2\       \3/4\      1\1/4\       \5/8\       \1/2\
28..................................................          10       \7/8\      1\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
30..................................................          10       \7/8\      1\1/2\       \3/4\       \5/8\
36..................................................          12           1           2       \7/8\       \3/4\
42..................................................          14           1           2       \7/8\       \3/4\
48..................................................          16      1\1/4\           2      1\1/8\           1
60..................................................          20      1\1/4\           2      1\1/4\      1\1/8\
72..................................................          24      1\1/2\      2\1/2\      1\3/8\      1\1/4\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Flanges for wheels under 2 inches diameter may be unrelieved and shall be maintained flat and true.


[[Page 612]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.073


   Table O-7--Minimum Dimensions for Straight Flanges--for Mechanical
              Grinders 12,500 S.F.P.M. to 16,5 S.F.P.M.\1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                E--Minimum
                        B--Minimum  D--Minimum   thickness  F \2\--(D-E)
   Wheel    Wheel hole    flange     thickness   of flange     minimum
 diameter    diameter    diameter    of flange  at edge of    thickness
                                      at bore    undercut
------------------------------------------------------------------------
20........           6           8           1       \1/2\        \1/2\
20........           8          10      1\1/2\       \3/4\        \3/4\
24........          12          15           2           1            1
30........          12          15           2           1            1
36........          12          15           2           1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Flanges shall be of steel, quality SAE 1040 or equivalent, annealed
  plate, heat treated to R. 25-30.
\2\ For wheels under 1\1/4\ inch thick F dimension shall not exceed 40
  percent of wheel thickness.

  [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.074
  

      Table O-8--Minimum Dimensions for Straight Flanges Used as Wheel Sleeves for Precision Grinding Only
                                                   [In inches]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                      E--Minimum
                                                                              B--Minimum  D--Minimum   thickness
                         Wheel diameter                           Wheel hole    outside    thickness   of flange
                                                                   diameter    diameter    of flange  at edge of
                                                                               of flange    at bore    undercut
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12 to 14........................................................           5           7       \1/2\      \7/16\
Larger than 14 to 20............................................           5           7       \5/8\      \7/16\
                                                                           6           8       \5/8\      \7/16\
                                                                           8          10       \5/8\      \7/16\
                                                                          10     11\1/2\       \5/8\      \7/16\
                                                                          12     13\1/2\       \5/8\      \7/16\
Larger than 20 to 30............................................           8          10       \3/4\       \1/2\
                                                                          10     11\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
                                                                          12     13\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
                                                                          16     17\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
Larger than 30 to 42............................................          12     13\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
                                                                          16     17\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
                                                                          18     19\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
                                                                          20     21\1/2\       \3/4\       \1/2\
Larger than 42 to 60............................................          16          20           1       \3/4\
                                                                          20          24           1       \3/4\
                                                                          24          29      1\1/8\       \7/8\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: These flanges may be clamped together by means of a central nut, or by a series of bolts or some other
  equivalent means of fastening. For hole sizes smaller than shown in this table, use table 12.


[[Page 613]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.075


[[Page 614]]


                                  Table O-9--Minimum Basic Thicknesses of Peripheral and Side Members for Safety Guards
                                                                       [In inches]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                     Grinding wheel diameters
                                Maximum  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Material used in construction  thickness   3 to 6 inches   Over 6 to 12    Over 12 to 16   Over 16 to 20   Over 20 to 24   Over 24 to 30   Over 30 to 48
           of guard                of    ----------------     inches          inches          inches          inches          inches          inches
                                grinding                 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 wheel       A       B       A       B       A       B       A       B       A       B       A       B       A       B
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Material                              2    \1/4\   \1/4\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\   \3/8\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \7/8\   \5/8\       1   \3/4\  1\1/4\       1
  satis-                              4   \5/16\  \5/16\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\   \3/8\   \3/4\   \5/8\       1   \5/8\  1\1/8\   \3/4\  1\3/8\       1
  factory  \1\                        6    \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\  \7/16\   \5/8\   \1/2\       1   \5/8\  1\1/8\   \3/4\  1\1/4\   \7/8\  1\1/2\  1\1/8\
  for                                 8                    \5/8\  \9/16\   \7/8\   \3/4\       1   \3/4\  1\1/8\   \3/4\  1\1/4\   \7/8\  1\1/2\  1\1/8\
  speeds                             10                    \3/4\    \11/
                                                                     16\   \7/8\   \3/4\       1   \3/4\  1\1/8\   \3/4\  1\1/4\   \7/8\  1\1/2\  1\1/8\
  up to                              16                                   1\1/8\       1  1\1/4\       1    1\5/
                                                                                                             16\       1    1\7/
                                                                                                                             16\    1\1/
                                                                                                                                     16\  1\3/4\  1\3/8\
  8,000                              20                                                   1\3/8\  1\1/8\  1\3/8\  1\1/8\  1\1/2\  1\3/8\       2  1\5/8\
  SFPM.
Cast iron (min. tensile
 strength 20,000 p.s.i.)
 Class 20.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Material                              2    \1/4\   \1/4\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\   \3/8\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \7/8\   \3/4\       1   \7/8\
  satis-                              4   \5/16\  \5/16\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\   \3/8\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \7/8\   \3/4\  1\1/8\   \7/8\
  factory  \1\                        6    \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\  \7/16\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \7/8\   \5/8\       1   \3/4\  1\1/4\   \7/8\
  for                                 8                    \1/2\  \7/16\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \7/8\   \5/8\       1   \3/4\  1\1/4\   \7/8\
  speeds                             10                    \1/2\  \7/16\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \7/8\   \5/8\       1   \3/4\  1\1/4\   \7/8\
  up to                              16                                     \13/
                                                                             16\    \11/
                                                                                     16\    \13/
                                                                                             16\    \11/
                                                                                                     16\       1   \3/4\  1\1/8\   \7/8\  1\3/8\       1
  9,000                              20                                                    \7/8\   \3/4\       1   \3/4\  1\1/8\   \7/8\  1\1/2\  1\1/8\
  SFPM.
Malleable iron (min. tensile
 strength 50,000 p.s.i.)
 Grade 32510.
Materials                             2    \1/4\   \1/4\  \5/16\  \5/16\   \3/8\   \3/8\   \1/2\  \7/16\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \7/8\   \3/4\
  satis-                              4    \1/4\   \1/4\   \1/2\   \1/2\   \1/2\   \1/2\  \9/16\   \1/2\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \3/4\   \5/8\       1   \3/4\
  factory  \1\                        6    \3/8\   \1/4\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \3/4\   \5/8\    \13/
                                                                                                             16\    \11/
                                                                                                                     16\    \13/
                                                                                                                             16\    \11/
                                                                                                                                     16\  1\1/8\   \3/4\
  for                                 8                    \7/8\   \3/4\   \7/8\   \3/4\   \7/8\   \3/4\   \7/8\   \3/4\    \15/
                                                                                                                             16\    \13/
                                                                                                                                     16\  1\3/8\       1
  speeds                             10                        1   \7/8\       1   \7/8\       1   \7/8\  1\1/8\    \15/
                                                                                                                     16\  1\1/8\       1    1\7/
                                                                                                                                             16\    1\1/
                                                                                                                                                     16\
  up to                              16                                   1\1/4\  1\1/8\  1\1/4\  1\1/8\  1\1/4\  1\1/8\  1\1/4\  1\1/8\   1\13/
                                                                                                                                             16\    1\7/
                                                                                                                                                     16\
  16,000                             20                                                   1\3/8\  1\1/4\  1\3/8\  1\1/4\    1\7/
                                                                                                                             16\    1\5/
                                                                                                                                     16\    2\1/
                                                                                                                                             16\   1\11/
                                                                                                                                                     16\
  SFPM.
Steel castings (min. tensile
 strength 60,000 p.s.i.)
 Grade V60-30.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Structural                            2    \1/8\  \1/16\  \5/16\   \1/4\  \5/16\   \1/4\  \5/16\   \1/4\  \5/16\   \1/4\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\   \3/8\
   steel                              4    \1/8\  \1/16\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \3/8\  \5/16\   \1/2\   \3/8\
  (min.                               6   \3/16\  \1/16\   \1/2\   \3/8\  \7/16\   \3/8\  \7/16\   \3/8\  \7/16\   \3/8\  \7/16\   \3/8\   \3/4\   \1/2\
  tensile                             8                    \1/2\   \3/8\  \9/16\  \7/16\  \9/16\  \7/16\       9
  strength                           10   \9/16\  \7/16\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \5/8\   \1/2\   \7/8\   \5/8\
  60,000                             16                                    \5/8\  \9/16\   \3/4\   \5/8\   \3/4\   \5/8\    \13/
                                                                                                                             16\    \11/
                                                                                                                                     16\    1\1/
                                                                                                                                             16\    \13/
                                                                                                                                                     16\
  p.s.i.)                            20                                                     \13/
                                                                                             16\    \11/
                                                                                                     16\    \13/
                                                                                                             16\    \11/
                                                                                                                     16\   \7/8\   \3/4\    1\3/
                                                                                                                                             16\    \15/
                                                                                                                                                     16\
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The recommendations listed in the above table are guides for the conditions stated. Other material, designs or dimensions affording equal or
  superior protection are also acceptable.

[[Page 615]]



               Table O-2--Exposure Versus Wheel Thickness
                               [In inches]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Maximum
                                                               exposure
               Overall thickness of wheel (T)                  of wheel
                                                                  (C)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/2\.......................................................       \1/4\
1...........................................................       \1/2\
2...........................................................       \3/4\
3...........................................................           1
4...........................................................      1\1/2\
5 and over..................................................           2
------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table O-4--Minimum Dimensions for Straight Unrelieved Flanges for Wheels
                with Threaded Inserts or Projecting Studs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          B \1\--Minimum outside    T--Minimum thickness
 A--Diameter of wheel       diameter of flange           of flange
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.....................             \5/8\                    \1/8\
2.....................                 1                    \1/8\
3.....................                 1                   \3/16\
4.....................           1 \3/8\                   \3/16\
5.....................            1\3/4\                    \1/4\
6.....................                 2                    \3/8\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Note: Must be large enough to extend beyond the bushing. Where prong
  anchor or cupback bushing are used, this footnote does not apply.

[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49750, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 FR 9240, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.216  Mills and calenders in the rubber and plastics industries.

    (a) General requirements--
    (1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) Auxiliary equipment. Mechanical and electrical equipment and 
auxiliaries shall be installed in accordance with this section and 
Subpart S of this part.
    (4) Mill roll heights. All new mill installations shall be installed 
so that the top of the operating rolls is not less than 50 inches above 
the level on which the operator stands, irrespective of the size of the 
mill. This distance shall apply to the actual working level, whether it 
be at the general floor level, in a pit, or on a platform.
    (b) Mill safety controls--(1) Safety trip control. A safety trip 
control shall be provided in front and in back of each mill. It shall be 
accessible and shall operate readily on contact. The safety trip control 
shall be one of the following types or a combination thereof:
    (i) Pressure-sensitive body bars. Installed at front and back of 
each mill having a 46-inch roll height or over. These bars shall operate 
readily by pressure of the mill operator's body.
    (ii) Safety triprod. Installed in the front and in the back of each 
mill and located within 2 inches of a vertical plane tangent to the 
front and rear rolls. The top rods shall be not more than 72 inches 
above the level on which the operator stands. The triprods shall be 
accessible and shall operate readily whether the rods are pushed or 
pulled.
    (iii) Safety tripwire cable or wire center cord. Installed in the 
front and in the back of each mill and located within 2 inches of a 
vertical plane tangent to the front and rear rolls. The cables shall not 
be more than 72 inches above the level on which the operator stands. The 
tripwire cable or wire center cord shall operate readily whether cable 
or cord is pushed or pulled.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Auxiliary equipment. All auxiliary equipment such as mill 
divider, support bars, spray pipes, feed conveyors, strip knives, etc., 
shall be located in such a manner as to avoid interference with access 
to and operation of safety devices.
    (c) Calender safety controls--(1) Safety trip, face. A safety 
triprod, cable, or wire center cord shall be provided across each pair 
of in-running rolls extending the length of the face of the rolls. It 
shall be readily accessible and operate whether pushed or pulled. The 
safety tripping devices shall be located within reach of the operator 
and the bite.
    (2) Safety trip, side. On both sides of the calender and near each 
end of the face of the roll, there shall be a cable or wire center cord 
connected to the safety trip. They shall operate readily when pushed or 
pulled.
    (d) Protection by location--(1) Mills. Where a mill is so installed 
that persons cannot normally reach through, over, under, or around to 
come in contact with the roll bite or be caught between a roll and an 
adjacent object, then, provided such elements are made a fixed part of a 
mill, safety control devices listed in paragraph (b) of this section 
shall not apply.
    (2) Calenders. Where a calender is so installed that persons cannot 
normally reach through, over, under, or around

[[Page 616]]

to come in contact with the roll bite or be caught between a roll and an 
adjacent object, then, provided such elements are made a fixed part of a 
calender, safety control devices listed in paragraph (c) of this section 
shall not apply.
    (e) Trip and emergency switches. All trip and emergency switches 
shall not be of the automatically resetting type, but shall require 
manual resetting.
    (f) Stopping limits--(1) Determination of distance of travel. All 
measurements on mills and calenders shall be taken with the rolls 
running empty at maximum operating speed. Stopping distances shall be 
expressed in inches of surface travel of the roll from the instant the 
emergency stopping device is actuated.
    (2) Stopping limits for mills. All mills irrespective of the size of 
the rolls or their arrangement (individually or group-driven) shall be 
stopped within a distance, as measured in inches of surface travel, not 
greater than 1\1/2\ percent of the peripheral no-load surface speeds of 
the respective rolls as determined in feet per minute.
    (3) Stopping limits for calenders. (i) All calenders, irrespective 
of size of the rolls or their configuration, shall be stopped within a 
distance, as measured in inches of surface travel, not greater than 1\3/
4\ percent of the peripheral no-load surface speeds of the respective 
calender rolls as determined in feet per minute.
    (ii) Where speeds above 250 feet per minute as measured on the 
surface of the drive roll are used, stopping distances of more than 1\3/
4\ percent are permissible. Such stopping distances shall be subject to 
engineering determination.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 
FR 9240, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.217  Mechanical power presses.

    (a) General requirements.
    (1)-(3) [Reserved]
    (4) Reconstruction and modification. It shall be the responsibility 
of any person reconstructing, or modifying a mechanical power press to 
do so in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
    (5) Excluded machines. Press brakes, hydraulic and pneumatic power 
presses, bulldozers, hot bending and hot metal presses, forging presses 
and hammers, riveting machines and similar types of fastener applicators 
are excluded from the requirements of this section.
    (b) Mechanical power press guarding and construction, general--(1) 
Hazards to personnel associated with broken or falling machine 
components. Machine components shall be designed, secured, or covered to 
minimize hazards caused by breakage, or loosening and falling or release 
of mechanical energy (i.e. broken springs).
    (2) Brakes. Friction brakes provided for stopping or holding a slide 
movement shall be inherently self-engaging by requiring power or force 
from an external source to cause disengagement. Brake capacity shall be 
sufficient to stop the motion of the slide quickly and capable of 
holding the slide and its attachments at any point in its travel.
    (3) Machines using full revolution positive clutches. (i) Machines 
using full revolution clutches shall incorporate a single-stroke 
mechanism.
    (ii) If the single-stroke mechanism is dependent upon spring action, 
the spring(s) shall be of the compression type, operating on a rod or 
guided within a hole or tube, and designed to prevent interleaving of 
the spring coils in event of breakage.
    (4) Foot pedals (treadle). (i) The pedal mechanism shall be 
protected to prevent unintended operation from falling or moving objects 
or by accidental stepping onto the pedal.
    (ii) A pad with a nonslip contact area shall be firmly attached to 
the pedal.
    (iii) The pedal return spring(s) shall be of the compression type, 
operating on a rod or guided within a hole or tube, or designed to 
prevent interleaving of spring coils in event of breakage.
    (iv) If pedal counterweights are provided, the path of the travel of 
the weight shall be enclosed.
    (5) Hand operated levers. (i) Hand-lever-operated power presses 
shall be equipped with a spring latch on the operating lever to prevent 
premature or accidental tripping.
    (ii) The operating levers on hand-tripped presses having more than 
one operating station shall be interlocked to prevent the tripping of 
the press except by the ``concurrent'' use of all levers.

[[Page 617]]

    (6) Two-hand trip. (i) A two-hand trip shall have the individual 
operator's hand controls protected against unintentional operation and 
have the individual operator's hand controls arranged by design and 
construction and/or separation to require the use of both hands to trip 
the press and use a control arrangement requiring concurrent operation 
of the individual operator's hand controls.
    (ii) Two-hand trip systems on full revolution clutch machines shall 
incorporate an antirepeat feature.
    (iii) If two-hand trip systems are used on multiple operator 
presses, each operator shall have a separate set of controls.
    (7) Machines using part revolution clutches. (i) The clutch shall 
release and the brake shall be applied when the external clutch engaging 
means is removed, deactivated, or deenergized.
    (ii) A red color stop control shall be provided with the clutch/
brake control system. Momentary operation of the stop control shall 
immediately deactivate the clutch and apply the brake. The stop control 
shall override any other control, and reactuation of the clutch shall 
require use of the operating (tripping) means which has been selected.
    (iii) A means of selecting Off, ``Inch,'' Single Stroke, and 
Continuous (when the continuous function is furnished) shall be supplied 
with the clutch/brake control to select type of operation of the press. 
Fixing of selection shall be by means capable of supervision by the 
employer.
    (iv) The ``Inch'' operating means shall be designed to prevent 
exposure of the workers hands within the point of operation by:
    (a) Requiring the concurrent use of both hands to actuate the 
clutch, or
    (b) Being a single control protected against accidental actuation 
and so located that the worker cannot reach into the point of operation 
while operating the single control.
    (v) Two-hand controls for single stroke shall conform to the 
following requirements:
    (a) Each hand control shall be protected against unintended 
operation and arranged by design, construction, and/or separation so 
that the concurrent use of both hands is required to trip the press.
    (b) The control system shall be designed to permit an adjustment 
which will require concurrent pressure from both hands during the die 
closing portion of the stroke.
    (c) The control system shall incorporate an antirepeat feature.
    (d) The control systems shall be designed to require release of all 
operators' hand controls before an interrupted stroke can be resumed. 
This requirement pertains only to those single-stroke, two-hand controls 
manufactured and installed on or after August 31, 1971.
    (vi) [Reserved]
    (vii) Controls for more than one operating station shall be designed 
to be activated and deactivated in complete sets of two operator's hand 
controls per operating station by means capable of being supervised by 
the employer. The clutch/brake control system shall be designed and 
constructed to prevent actuation of the clutch if all operating stations 
are bypassed.
    (viii) Those clutch/brake control systems which contain both single 
and continuous functions shall be designed so that completion of 
continuous circuits may be supervised by the employer. The initiation of 
continuous run shall require a prior action or decision by the operator 
in addition to the selection of Continuous on the stroking selector, 
before actuation of the operating means will result in continuous 
stroking.
    (ix) If foot control is provided, the selection method between hand 
and foot control shall be separate from the stroking selector and shall 
be designed so that the selection may be supervised by the employer.
    (x) Foot operated tripping controls, if used, shall be protected so 
as to prevent operation from falling or moving objects, or from 
unintended operation by accidental stepping onto the foot control.
    (xi) The control of air-clutch machines shall be designed to prevent 
a significant increase in the normal stopping time due to a failure 
within the operating value mechanism, and to inhibit further operation 
if such failure does occur. This requirement shall

[[Page 618]]

apply only to those clutch/brake air-valve controls manufactured and 
installed on or after August 31, 1971, but shall not apply to machines 
intended only for continuous, automatic feeding applications.
    (xii) The clutch/brake control shall incorporate an automatic means 
to prevent initiation or continued activation of the Single Stroke or 
Continuous functions unless the press drive motor is energized and in 
the forward direction.
    (xiii) The clutch/brake control shall automatically deactivate in 
event of failure of the power or pressure supply for the clutch engaging 
means. Reactivation of the clutch shall require restoration of normal 
supply and the use of the tripping mechanism(s).
    (xiv) The clutch/brake control shall automatically deactivate in 
event of failure of the counterbalance(s) air supply. Reactivation of 
the clutch shall require restoration of normal air supply and use of the 
tripping mechanism(s).
    (xv) Selection of bar operation shall be by means capable of being 
supervised by the employer. A separate pushbutton shall be employed to 
activate the clutch, and the clutch shall be activated only if the 
driver motor is deenergized.
    (8) Electrical. (i) A main power disconnect switch capable of being 
locked only in the Off position shall be provided with every power press 
control system.
    (ii) The motor start button shall be protected against accidental 
operation.
    (iii) All mechanical power press controls shall incorporate a type 
of drive motor starter that will disconnect the drive motor from the 
power source in event of control voltage or power source failure, and 
require operation of the motor start button to restart the motor when 
voltage conditions are restored to normal.
    (iv) All a.c. control circuits and solenoid value coils shall be 
powered by not more than a nominal 120-volt a.c. supply obtained from a 
transformer with an isolated secondary. Higher voltages that may be 
necessary for operation of machine or control mechanisms shall be 
isolated from any control mechanism handled by the operator, but motor 
starters with integral Start-Stop buttons may utilize line voltage 
control. All d.c. control circuits shall be powered by not more than a 
nominal 240-volt d.c. supply isolated from any higher voltages.
    (v) All clutch/brake control electrical circuits shall be protected 
against the possibility of an accidental ground in the control circuit 
causing false operation of the press.
    (vi) Electrical clutch/brake control circuits shall incorporate 
features to minimize the possibility of an unintended stroke in the 
event of the failure of a control component to function properly, 
including relays, limit switches, and static output circuits.
    (9) Slide counterbalance systems. (i) Spring counterbalance systems 
when used shall incorporate means to retain system parts in event of 
breakage.
    (ii) Spring counterbalances when used shall have the capability to 
hold the slide and its attachments at midstroke, without brake applied.
    (iii) Air counterbalance cylinders shall incorporate means to retain 
the piston and rod in case of breakage or loosening.
    (iv) Air counterbalance cylinders shall have adequate capability to 
hold the slide and its attachments at any point in stroke, without brake 
applied.
    (v) Air counterbalance cylinders shall incorporate means to prevent 
failure of capability (sudden loss of pressure) in event of air supply 
failure.
    (10) Air controlling equipment. Air controlling equipment shall be 
protected against foreign material and water entering the pneumatic 
system of the press. A means of air lubrication shall be provided when 
needed.
    (11) Hydraulic equipment. The maximum anticipated working pressures 
in any hydraulic system on a mechanical power press shall not exceed the 
safe working pressure rating of any component used in that system.
    (12) Pressure vessels. All pressure vessels used in conjunction with 
power presses shall conform to the American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers Code for Pressure Vessels, 1968 Edition, which is incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (13) Control reliability. When required by paragraph (c)(5) of this 
section, the

[[Page 619]]

control system shall be constructed so that a failure within the system 
does not prevent the normal stopping action from being applied to the 
press when required, but does prevent initiation of a successive stroke 
until the failure is corrected. The failure shall be detectable by a 
simple test, or indicated by the control system. This requirement does 
not apply to those elements of the control system which have no effect 
on the protection against point of operation injuries.
    (14) Brake system monitoring. When required by paragraph (c)(5) of 
this section, the brake monitor shall meet the following requirements:
    (i) Be so constructed as to automatically prevent the activation of 
a successive stroke if the stopping time or braking distance 
deteriorates to a point where the safety distance being utilized does 
not meet the requirements set forth in paragraph (c)(3)(iii)(e) or 
(c)(3)(vii)(c) of this section. The brake monitor used with the Type B 
gate or movable barrier device shall be installed in a manner to detect 
slide top-stop overrun beyond the normal limit reasonably established by 
the employer.
    (ii) Be installed on a press such that it indicates when the 
performance of the braking system has deteriorated to the extent 
described in paragraph (b)(14)(i) of this section; and
    (iii) Be constructed and installed in a manner to monitor brake 
system performance on each stroke.
    (c) Safeguarding the point of operation--(1) General requirements. 
(i) It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide and insure 
the usage of ``point of operation guards'' or properly applied and 
adjusted point of operation devices on every operation performed on a 
mechanical power press. See Table O-10.
    (ii) The requirement of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section shall 
not apply when the point of operation opening is one-fourth inch or 
less. See Table O-10.
    (2) Point of operation guards. (i) Every point of operation guard 
shall meet the following design, construction, application, and 
adjustment requirements:
    (a) It shall prevent entry of hands or fingers into the point of 
operation by reaching through, over, under or around the guard;
    (b) It shall conform to the maximum permissible openings of Table O-
10;
    (c) It shall, in itself, create no pinch point between the guard and 
moving machine parts;
    (d) It shall utilize fasteners not readily removable by operator, so 
as to minimize the possibility of misuse or removal of essential parts;
    (e) It shall facilitate its inspection, and
    (f) It shall offer maximum visibility of the point of operation 
consistent with the other requirements.
    (ii) A die enclosure guard shall be attached to the die shoe or 
stripper in a fixed position.
    (iii) A fixed barrier guard shall be attached securely to the frame 
of the press or to the bolster plate.
    (iv) An interlocked press barrier guard shall be attached to the 
press frame or bolster and shall be interlocked with the press clutch 
control so that the clutch cannot be activated unless the guard itself, 
or the hinged or movable sections of the guard are in position to 
conform to the requirements of Table O-10.
    (v) The hinged or movable sections of an interlocked press barrier 
guard shall not be used for manual feeding. The guard shall prevent 
opening of the interlocked section and reaching into the point of 
operation prior to die closure or prior to the cessation of slide 
motion. See paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section regarding manual 
feeding through interlocked press barrier devices.
    (vi) The adjustable barrier guard shall be securely attached to the 
press bed, bolster plate, or die shoe, and shall be adjusted and 
operated in conformity with Table O-10 and the requirements of this 
subparagraph. Adjustments shall be made only by authorized personnel 
whose qualifications include a knowledge of the provisions of Table O-10 
and this subparagraph.
    (vii) A point of operation enclosure which does not meet the 
requirements of this subparagraph and Table O-10 shall be used only in 
conjunction with point of operation devices.

[[Page 620]]

    (3) Point of operation devices. (i) Point of operation devices shall 
protect the operator by:
    (a) Preventing and/or stopping normal stroking of the press if the 
operator's hands are inadvertently placed in the point of operation; or
    (b) Preventing the operator from inadvertently reaching into the 
point of operation, or withdrawing his hands if they are inadvertently 
located in the point of operation, as the dies close; or
    (c) Preventing the operator from inadvertently reaching into the 
point of operation at all times; or
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Requiring application of both of the operator's hands to machine 
operating controls and locating such controls at such a safety distance 
from the point of operation that the slide completes the downward travel 
or stops before the operator can reach into the point of operation with 
his hands; or
    (f) Enclosing the point of operation before a press stroke can be 
initiated, and maintaining this closed condition until the motion of the 
slide had ceased; or
    (g) Enclosing the point of operation before a press stroke can be 
initiated, so as to prevent an operator from reaching into the point of 
operation prior to die closure or prior to cessation of slide motion 
during the downward stroke.
    (ii) A gate or movable barrier device shall protect the operator as 
follows:
    (a) A Type A gate or movable barrier device shall protect the 
operator in the manner specified in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(f) of this 
section, and
    (b) A Type B gate or movable barrier device shall protect the 
operator in the manner specified in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(g) of this 
section.
    (iii) A presence sensing point of operation device shall protect the 
operator as provided in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(a) of this section, and 
shall be interlocked into the control circuit to prevent or stop slide 
motion if the operator's hand or other part of his body is within the 
sensing field of the device during the downstroke of the press slide.
    (a) The device may not be used on machines using full revolution 
clutches.
    (b) The device may not be used as a tripping means to initiate slide 
motion, except when used in total conformance with paragraph (h) of this 
section.
    (c) The device shall be constructed so that a failure within the 
system does not prevent the normal stopping action from being applied to 
the press when required, but does prevent the initiation of a successive 
stroke until the failure is corrected. The failure shall be indicated by 
the system.
    (d) Muting (bypassing of the protective function) of such device, 
during the upstroke of the press slide, is permitted for the purpose of 
parts ejection, circuit checking, and feeding.
    (e) The safety distance (D<INF>s</INF>) from the sensing field to 
the point of operation shall be greater than the distance determined by 
the following formula:

                D<INF>s</INF>=63 inches/second X T<INF>s

</INF>where:

D<INF>s</INF>=minimum safety distance (inches); 63 inches/second=hand 
          speed constant;
and
T<INF>s</INF>=stopping time of the press measured at approximately 
          90 deg. position of crankshaft rotation (seconds).

    (f) Guards shall be used to protect all areas of entry to the point 
of operation not protected by the presence sensing device.
    (iv) The pull-out device shall protect the operator as specified in 
paragraph (c)(3)(i)(b) of this section, and shall include attachments 
for each of the operator's hands.
    (a) Attachments shall be connected to and operated only by the press 
slide or upper die.
    (b) Attachments shall be adjusted to prevent the operator from 
reaching into the point of operation or to withdraw the operator's hands 
from the point of operation before the dies close.
    (c) A separate pull-out device shall be provided for each operator 
if more than one operator is used on a press.
    (d) Each pull-out device in use shall be visually inspected and 
checked for proper adjustment at the start of each operator shift, 
following a new die set-up, and when operators are changed. Necessary 
maintenance or repair or both shall be performed and completed before 
the press is operated. Records of

[[Page 621]]

inspections and maintenance shall be kept in accordance with paragraph 
(e) of this section.
    (v) The sweep device may not be used for point of operation 
safeguarding.
    (vi) A holdout or a restraint device shall protect the operator as 
specified in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(c) of this section and shall include 
attachments for each of the operator's hands. Such attachments shall be 
securely anchored and adjusted in such a way that the operator is 
restrained from reaching into the point of operation. A separate set of 
restraints shall be provided for each operator if more than one operator 
is required on a press.
    (vii) The two hand control device shall protect the operator as 
specified in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(e) of this section.
    (a) When used in press operations requiring more than one operator, 
separate two hand controls shall be provided for each operator, and 
shall be designed to require concurrent application of all operators' 
controls to activate the slide. The removal of a hand from any control 
button shall cause the slide to stop.
    (b) Each two hand control shall meet the construction requirements 
of paragraph (b)(7)(v) of this section.
    (c) The safety distance (D<INF>s</INF>) between each two hand 
control device and the point of operation shall be greater than the 
distance determined by the following formula:

             D<INF>s</INF>=63 inches/second X T<INF>s</INF>;

where:
D<INF>s</INF>=minimum safety distance (inches); 63 inches/second=hand 
          speed constant;
and
T<INF>s</INF>=stopping time of the press measured at approximately 
          90 deg. position of crankshaft rotation (seconds).

    (d) Two hand controls shall be fixed in position so that only a 
supervisor or safety engineer is capable of relocating the controls.
    (viii) The two hand trip device shall protect the operator as 
specified in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(e) of this section.
    (a) When used in press operations requiring more than one operator, 
separate two hand trips shall be provided for each operator, and shall 
be designed to require concurrent application of all operators' to 
activate the slide.
    (b) Each two hand trip shall meet the construction requirements of 
paragraph (b)(6) of this section.
    (c) The safety distance (D<INF>m</INF>) between the two hand trip 
and the point of operation shall be greater than the distance determined 
by the following formula:

             D<INF>m</INF>=63 inches/second X T<INF>m</INF>;

where:
D<INF>m</INF>=minimum safety distance (inches); 63 inches/second=hand 
          speed constant;
and
T<INF>m</INF>=the maximum time the press takes for the die closure after 
          it has been tripped (seconds). For full revolution clutch 
          presses with only one engaging point T<INF>m</INF> is equal to 
          the time necessary for one and one-half revolutions of the 
          crankshaft. For full revolution clutch presses with more than 
          one engaging point, T<INF>m</INF> shall be calculated as 
          follows:
T<INF>m</INF> = [\1/2\ + (1 <divide> Number of engaging points per 
          revolution)]  x  time necessary to complete one revolution of 
          the crankshaft (seconds).
    (d) Two hand trips shall be fixed in position so that only a 
supervisor or safety engineer is capable of relocating the controls.
    (4) Hand feeding tools. Hand feeding tools are intended for placing 
and removing materials in and from the press. Hand feeding tools are not 
a point of operation guard or protection device and shall not be used in 
lieu of the ``guards'' or devices required in this section.
    (5) Additional requirements for safe-guarding. Where the operator 
feeds or removes parts by placing one or both hands in the point of 
operation, and a two hand control, presence sensing device of Type B 
gate or movable barrier (on a part revolution clutch) is used for 
safeguarding:
    (i) The employer shall use a control system and a brake monitor 
which comply with paragraphs (b) (13) and (14) of this section;
    (ii) The exception in paragraph (b)(7)(v)(d) of this section for two 
hand controls manufactured and installed before August 31, 1971 is not 
applicable under this paragraph (c)(5);
    (iii) The control of air clutch machines shall be designed to 
prevent a significant increase in the normal stopping time due to a 
failure within the

[[Page 622]]

operating valve mechanism, and to inhibit further operation if such 
failure does occur, where a part revolution clutch is employed. The 
exception in paragraph (b)(7)(xi) of this section for controls 
manufactured and installed before August 31, 1971, is not applicable 
under this paragraph (c)(5).
    (d) Design, construction, setting and feeding of dies--(1) General 
requirements. The employer shall: (i) Use dies and operating methods 
designed to control or eliminate hazards to operating personnel, and 
(ii) furnish and enforce the use of hand tools for freeing and removing 
stuck work or scrap pieces from the die, so that no employee need reach 
into the point of operation for such purposes.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Scrap handling. The employer shall provide means for handling 
scrap from roll feed or random length stock operations. Scrap cutters 
used in conjunction with scrap handling systems shall be safeguarded in 
accordance with paragraph (c) of this section and with Sec. 1910.219.
    (4) Guide post hazard. The hazard created by a guide post (when it 
is located in the immediate vicinity of the operator) when separated 
from its bushing by more than one-fourth inch shall be considered as a 
point of operation hazard and be protected in accordance with paragraph 
(c) of this section.
    (5) Unitized tooling. If unitized tooling is used, the opening 
between the top of the punch holder and the face of the slide, or 
striking pad, shall be safeguarded in accordance with the requirements 
of paragraph (c) of this section.
    (6) Tonnage, stroke, and weight designation. All dies shall be:
    (i) Stamped with the tonnage and stroke requirements, or have these 
characteristics recorded if these records are readily available to the 
die setter;
    (ii) Stamped to indicate upper die weight when necessary for air 
counterbalance pressure adjustment; and
    (iii) Stamped to indicate complete die weight when handling 
equipment may become overloaded.
    (7) Die fastening. Provision shall be made in both the upper and 
lower shoes for securely mounting the die to the bolster and slide. 
Where clamp caps or setscrews are used in conjunction with punch stems, 
additional means of securing the upper shoe to the slide shall be used.
    (8) Die handling. Handling equipment attach points shall be provided 
on all dies requiring mechanical handling.
    (9) Diesetting. (i) The employer shall establish a diesetting 
procedure that will insure compliance with paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (ii) The employer shall provide spring loaded turnover bars, for 
presses designed to accept such turnover bars.
    (iii) The employer shall provide die stops or other means to prevent 
losing control of the die while setting or removing dies in presses 
which are inclined.
    (iv) The employer shall provide and enforce the use of safety blocks 
for use whenever dies are being adjusted or repaired in the press.
    (v) The employer shall provide brushes, swabs, lubricating rolls, 
and automatic or manual pressure guns so that operators and diesetters 
shall not be required to reach into the point of operation or other 
hazard areas to lubricate material, punches or dies.
    (e) Inspection, maintenance, and modification of presses--(1) 
Inspection and maintenance records. (i) It shall be the responsibility 
of the employer to establish and follow a program of periodic and 
regular inspections of his power presses to ensure that all their parts, 
auxiliary equipment, and safeguards are in a safe operating condition 
and adjustment. The employer shall maintain a certification record of 
inspections which includes the date of inspection, the signature of the 
person who performed the inspection and the serial number, or other 
identifier, of the power press that was inspected.
    (ii) Each press shall be inspected and tested no less than weekly to 
determine the condition of the clutch/brake mechanism, antirepeat 
feature and single stroke mechanism. Necessary maintenance or repair or 
both shall be performed and completed before the press is operated. 
These requirements do not apply to those presses which comply with 
paragraphs (b) (13) and (14) of this section. The employer shall

[[Page 623]]

maintain a certification record of inspections, tests and maintenance 
work which includes the date of the inspection, test or maintenance; the 
signature of the person who performed the inspection, test, or 
maintenance; and the serial number or other identifier of the press that 
was inspected, tested or maintained.
    (2) Modification. It shall be the responsibility of any person 
modifying a power press to furnish instructions with the modification to 
establish new or changed guidelines for use and care of the power press 
so modified.
    (3) Training of maintenance personnel. It shall be the 
responsibility of the employer to insure the original and continuing 
competence of personnel caring for, inspecting, and maintaining power 
presses.
    (f) Operation of power presses--(1) [Reserved]
    (2) Instruction to operators. The employer shall train and instruct 
the operator in the safe method of work before starting work on any 
operation covered by this section. The employer shall insure by adequate 
supervision that correct operating procedures are being followed.
    (3) Work area. The employer shall provide clearance between machines 
so that movement of one operator will not interfere with the work of 
another. Ample room for cleaning machines, handling material, work 
pieces, and scrap shall also be provided. All surrounding floors shall 
be kept in good condition and free from obstructions, grease, oil, and 
water.
    (4) Overloading. The employer shall operate his presses within the 
tonnage and attachment weight ratings specified by the manufacturer.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.076

    Explanation of above diagram:
    This diagram shows the accepted safe openings between the bottom 
edge of a guard and feed table at various distances from the danger line 
(point of operation).
    The clearance line marks the distance required to prevent contact 
between guard and moving parts.
    The minimum guarding line is the distance between the infeed side of 
the guard and the danger line which is one-half inch from the danger 
line.
    The various openings are such that for average size hands an 
operator's fingers won't reach the point of operation.
    After installation of point of operation guards and before a job is 
released for operation a check should be made to verify that the guard 
will prevent the operator's hands from reaching the point of operation.

                               Table O-10
                               [In inches]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Maximum
     Distance of opening from point of operation hazard        width of
                                                                opening
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/2\ to 1\1/2\.............................................       \1/4\
1\1/2\ to 2\1/2\............................................       \3/8\
2\1/2\ to 3\1/2\............................................       \1/2\
3\1/2\ to 5\1/2\............................................       \5/8\

[[Page 624]]

5\1/2\ to 6\1/2\............................................       \3/4\
6\1/2\ to 7\1/2\............................................       \7/8\
7\1/2\ to 12\1/2\...........................................      1\1/4\
12\1/2\ to 15\1/2\..........................................      1\1/2\
15\1/2\ to 17\1/2\..........................................      1\7/8\
17\1/2\ to 31\1/2\..........................................      2\1/8\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    This table shows the distances that guards shall be positioned from 
the danger line in accordance with the required openings.

    (g) Reports of injuries to employees operating mechanical power 
presses. (1) The employer shall, within 30 days of the occurrence, 
report to either the Director of the Directorate of Safety Standards 
Programs, OSHA, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, D.C. 20210, or the 
State agency administering a plan approved by the Assistant Secretary of 
Labor for Occupational Safety and Health, all point of operation 
injuries to operators or other employees. The following information 
shall be included in the report:
    (i) Employer's name, address and location of the workplace 
(establishment).
    (ii) Employee's name, injury sustained, and the task being performed 
(operation, set-up, maintenance, or other).
    (iii) Type of clutch used on the press (full revolution, part 
revolution, or direct drive).
    (iv) Type of safeguard(s) being used (two hand control, two hand 
trip, pull-outs, sweeps, or other). If the safeguard is not described in 
this section, give a complete description.
    (v) Cause of the accident (repeat of press, safeguard failure, 
removing stuck part or scrap, no safeguard provided, no safeguard in 
use, or other).
    (vi) Type of feeding (manual with hands in dies or with hands out of 
dies, semiautomatic, automatic, or other).
    (vii) Means used to actuate press stroke (foot trip, foot control, 
hand trip, hand control, or other).
    (viii) Number of operators required for the operation and the number 
of operators provided with controls and safeguards.
    (h) Presence sensing device initiation (PSDI)--(1) General. (i) The 
requirements of paragraph (h) shall apply to all part revolution 
mechanical power presses used in the PSDI mode of operation.
    (ii) The relevant requirements of paragraphs (a) through (g) of this 
section also shall apply to all presses used in the PSDI mode of 
operation, whether or not cross referenced in this paragraph (h). Such 
cross-referencing of specific requirements from paragraphs (a) through 
(g) of this section is intended only to enhance convenience and 
understanding in relating to the new provisions to the existing 
standard, and is not to be construed as limiting the applicability of 
other provisions in paragraphs (a) through (g) of this section.
    (iii) Full revolution mechanical power presses shall not be used in 
the PSDI mode of operation.
    (iv) Mechanical power presses with a configuration which would allow 
a person to enter, pass through, and become clear of the sensing field 
into the hazardous portion of the press shall not be used in the PSDI 
mode of operation.
    (v) The PSDI mode of operation shall be used only for normal 
production operations. Die-setting and maintenance procedures shall 
comply with paragraphs (a) through (g) of this section, and shall not be 
done in the PSDI mode.
    (2) Brake and clutch requirements. (i) Presses with flexible steel 
band brakes or with mechanical linkage actuated brakes or clutches shall 
not be used in the PSDI mode.
    (ii) Brake systems on presses used in the PSDI mode shall have 
sufficient torque so that each average value of stopping times (Ts) for 
stops initiated at approximately 45 degrees, 60 degrees, and 90 degrees, 
respectively, of crankshaft angular position, shall not be more than 125 
percent of the average value of the stopping time at the top crankshaft 
position. Compliance with this requirement shall be determined by using 
the heaviest upper die to be used on the press, and operating at the 
fastest press speed if there is speed selection.
    (iii) Where brake engagement and clutch release is effected by 
spring action, such spring(s) shall operate in compression on a rod or 
within a hole

[[Page 625]]

or tube, and shall be of non-interleaving design.
    (3) Pneumatic systems. (i) Air valve and air pressure supply/
control.
    (A) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(7)(xiii), (b)(7)(xiv), 
(b)(10), (b)(12) and (c)(5)(iii) of this section apply to the pneumatic 
systems of machines used in the PSDI mode.
    (B) The air supply for pneumatic clutch/brake control valves shall 
incorporate a filter, an air regulator, and, when necessary for proper 
operation, a lubricator.
    (C) The air pressure supply for clutch/brake valves on machines used 
in the PSDI mode shall be regulated to pressures less than or equal to 
the air pressure used when making the stop time measurements required by 
paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) Air counterbalance systems.
    (A) Where presses that have slide counterbalance systems are used in 
the PSDI mode, the counterbalance system shall also meet the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(9) of this section.
    (B) Counterbalances shall be adjusted in accordance with the press 
manufacturer's recommendations to assure correct counterbalancing of the 
slide attachment (upper die) weight for all operations performed on 
presses used in the PSDI mode. The adjustments shall be made before 
performing the stopping time measurements required by paragraphs 
(h)(2)(ii), (h)(5)(iii), and (h)(9)(v) of this section.
    (4) Flywheels and bearings. Presses whose designs incorporate 
flywheels running on journals on the crankshaft or back shaft, or bull 
gears running on journals mounted on the crankshaft, shall be inspected, 
lubricated, and maintained as provided in paragraph (h)(10) of this 
section to reduce the possibility of unintended and uncontrolled press 
strokes caused by bearing seizure.
    (5) Brake monitoring. (i) Presses operated in the PSDI mode shall be 
equipped with a brake monitor that meets the requirements of paragraphs 
(b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section. In addition, the brake monitor 
shall be adjusted during installation certification to prevent 
successive stroking of the press if increases in stopping time cause an 
increase in the safety distance above that required by paragraph 
(h)(9)(v) of this section.
    (ii) Once the PSDI safety system has been certified/validated, 
adjustment of the brake monitor shall not be done without prior approval 
of the validation organization for both the brake monitor adjustment and 
the corresponding adjustment of the safety distance. The validation 
organization shall in its installation validation, state that in what 
circumstances, if any, the employer has advance approval for adjustment, 
when prior oral approval is appropriate and when prior approval must be 
in writing. The adjustment shall be done under the supervision of an 
authorized person whose qualifications include knowledge of safety 
distance requirements and experience with the brake system and its 
adjustment. When brake wear or other factors extend press stopping time 
beyond the limit permitted by the brake monitor, adjustment, repair, or 
maintenance shall be performed on the brake or other press system 
element that extends the stopping time.
    (iii) The brake monitor setting shall allow an increase of no more 
than 10 percent of the longest stopping time for the press, or 10 
milliseconds, whichever is longer, measured at the top of the stroke.
    (6) Cycle control and control systems. (i) The control system on 
presses used in the PSDI mode shall meet the applicable requirements of 
paragraphs (b)(7), (b)(8), (b)(13), and (c)(5) of this section.
    (ii) The control system shall incorporate a means of dynamically 
monitoring for decoupling of the rotary position indicating mechanism 
drive from the crankshaft. This monitor shall stop slide motion and 
prevent successive press strokes if decoupling occurs, or if the monitor 
itself fails.
    (iii) The mode selection means of paragraph (b)(7)(iii) of this 
section shall have at least one position for selection of the PSDI mode. 
Where more than one interruption of the light sensing field is used in 
the initiation of a stroke, either the mode selection means must have 
one position for each function, or a separate selection means shall be 
provided which becomes operable when the PSDI mode is selected.

[[Page 626]]

Selection of PSDI mode and the number of interruptions/withdrawals of 
the light sensing field required to initiate a press cycle shall be by 
means capable of supervision by the employer.
    (iv) A PSDI set-up/reset means shall be provided which requires an 
overt action by the operator, in addition to PSDI mode selection, before 
operation of the press by means of PSDI can be started.
    (v) An indicator visible to the operator and readily seen by the 
employer shall be provided which shall clearly indicate that the system 
is set-up for cycling in the PSDI mode.
    (vi) The control system shall incorporate a timer to deactivate PSDI 
when the press does not stroke within the period of time set by the 
timer. The timer shall be manually adjustable, to a maximum time of 30 
seconds. For any timer setting greater than 15 seconds, the adjustment 
shall be made by the use of a special tool available only to authorized 
persons. Following a deactivation of PSDI by the timer, the system shall 
make it necessary to reset the set-up/reset means in order to reactivate 
the PSDI mode.
    (vii) Reactivation of PSDI operation following deactivation of the 
PSDI mode from any other cause, such as activation of the red color stop 
control required by paragraph (b)(7)(ii) of this section, interruption 
of the presence sensing field, opening of an interlock, or reselection 
of the number of sensing field interruptions/withdrawals required to 
cycle the press, shall require resetting of the set-up/reset means.
    (viii) The control system shall incorporate an automatic means to 
prevent initiation or continued operation in the PSDI mode unless the 
press drive motor is energized in the forward direction of crankshaft 
rotation.
    (ix) The control design shall preclude any movement of the slide 
caused by operation of power on, power off, or selector switches, or 
from checks for proper operations as required by paragraph (h)(6)(xiv) 
of this section.
    (x) All components and subsystems of the control system shall be 
designed to operate together to provide total control system compliance 
with the requirements of this section.
    (xi) Where there is more than one operator of a press used for PSDI, 
each operator shall be protected by a separate, independently 
functioning, presence sensing device. The control system shall require 
that each sensing field be interrupted the selected number of times 
prior to initiating a stroke. Further, each operator shall be provided 
with a set-up/reset means that meets the requirements of paragraph 
(h)(6) of this section, and which must be actuated to initiate operation 
of the press in the PSDI mode.
    (xii) [Reserved]
    (xiii) The Control system shall incorporate interlocks for 
supplemental guards, if used, which will prevent stroke initiation or 
will stop a stroke in progress if any supplemental guard fails or is 
deactivated.
    (xiv) The control system shall perform checks for proper operation 
of all cycle control logic element switches and contacts at least once 
each cycle. Control elements shall be checked for correct status after 
power ``on'' and before the initial PSDI stroke.
    (xv) The control system shall have provisions for an ``inch'' 
operating means meeting the requirements of paragraph (b)(7)(iv) of this 
section. Die-setting shall not be done in the PSDI mode. Production 
shall not be done in the ``inch'' mode.
    (xvi) The control system shall permit only a single stroke per 
initiation command.
    (xvii) Controls with internally stored programs (e.g., mechanical, 
electro-mechanical, or electronic) shall meet the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(13) of this section, and shall default to a predetermined 
safe condition in the event of any single failure within the system. 
Programmable controllers which meet the requirements for controls with 
internally stored programs stated above shall be permitted only if all 
logic elements affecting the safety system and point of operation safety 
are internally stored and protected in such a manner that they cannot be 
altered or manipulated by the user to an unsafe condition.
    (7) Environmental requirements. Control components shall be 
selected, constructed, and connected together in such a way as to 
withstand expected

[[Page 627]]

operational and environmental stresses, at least including those 
outlined in appendix A. Such stresses shall not so affect the control 
system as to cause unsafe operation.
    (8) Safety system. (i) Mechanical power presses used in the PSDI 
mode shall be operated under the control of a safety system which, in 
addition to meeting the applicable requirements of paragraphs (b)(13) 
and (c)(5) and other applicable provisions of this section, shall 
function such that a single failure or single operating error shall not 
cause injury to personnel from point of operation hazards.
    (ii) The safety system shall be designed, constructed, and arranged 
as an integral total system, including all elements of the press, the 
controls, the safeguarding and any required supplemental safeguarding, 
and their interfaces with the operator and that part of the environment 
which has effect on the protection against point of operation hazards.
    (9) Safeguarding the point of operation. (i) The point of operation 
of presses operated in the PSDI mode shall be safeguarded in accordance 
with the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section, except that the 
safety distance requirements of paragraph (h)(9)(v) of this section 
shall be used for PSDI operation.
    (ii)(A) PSDI shall be implemented only by use of light curtain 
(photo-electric) presence sensing devices which meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(3)(iii)(c) of this section unless the requirements of the 
following paragraph have been met.
    (B) Alternatives to photo-electric light curtains may be used for 
PSDI when the employer can demonstrate, through tests and analysis by 
the employer or the manufacturer, that the alternative is as safe as the 
photo-electric light curtain, that the alternative meets the conditions 
of this section, has the same long term reliability as light curtains 
and can be integrated into the entire safety system as provided for in 
this section. Prior to use, both the employer and manufacturer must 
certify that these requirements and all the other applicable 
requirements of this section are met and these certifications must be 
validated by an OSHA-recognized third-party validation organization to 
meet these additional requirements and all the other applicable 
requirements of paragraphs (a) through (h) and appendix A of this 
section. Three months prior to the operation of any alternative system, 
the employer must notify the OSHA Directorate of Safety Standards 
Programs of the name of the system to be installed, the manufacturer and 
the OSHA-recognized third-party validation organization immediately. 
Upon request, the employer must make available to that office all tests 
and analyses for OSHA review.
    (iii) Individual sensing fields of presence sensing devices used to 
initiate strokes in the PSDI mode shall cover only one side of the 
press.
    (iv) Light curtains used for PSDI operation shall have minimum 
object sensitivity not to exceed one and one-fourth inches (31.75 mm). 
Where light curtain object sensitivity is user-adjustable, either 
discretely or continuously, design features shall limit the minimum 
object sensitivity adjustment not to exceed one and one-fourth inches 
(31.75 mm). Blanking of the sensing field is not permitted.
    (v) The safety distance (Ds) from the sensing field of the presence 
sensing device to the point of operation shall be greater than or equal 
to the distance determined by the formula:

                        Ds=Hs x (Ts+Tp+Tr+2Tm)+Dp

Where:
Ds=Minimum safety distance.
Hs=Hand speed constant of 63 inches per second (1.6 m/s).
Ts=Longest press stopping time, in seconds, computed by taking averages 
          of multiple measurements at each of three positions (45 
          degrees, 60 degrees, and 90 degrees) of crankshaft angular 
          position; the longest of the three averages is the stopping 
          time to use. (Ts is defined as the sum of the kinetic energy 
          dissipation time plus the pneumatic/magnetic/hydraulic 
          reaction time of the clutch/brake operating mechanism(s).)
Tp=Longest presence sensing device response time, in seconds.
Tr=Longest response time, in seconds, of all interposing control 
          elements between the presence sensing device and the clutch/
          brake operating mechanism(s).
Tm=Increase in the press stopping time at the top of the stroke, in 
          seconds, allowed

[[Page 628]]

          by the brake monitor for brake wear. The time increase allowed 
          shall be limited to no more than 10 percent of the longest 
          press stopping time measured at the top of the stroke, or 10 
          milliseconds, whichever is longer.
Dp=Penetration depth factor, required to provide for possible 
          penetration through the presence sensing field by fingers or 
          hand before detection occurs. The penetration depth factor 
          shall be determined from Graph h-1 using the minimum object 
          sensitivity size.

[[Page 629]]

          [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.077
          

[[Page 630]]


    (vi) The presence sensing device location shall either be set at 
each tool change and set-up to provide at least the minimum safety 
distance, or fixed in location to provide a safety distance greater than 
or equal to the minimum safety distance for all tooling set-ups which 
are to be used on that press.
    (vii) Where presence sensing device location is adjustable, 
adjustment shall require the use of a special tool available only to 
authorized persons.
    (viii) Supplemental safeguarding shall be used to protect all areas 
of access to the point of operation which are unprotected by the PSDI 
presence sensing device. Such supplemental safeguarding shall consist of 
either additional light curtain (photo-electric) presence sensing 
devices or other types of guards which meet the requirements of 
paragraphs (c) and (h) of this section.
    (A) Presence sensing devices used as supplemental safeguarding shall 
not initiate a press stroke, and shall conform to the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(3)(iii) and other applicable provisions of this section, 
except that the safety distance shall comply with paragraph (h)(9)(v) of 
this section.
    (B) Guards used as supplemental safeguarding shall conform to the 
design, construction and application requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of 
this section, and shall be interlocked with the press control to prevent 
press PSDI operation if the guard fails, is removed, or is out of 
position.
    (ix) Barriers shall be fixed to the press frame or bolster to 
prevent personnel from passing completely through the sensing field, 
where safety distance or press configuration is such that personnel 
could pass through the PSDI presence sensing field and assume a position 
where the point of operation could be accessed without detection by the 
PSDI presence sensing device. As an alternative, supplemental presence 
sensing devices used only in the safeguard mode may be provided. If 
used, these devices shall be located so as to detect all operator 
locations and positions not detected by the PSDI sensing field, and 
shall prevent stroking or stop a stroke in process when any supplemental 
sensing field(s) are interrupted.
    (x) Hand tools. Where tools are used for feeding, removal of scrap, 
lubrication of parts, or removal of parts that stick on the die in PSDI 
operations:
    (A) The minimum diameter of the tool handle extension shall be 
greater than the minimum object sensitivity of the presence sensing 
device(s) used to initiate press strokes; or
    (B) The length of the hand tool shall be such as to ensure that the 
operator's hand will be detected for any safety distance required by the 
press set-ups.
    (10) Inspection and maintenance. (i) Any press equipped with 
presence sensing devices for use in PSDI, or for supplemental 
safeguarding on presses used in the PSDI mode, shall be equipped with a 
test rod of diameter specified by the presence sensing device 
manufacturer to represent the minimum object sensitivity of the sensing 
field. Instructions for use of the test rod shall be noted on a label 
affixed to the presence sensing device.
    (ii) The following checks shall be made at the beginning of each 
shift and whenever a die change is made.
    (A) A check shall be performed using the test rod according to the 
presence sensing device manufacturer's instructions to determine that 
the presence sensing device used for PSDI is operational.
    (B) The safety distance shall be checked for compliance with 
(h)(9)(v) of this section.
    (C) A check shall be made to determine that all supplemental 
safeguarding is in place. Where presence sensing devices are used for 
supplemental safeguarding, a check for proper operation shall be 
performed using the test rod according to the presence sensing device 
manufacturer's instructions.
    (D) A check shall be made to assure that the barriers and/or 
supplemental presence sensing devices required by paragraph (h)(9)(ix) 
of this section are operating properly.
    (E) A system or visual check shall be made to verify correct 
counterbalance adjustment for die weight according to the press 
manufacturer's instructions, when a press is equipped with a slide 
counterbalance system.
    (iii) When presses used in the PSDI mode have flywheel or bullgear 
running on crankshaft mounted journals

[[Page 631]]

and bearings, or a flywheel mounted on back shaft journals and bearings, 
periodic inspections following the press manufacturer's recommendations 
shall be made to ascertain that bearings are in good working order, and 
that automatic lubrication systems for these bearings (if automatic 
lubrication is provided) are supplying proper lubrication. On presses 
with provision for manual lubrication of flywheel or bullgear bearings, 
lubrication shall be provided according to the press manufacturer's 
recommendations.
    (iv) Periodic inspections of clutch and brake mechanisms shall be 
performed to assure they are in proper operating condition. The press 
manufacturer's recommendations shall be followed.
    (v) When any check of the press, including those performed in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraphs (h)(10)(ii), (iii) or 
(iv) of this section, reveals a condition of noncompliance, improper 
adjustment, or failure, the press shall not be operated until the 
condition has been corrected by adjustment, replacement, or repair.
    (vi) It shall be the responsibility of the employer to ensure the 
competence of personnel caring for, inspecting, and maintaining power 
presses equipped for PSDI operation, through initial and periodic 
training.
    (11) Safety system certification/validation. (i) Prior to the 
initial use of any mechanical press in the PSDI mode, two sets of 
certification and validation are required:
    (A) The design of the safety system required for the use of a press 
in the PSDI mode shall be certified and validated prior to installation. 
The manufacturer's certification shall be validated by an OSHA-
recognized third-party validation organization to meet all applicable 
requirements of paragraphs (a) through (h) and appendix A of this 
section.
    (B) After a press has been equipped with a safety system whose 
design has been certified and validated in accordance with paragraph 
(h)(11)(i) of this section, the safety system installation shall be 
certified by the employer, and then shall be validated by an OSHA-
recognized third-party validation organization to meet all applicable 
requirements of paragraphs (a) through (h) and appendix A of this 
section.
    (ii) At least annually thereafter, the safety system on a mechanical 
power press used in the PSDI mode shall be recertified by the employer 
and revalidated by an OSHA-recognized third-party validation 
organization to meet all applicable requirements of paragraphs (a) 
through (h) and appendix A of this section. Any press whose safety 
system has not been recertified and revalidated within the preceding 12 
months shall be removed from service in the PSDI mode until the safety 
system is recertified and revalidated.
    (iii) A label shall be affixed to the press as part of each 
installation certification/validation and the most recent 
recertification/revalidation. The label shall indicate the press serial 
number, the minimum safety distance (Ds) required by paragraph (h)(9)(v) 
of this section, the fulfillment of design certification/validation, the 
employer's signed certification, the identification of the OSHA-
recognized third-party validation organization, its signed validation, 
and the date the certification/validation and recertification/
revalidation are issued.
    (iv) Records of the installation certification and validation and 
the most recent recertification and revalidation shall be maintained for 
each safety system equipped press by the employer as long as the press 
is in use. The records shall include the manufacture and model number of 
each component and subsystem, the calculations of the safety distance as 
required by paragraph (h)(9)(v) of this section, and the stopping time 
measurements required by paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section. The most 
recent records shall be made available to OSHA upon request.
    (v) The employer shall notify the OSHA-recognized third-party 
validation organization within five days whenever a component or a 
subsystem of the safety system fails or modifications are made which may 
affect the safety of the system. The failure of a critical component 
shall necessitate the removal of the safety system from service until it 
is recertified and revalidated, except recertification by the employer 
without revalidation is permitted when a non-critical component

[[Page 632]]

or subsystem is replaced by one of the same manufacture and design as 
the original, or determined by the third-party validation organization 
to be equivalent by similarity analysis, as set forth in appendix A.
    (vi) The employer shall notify the OSHA-recognized third-party 
validation organization within five days of the occurrence of any point 
of operation injury while a press is used in the PSDI mode. This is in 
addition to the report of injury required by paragraph (g) of this 
section; however, a copy of that report may be used for this purpose.
    (12) Die setting and work set-up. (i) Die setting on presses used in 
the PSDI mode shall be performed in accordance with paragraphs (d) and 
(h) of this section.
    (ii) The PSDI mode shall not be used for die setting or set-up. An 
alternative manual cycle initiation and control means shall be supplied 
for use in die setting which meets the requirements of paragraph (b)(7) 
of this section.
    (iii) Following a die change, the safety distance, the proper 
application of supplemental safeguarding, and the slide counterbalance 
adjustment (if the press is equipped with a counterbalance) shall be 
checked and maintained by authorized persons whose qualifications 
include knowledge of the safety distance, supplemental safeguarding 
requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications for counterbalance 
adjustment. Adjustment of the location of the PSDI presence sensing 
device shall require use of a special tool available only to the 
authorized persons.
    (13) Operator training. (i) The operator training required by 
paragraph (f)(2) of this section shall be provided to the employee 
before the employee initially operates the press and as needed to 
maintain competence, but not less than annually thereafter. It shall 
include instruction relative to the following items for presses used in 
the PSDI mode.
    (A) The manufacturer's recommended test procedures for checking 
operation of the presence sensing device. This shall include the use of 
the test rod required by paragraph (h)(10)(i) of this section.
    (B) The safety distance required.
    (C) The operation, function and performance of the PSDI mode.
    (D) The requirements for hand tools that may be used in the PSDI 
mode.
    (E) The severe consequences that can result if he or she attempts to 
circumvent or by-pass any of the safeguard or operating functions of the 
PSDI system.
    (ii) The employer shall certify that employees have been trained by 
preparing a certification record which includes the identity of the 
person trained, the signature of the employer or the person who 
conducted the training, and the date the training was completed. The 
certification record shall be prepared at the completion of training and 
shall be maintained on file for the duration of the employee's 
employment. The certification record shall be made available upon 
request to the Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health.

 Appendix A to Sec. 1910.217--Mandatory Requirements for Certification/
 Validation of Safety Systems for Presence Sensing Device Initiation of 
                        Mechanical Power Presses

                                 Purpose

    The purpose of the certification/validation of safety systems for 
presence sensing device initiation (PSDI) of mechanical power presses is 
to ensure that the safety systems are designed, installed, and 
maintained in accordance with all applicable requirements of 29 CFR 
1910.217 (a) through (h) and this appendix A.

                                 General

    The certification/validation process shall utilize an independent 
third-party validation organization recognized by OSHA in accordance 
with the requirements specified in appendix C of this section.
    While the employer is responsible for assuring that the 
certification/validation requirements in Sec. 1910.217(h)(11) are 
fulfilled, the design certification of PSDI safety systems may be 
initiated by manufacturers, employers, and/or their representatives. The 
term manufacturers refers to the manufacturer of any of the components 
of the safety system. An employer who assembles a PSDI safety system 
would be a manufacturer as well as employer for purposes of this 
standard and appendix.

[[Page 633]]

    The certification/validation process includes two stages. For design 
certification, in the first stage, the manufacturer (which can be an 
employer) certifies that the PSDI safety system meets the requirements 
of 29 CFR 1910.217 (a) through (h) and this appendix A, based on 
appropriate design criteria and tests. In the second stage, the OSHA-
recognized third-party validation organization validates that the PSDI 
safety system meets the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217 (a) through (h) 
and this appendix A and the manufacturer's certification by reviewing 
the manufacturer's design and test data and performing any additional 
reviews required by this standard or which it believes appropriate.
    For installation certification/validation and annual 
recertification/revalidation, in the first stage the employer certifies 
or recertifies that the employer is installing or utilizing a PSDI 
safety system validated as meeting the design requirements of 29 CFR 
1910.217 (a) through (h) and this appendix A by an OSHA-recognized 
third-party validation organization and that the installation, operation 
and maintenance meet the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217 (a) through (h) 
and this appendix A. In the second stage, the OSHA-recognized third-
party validation organization validates or revalidates that the PSDI 
safety system installation meets the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217 (a) 
through (h) and this appendix A and the employer's certification, by 
reviewing that the PSDI safety system has been certified; the employer's 
certification, designs and tests, if any; the installation, operation, 
maintenance and training; and by performing any additional tests and 
reviews which the validation organization believes is necessary.

                                 Summary

    The certification/validation of safety systems for PSDI shall 
consider the press, controls, safeguards, operator, and environment as 
an integrated system which shall comply with all of the requirements in 
29 CFR 1910.217 (a) through (h) and this appendix A. The certification/
validation process shall verify that the safety system complies with the 
OSHA safety requirements as follows:

                   A. Design Certification/Validation

    1. The major parts, components and subsystems used shall be defined 
by part number or serial number, as appropriate, and by manufacturer to 
establish the configuration of the system.
    2. The identified parts, components and subsystems shall be 
certified by the manufacturer to be able to withstand the functional and 
operational environments of the PSDI safety system.
    3. The total system design shall be certified by the manufacturer as 
complying with all requirements in 29 CFR 1910.217 (a) through (h) and 
this appendix A.
    4. The third-party validation organization shall validate the 
manufacturer's certification under paragraphs 2 and 3.

                B. Installation Certification/Validation

    1. The employer shall certify that the PSDI safety system has been 
design certified and validated, that the installation meets the 
operational and environmental requirements specified by the 
manufacturer, that the installation drawings are accurate, and that the 
installation meets the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217 (a) through (h) 
and this appendix A. (The operational and installation requirements of 
the PSDI safety system may vary for different applications.)
    2. The third-party validation organization shall validate the 
employer's certifications that the PSDI safety system is design 
certified and validated, that the installation meets the installation 
and environmental requirements specified by the manufacturer, and that 
the installation meets the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217 (a) through 
(h) and this appendix A.

                     C. Recertification/Revalidation

    1. The PSDI safety system shall remain under certification/
validation for the shorter of one year or until the system hardware is 
changed, modified or refurbished, or operating conditions are changed 
(including environmental, application or facility changes), or a failure 
of a critical component has occurred.
    2. Annually, or after a change specified in paragraph 1., the 
employer shall inspect and recertify the installation as meeting the 
requirements set forth under B., Installation Certification/Validation.
    3. The third-party validation organization, annually or after a 
change specified in paragraph 1., shall validate the employer's 
certification that the requirements of paragraph B., Installation 
Certification/Validation have been met.

    (Note: Such changes in operational conditions as die changes or 
press relocations not involving disassembly or revision to the safety 
system would not require recertification/revalidation.)

                  Certification/Validation Requirements

         A. General Design Certification/Validation Requirements

    1. Certification/Validation Program Requirements. The manufacturer 
shall certify and the OSHA-recognized third-party validation 
organization shall validate that:
    (a) The design of components, subsystems, software and assemblies 
meets OSHA performance requirements and are ready for the intended use; 
and

[[Page 634]]

    (b) The performance of combined subsystems meets OSHA's operational 
requirements.
    2. Certification/Validation Program Level of Risk Evaluation 
Requirements. The manufacturer shall evaluate and certify, and the OSHA-
recognized third-party validation organization shall validate, the 
design and operation of the safety system by determining conformance 
with the following:
    a. The safety system shall have the ability to sustain a single 
failure or a single operating error and not cause injury to personnel 
from point of operation hazards. Acceptable design features shall 
demonstrate, in the following order or precedence, that:
    (1) No single failure points may cause injury; or
    (2) Redundancy, and comparison and/or diagnostic checking, exist for 
the critical items that may cause injury, and the electrical, 
electronic, electromechanical and mechanical parts and components are 
selected so that they can withstand operational and external 
environments. The safety factor and/or derated percentage shall be 
specifically noted and complied with.
    b. The manufacturer shall design, evaluate, test and certify, and 
the third-party validation organization shall evaluate and validate, 
that the PSDI safety system meets appropriate requirements in the 
following areas.
    (1) Environmental Limits
    (a) Temperature
    (b) Relative humidity
    (c) Vibration
    (d) Fluid compatability with other materials
    (2) Design Limits
    (a) Power requirements
    (b) Power transient tolerances
    (c) Compatability of materials used
    (d) Material stress tolerances and limits
    (e) Stability to long term power fluctuations
    (f) Sensitivity to signal acquisition
    (g) Repeatability of measured parameter without inadvertent 
initiation of a press stroke
    (h) Operational life of components in cycles, hours, or both
    (i) Electromagnetic tolerance to:
    (1) Specific operational wave lengths; and
    (2) Externally generated wave lengths
    (3) New Design Certification/Validation. Design certification/
validation for a new safety system, i.e., a new design or new 
integration of specifically identified components and subsystems, would 
entail a single certification/validation which would be applicable to 
all identical safety systems. It would not be necessary to repeat the 
tests on individual safety systems of the same manufacture or design. 
Nor would it be necessary to repeat these tests in the case of 
modifications where determined by the manufacturer and validated by the 
third-party validation organization to be equivalent by similarity 
analysis. Minor modifications not affecting the safety of the system may 
be made by the manufacturer without revalidation.
    Substantial modifications would require testing as a new safety 
system, as deemed necessary by the validation organization.

   B. Additional Detailed Design Certification/Validation Requirements

    1. General. The manufacturer or the manufacturer's representative 
shall certify to and submit to an OSHA-recognized third-party validation 
organization the documentation necessary to demonstrate that the PSDI 
safety system design is in full compliance with the requirements of 29 
CFR 1910.217(a)-(h) and this appendix A, as applicable, by means of 
analysis, tests, or combination of both, establishing that the following 
additional certification/validation requirements are fulfilled.
    2. Reaction Times. For the purpose of demonstrating compliance with 
the reaction time required by Sec. 1910.217(h), the tests shall use the 
following definitions and requirements:
    a. Reaction time means the time, in seconds, it takes the signal, 
required to activate/deactivate the system, to travel through the 
system, measured from the time of signal initiation to the time the 
function being measured is completed.
    b. Full stop or No movement of the slide or ram means when the 
crankshaft rotation has slowed to two or less revolutions per minute, 
just before stopping completely.
    c. Function completion means for, electrical, electromechanical and 
electronic devices, when the circuit produces a change of state in the 
output element of the device.
    d. When the change of state is motion, the measurement shall be made 
at the completion of the motion.
    e. The generation of the test signal introduced into the system for 
measuring reaction time shall be such that the initiation time can be 
established with an error of less than 0.5 percent of the reaction time 
measured.
    f. The instrument used to measure reaction time shall be calibrated 
to be accurate to within 0.001 second.
    3. Compliance with Sec. 1910.217(h)(2)(ii). For compliance with 
these requirements, the average value of the stopping time, Ts, shall be 
the arithmetic mean of at least 25 stops for each stop angle initiation 
measured with the brake and/or clutch unused, 50 percent worn, and 90 
percent worn. The recommendations of the brake system manufacturer shall 
be used to simulate or estimate the brake wear. The manufacturer's 
recommended minimum lining depth shall be identified and documented, and 
an evaluation made that the minimum depth will not be exceeded before

[[Page 635]]

the next (annual) recertification/revalidation. A correlation of the 
brake and/or clutch degradation based on the above tests and/or 
estimates shall be made and documented. The results shall document the 
conditions under which the brake and/or clutch will and will not comply 
with the requirement. Based upon this determination, a scale shall be 
developed to indicate the allowable 10 percent of the stopping time at 
the top of the stroke for slide or ram overtravel due to brake wear. The 
scale shall be marked to indicate that brake adjustment and/or 
replacement is required. The explanation and use of the scale shall be 
documented.
    The test specification and procedure shall be submitted to the 
validation organization for review and validation prior to the test. The 
validation organization representative shall witness at least one set of 
tests.
    4. Compliance with Secs. 1910.217(h)(5)(iii) and (h)(9)(v). Each 
reaction time required to calculate the Safety Distance, including the 
brake monitor setting, shall be documented in separate reaction time 
tests. These tests shall specify the acceptable tolerance band 
sufficient to assure that tolerance build-up will not render the safety 
distance unsafe.
    a. Integrated test of the press fully equipped to operate in the 
PSDI mode shall be conducted to establish the total system reaction 
time.
    b. Brakes which are the adjustable type shall be adjusted properly 
before the test.
    5. Compliance with Sec. 1910.217(h)(2)(iii). a. Prior to conducting 
the brake system test required by paragraph (h)(2)(ii), a visual check 
shall be made of the springs. The visual check shall include a 
determination that the spring housing or rod does not show damage 
sufficient to degrade the structural integrity of the unit, and the 
spring does not show any tendency to interleave.
    b. Any detected broken or unserviceable springs shall be replaced 
before the test is conducted. The test shall be considered successful if 
the stopping time remains within that which is determined by paragraph 
(h)(9)(v) for the safety distance setting. If the increase in press 
stopping time exceeds the brake monitor setting limit defined in 
paragraph (h)(5)(iii), the test shall be considered unsuccessful, and 
the cause of the excessive stopping time shall be investigated. It shall 
be ascertained that the springs have not been broken and that they are 
functioning properly.
    6. Compliance with Sec. 1910.217(h)(7). a. Tests which are conducted 
by the manufacturers of electrical components to establish stress, life, 
temperature and loading limits must be tests which are in compliance 
with the provisions of the National Electrical Code.
    b. Electrical and/or electronic cards or boards assembled with 
discreet components shall be considered a subsystem and shall require 
separate testing that the subsystems do not degrade in any of the 
following conditions:
    (1) Ambient temperature variation from  -20 deg. C to +50 deg. C.
    (2) Ambient relative humidity of 99 percent.
    (3) Vibration of 45G for one millisecond per stroke when the item is 
to be mounted on the press frame.
    (4) Electromagnetic interference at the same wavelengths used for 
the radiation sensing field, at the power line frequency fundamental and 
harmonics, and also from outogenous radiation due to system switching.
    (5) Electrical power supply variations of <plus-minus>15 percent.
    c. The manufacturer shall specify the test requirements and 
procedures from existing consensus tests in compliance with the 
provisions of the National Electrical Code.
    d. Tests designed by the manufacturer shall be made available upon 
request to the validation organization. The validation organization 
representative shall witness at least one set of each of these tests.
    7. Compliance with Sec. 1910.217(h)(9)(iv). a. The manufacturer 
shall design a test to demonstrate that the prescribed minimum object 
sensitivity of the presence sensing device is met.
    b. The test specifications and procedures shall be made available 
upon request to the validation organization.
    8. Compliance with Sec. 1910.217(h)(9)(x). a. The manufacturer shall 
design a test(s) to establish the hand tool extension diameters allowed 
for variations in minimum object sensitivity response.
    b. The test(s) shall document the range of object diameter sizes 
which will produce both single and double break conditions.
    c. The test(s) specifications and procedures shall be made available 
upon request to the validation organization.
    9. Integrated Tests Certification/Validation. a. The manufacturer 
shall design a set of integrated tests to demonstrate compliance with 
the following requirements:
    Sections 1910.217(h)(6) (ii); (iii); (iv); (v); (vi); (vii); (viii); 
(ix); (xi); (xii); (xiii); (xiv); (xv); and (xvii).
    b. The integrated test specifications and procedures shall be made 
available to the validation organization.
    10. Analysis. a. The manufacturer shall submit to the validation 
organization the technical analysis such as Hazard Analysis, Failure 
Mode and Effect Analysis, Stress Analysis, Component and Material 
Selection Analysis, Fluid Compatability, and/or other analyses which may 
be necessary to demonstrate, compliance with the following requirements:
    Sections 1910.217(h)(8) (i) and (ii); (h)(2) (ii) and (iii); 
(h)(3)(i) (A) and (C), and (ii); (h)(5) (i), (ii) and (iii); (h)(6) (i), 
(iii), (iv), (vi), (vii),

[[Page 636]]

(viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xiii), (xiv), (xv), (xvi), and (xvii); (h)(7) 
(i) and (ii); (h)(9) (iv), (v), (viii), (ix) and (x); (h)(10) (i) and 
(ii).
    11. Types of Tests Acceptable for Certification/Validation. a. Test 
results obtained from development testing may be used to certify/
validate the design.
    b. The test results shall provide the engineering data necessary to 
establish confidence that the hardware and software will meet 
specifications, the manufacturing process has adequate quality control 
and the data acquired was used to establish processes, procedures, and 
test levels supporting subsequent hardware design, production, 
installation and maintenance.
    12. Validation for Design Certification/Validation. If, after review 
of all documentation, tests, analyses, manufacturer's certifications, 
and any additional tests which the third-party validation organization 
believes are necessary, the third-party validation organization 
determines that the PSDI safety system is in full compliance with the 
applicable requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217(a) through (h) and this 
appendix A, it shall validate the manufacturer's certification that it 
so meets the stated requirements.

          C. Installation Certification/Validation Requirements

    1. The employer shall evaluate and test the PSDI system 
installation, shall submit to the OSHA-recognized third-party validation 
organization the necessary supporting documentation, and shall certify 
that the requirements of Sec. 1910.217(a) through (h) and this appendix 
A have been met and that the installation is proper.
    2. The OSHA-recognized third-party validation organization shall 
conduct tests, and/or review and evaluate the employer's installation 
tests, documentation and representations. If it so determines, it shall 
validate the employer's certification that the PSDI safety system is in 
full conformance with all requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217(a) through (h) 
and this appendix A.

              D. Recertification/Revalidation Requirements

    1. A PSDI safety system which has received installation 
certification/validation shall undergo recertification/revalidation the 
earlier of:
    a. Each time the systems hardware is significantly changed, 
modified, or refurbished;
    b. Each time the operational conditions are significantly changed 
(including environmental, application or facility changes, but excluding 
such changes as die changes or press relocations not involving revision 
to the safety system);
    c. When a failure of a significant component has occurred or a 
change has been made which may affect safety; or
    d. When one year has elapsed since the installation certification/
validation or the last recertification/revalidation.
    2. Conduct or recertification/revalidation. The employer shall 
evaluate and test the PSDI safety system installation, shall submit to 
the OSHA-recognized third-party validation organization the necessary 
supporting documentation, and shall recertify that the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.217(a) through (h) and this appendix are being met. The 
documentation shall include, but not be limited to, the following items:
    a. Demonstration of a thorough inspection of the entire press and 
PSDI safety system to ascertain that the installation, components and 
safeguarding have not been changed, modified or tampered with since the 
installation certification/validation or last recertification/
revalidation was made.
    b. Demonstrations that such adjustments as may be needed (such as to 
the brake monitor setting) have been accomplished with proper changes 
made in the records and on such notices as are located on the press and 
safety system.
    c. Demonstration that review has been made of the reports covering 
the design certification/validation, the installation certification/
validation, and all recertification/revalidations, in order to detect 
any degradation to an unsafe condition, and that necessary changes have 
been made to restore the safety system to previous certification/
validation levels.
    3. The OSHA-recognized third-party validation organization shall 
conduct tests, and/or review and evaluate the employer's installation, 
tests, documentation and representations. If it so determines, it shall 
revalidate the employer's recertification that the PSDI system is in 
full conformance with all requirements of 29 CFR 1910.217(a) through (h) 
and this appendix A.

 Appendix B to Sec. 1910.217--Nonmandatory Guidelines for Certification/
 Validation of Safety Systems for Presence Sensing Device Initiation of 
                        Mechanical Power Presses

                               Objectives

    This appendix provides employers, manufacturers, and their 
representatives, with nonmandatory guidelines for use in developing 
certification documents. Employers and manufacturers are encouraged to 
recommend other approaches if there is a potential for improving safety 
and reducing cost. The guidelines apply to certification/validation 
activity from design evaluation through the completion of the 
installation test and the annual recertification/revalidation tests.

[[Page 637]]

                           General Guidelines

    A. The certification/validation process should confirm that hazards 
identified by hazard analysis, (HA), failure mode effect analysis 
(FMEA), and other system analyses have been eliminated by design or 
reduced to an acceptable level through the use of appropriate design 
features, safety devices, warning devices, or special procedures. The 
certification/validation process should also confirm that residual 
hazards identified by operational analysis are addressed by warning, 
labeling safety instructions or other appropriate means.
    B. The objective of the certification/validation program is to 
demonstrate and document that the system satisfies specification and 
operational requirements for safe operations.

                             Quality Control

    The safety attributes of a certified/validated PSDI safety system 
are more likely to be maintained if the quality of the system and its 
parts, components and subsystem is consistently controlled. Each 
manufacturer supplying parts, components, subsystems, and assemblies 
needs to maintain the quality of the product, and each employer needs to 
maintain the system in a non-degraded condition.

                           Analysis Guidelines

    A. Certification/validation of hardware design below the system 
level should be accomplished by test and/or analysis.
    B. Analytical methods may be used in lieu of, in combination with, 
or in support of tests to satisfy specification requirements.
    C. Analyses may be used for certification/validation when existing 
data are available or when test is not feasible.
    D. Similarity analysis may be used in lieu of tests where it can be 
shown that the article is similar in design, manufacturing process, and 
quality control to another article that was previously certified/
validated in accordance with equivalent or more stringent criteria. If 
previous design, history and application are considered to be similar, 
but not equal to or more exacting than earlier experiences, the 
additional or partial certification/validation tests should concentrate 
on the areas of changed or increased requirements.

                            Analysis Reports

    The analysis reports should identify: (1) The basis for the 
analysis; (2) the hardware or software items analyzed; (3) conclusions; 
(4) safety factors; and (5) limit of the analysis. The assumptions made 
during the analysis should be clearly stated and a description of the 
effects of these assumptions on the conclusions and limits should be 
included.
    Certification/validation by similarity analysis reports should 
identify, in addition to the above, application of the part, component 
or subsystem for which certification/validation is being sought as well 
as data from previous usage establishing adequacy of the item. 
Similarity analysis should not be accepted when the internal and 
external stresses on the item being certified/validated are not defined.
    Usage experience should also include failure data supporting 
adequacy of the design.

Appendix C to Sec. 1910.217--Mandatory Requirements for OSHA Recognition 
      of Third-Party Validation Organizations for the PSDI Standard

    This appendix prescribes mandatory requirements and procedures for 
OSHA recognition of third-party validation organizations to validate 
employer and manufacturer certifications that their equipment and 
practices meet the requirements of the PSDI standard. The scope of the 
appendix includes the three categories of certification/validation 
required by the PSDI standard: Design Certification/Validation, 
Installation Certification/Validation, and Annual Recertification/
Revalidation.
    If further detailing of these provisions will assist the validation 
organization or OSHA in this activity, this detailing will be done 
through appropriate OSHA Program Directives.

      I. Procedure for OSHA Recognition of Validation Organizations

                             A. Applications

    1. Eligibility. a. Any person or organization considering itself 
capable of conducting a PSDI-related third-party validation function may 
apply for OSHA recognition.
    b. However, in determining eligibility for a foreign-based third-
party validation organization, OSHA shall take into consideration 
whether there is reciprocity of treatment by the foreign government 
after consultation with relevant U.S. government agencies.
    2. Content of application. a. The application shall identify the 
scope of the validation activity for which the applicant wishes to be 
recognized, based on one of the following alternatives:
    (1) Design Certification/Validation, Installation Certification/
Validation, and Annual Recertification/Revalidation;
    (2) Design Certification/Validation only; or
    (3) Installation/Certification/Validation and Annual 
Recertification/Revalidation.
    b. The application shall provide information demonstrating that it 
and any validating laboratory utilized meet the qualifications set forth 
in section II of this appendix.

[[Page 638]]

    c. The applicant shall provide information demonstrating that it and 
any validating laboratory utilized meet the program requirements set 
forth in section III of this appendix.
    d. The applicant shall identify the test methods it or the 
validating laboratory will use to test or judge the components and 
operations of the PSDI safety system required to be tested by the PSDI 
standard and appendix A, and shall specify the reasons the test methods 
are appropriate.
    e. The applicant may include whatever enclosures, attachments, or 
exhibits the applicant deems appropriate. The application need not be 
submitted on a Federal form.
    f. The applicant shall certify that the information submitted is 
accurate.
    3. Filing office location. The application shall be filed with: PSDI 
Certification/Validation Program, Office of Variance Determination, 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, 
Room N3653, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210.
    4. Amendments and withdrawals. a. An application may be revised by 
an applicant at any time prior to the completion of the final staff 
recommendation.
    b. An application may be withdrawn by an applicant, without 
prejudice, at any time prior to the final decision by the Assistant 
Secretary in paragraph I.B.8.b.(4) of this appendix.

                     B. Review and Decision Process

    1. Acceptance and field inspection. All applications submitted will 
be accepted by OSHA, and their receipt acknowledged in writing. After 
receipt of an application, OSHA may request additional information if it 
believes information relevant to the requirements for recognition have 
been omitted. OSHA may inspect the facilities of the third-party 
validation organization and any validating laboratory, and while there 
shall review any additional documentation underlying the application. A 
report shall be made of each field inspection.
    2. Requirements for recognition. The requirements for OSHA 
recognition of a third-party validation organization for the PSDI 
standard are that the program has fulfilled the requirements of section 
II of this appendix for qualifications and of section III of this 
appendix for program requirements, and the program has identified 
appropriate test and analysis methods to meet the requirements of the 
PSDI standard and appendix A.
    3. Preliminary approval. If, after review of the application, any 
additional information, and the inspection report, the applicant and any 
validating laboratory appear to have met the requirements for 
recognition, a written recommendation shall be submitted by the 
responsible OSHA personnel to the Assistant Secretary to approve the 
application with a supporting explanation.
    4. Preliminary disapproval. If, after review of the application, 
additional information, and inspection report, the applicant does not 
appear to have met the requirements for recognition, the Director of the 
PSDI certification/validation program shall notify the applicant in 
writing, listing the specific requirements of this appendix which the 
applicant has not met, and the reasons.
    5. Revision of application. After receipt of a notification of 
preliminary disapproval, the applicant may submit a revised application 
for further review by OSHA pursuant to subsection I.B. of this appendix 
or may request that the original application be submitted to the 
Assistant Secretary with a statement of reasons supplied by the 
applicant as to why the application should be approved.
    6. Preliminary decision by Assistant Secretary. a. The Assistant 
Secretary, or a special designee for this purpose, will make a 
preliminary decision whether the applicant has met the requirements for 
recognition based on the completed application file and the written 
staff recommendation, as well as the statement of reasons by the 
applicant if there is a recommendation of disapproval.
    b. This preliminary decision will be sent to the applicant and 
subsequently published in the Federal Register.
    7. Public review and comment period. a. The Federal Register notice 
of preliminary decision will provide a period of not less than 60 
calendar days for the written comments on the applicant's fulfillment of 
the requirements for recognition. The application, supporting documents, 
staff recommendation, statement of applicant's reasons, and any comments 
received, will be available for public inspection in the OSHA Docket 
Office.
    b. If the preliminary decision is in favor of recognition, a member 
of the public, or if the preliminary decision is against recognition, 
the applicant may request a public hearing by the close of the comment 
period, if it supplies detailed reasons and evidence challenging the 
basis of the Assistant Secretary's preliminary decision and justifying 
the need for a public hearing to bring out evidence which could not be 
effectively supplied through written submissions.
    8. Final decision by Assistant Secretary-- a. Without hearing. If 
there are no valid requests for a hearing, based on the application, 
supporting documents, staff recommendation, evidence and public comment, 
the Assistant Secretary shall issue the final decision (including 
reasons) of the Department of Labor on whether the applicant has 
demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that it meets the 
requirements for recognition.
    b. After hearing. If there is a valid request for a hearing pursuant 
to paragraph I.B.7.b.

[[Page 639]]

of this appendix, the following procedures will be used:
    (1) The Assistant Secretary will issue a notice of hearing before an 
administrative law judge of the Department of Labor pursuant to the 
rules specified in 29 CFR part 1905, subpart C.
    (2) After the hearing, pursuant to subpart C, the administrative law 
judge shall issue a decision (including reasons) based on the 
application, the supporting documentation, the staff recommendation, the 
public comments and the evidence submitted during the hearing (the 
record), stating whether it has been demonstrated, based on a 
preponderance of evidence, that the applicant meets the requirements for 
recognition. If no exceptions are filed, this is the final decision of 
the Department of Labor.
    (3) Upon issuance of the decision, any party to the hearing may file 
exceptions within 20 days pursuant to subpart C. If exceptions are 
filed, the administrative law judge shall forward the decision, 
exceptions and record to the Assistant Secretary for the final decision 
on the application.
    (4) The Assistant Secretary shall review the record, the decision by 
the administrative law judge, and the exceptions. Based on this, the 
Assistant Secretary shall issue the final decision (including reasons) 
of the Department of Labor stating whether the applicant has 
demonstrated by a preponderance of evidence that it meets the 
requirements for recognition.
    b. Publication. A notification of the final decision shall be 
published in the Federal Register.

     C. Terms and Conditions of Recognition, Renewal and Revocation

    1. The following terms and conditions shall be part of every 
recognition:
    a. The recognition of any validation organization will be evidenced 
by a letter of recognition from OSHA. The letter will provide the 
specific details of the scope of the OSHA recognition as well as any 
conditions imposed by OSHA, including any Federal monitoring 
requirements.
    b. The recognition of each validation organization will be valid for 
five years, unless terminated before or renewed after the expiration of 
the period. The dates of the period of recognition will be stated in the 
recognition letter.
    c. The recognized validation organization shall continue to satisfy 
all the requirements of this appendix and the letter of recognition 
during the period of recognition.
    2. A recognized validation organization may change a test method of 
the PSDI safety system certification/validation program by notifying the 
Assistant Secretary of the change, certifying that the revised method 
will be at least as effective as the prior method, and providing the 
supporting data upon which its conclusions are based.
    3. A recognized validation organization may renew its recognition by 
filing a renewal request at the address in paragraph I.A.3. of this 
appendix, above, not less than 180 calendar days, nor more than one 
year, before the expiration date of its current recognition. When a 
recognized validation organization has filed such a renewal request, its 
current recognition will not expire until a final decision has been made 
on the request. The renewal request will be processed in accordance with 
subsection I.B. of this appendix, above, except that a reinspection is 
not required but may be performed by OSHA. A hearing will be granted to 
an objecting member of the public if evidence of failure to meet the 
requirements of this appendix is supplied to OSHA.
    4. A recognized validation organization may apply to OSHA for an 
expansion of its current recognition to cover other categories of PSDI 
certification/validation in addition to those included in the current 
recognition. The application for expansion will be acted upon and 
processed by OSHA in accordance with subsection I.B. of this appendix, 
subject to the possible reinspection exception. If the validation 
organization has been recognized for more than one year, meets the 
requirements for expansion of recognition, and there is no evidence that 
the recognized validation organization has not been following the 
requirements of this appendix and the letter of recognition, an 
expansion will normally be granted. A hearing will be granted to an 
objecting member of the public only if evidence of failure to meet the 
requirements of this appendix is supplied to OSHA.
    5. A recognized validation organization may voluntarily terminate 
its recognition, either in its entirety or with respect to any area 
covered in its recognition, by giving written notice to OSHA at any 
time. The written notice shall indicate the termination date. A 
validation organization may not terminate its installation certification 
and recertification validation functions earlier than either one year 
from the date of the written notice, or the date on which another 
recognized validation organization is able to perform the validation of 
installation certification and recertification.
    6.a. OSHA may revoke its recognition of a validation organization if 
its program either has failed to continue to satisfy the requirements of 
this appendix or its letter of recognition, has not been performing the 
validation functions required by the PSDI standard and appendix A, or 
has misrepresented itself in its applications. Before proposing to 
revoke recognition, the Agency will notify the recognized validation 
organization of the basis of the proposed revocation and will allow 
rebuttal or correction of the alleged

[[Page 640]]

deficiencies. If the deficiencies are not corrected, OSHA may revoke 
recognition, effective in 60 days, unless the validation organization 
requests a hearing within that time.
    b. If a hearing is requested, it shall be held before an 
administrative law judge of the Department of Labor pursuant to the 
rules specified in 29 CFR part 1905, subpart C.
    c. The parties shall be OSHA and the recognized validation 
organization. The decision shall be made pursuant to the procedures 
specified in paragraphs I.B.8.b.(2) through (4) of this appendix except 
that the burden of proof shall be on OSHA to demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the recognition should be revoked 
because the validation organization either is not meeting the 
requirements for recognition, has not been performing the validation 
functions required by the PSDI standard and appendix A, or has 
misrepresented itself in its applications.

                    D. Provisions of OSHA Recognition

    Each recognized third-party validation organization and its 
validating laboratories shall:
    1. Allow OSHA to conduct unscheduled reviews or on-site audits of it 
or the validating laboratories on matters relevant to PSDI, and 
cooperate in the conduct of these reviews and audits;
    2. Agree to terms and conditions established by OSHA in the grant of 
recognition on matters such as exchange of data, submission of accident 
reports, and assistance in studies for improving PSDI or the 
certification/validation process.

                           II. Qualifications

    The third-party validation organization, the validating laboratory, 
and the employees of each shall meet the requirements set forth in this 
section of this appendix.

                A. Experience of Validation Organization

    1. The third-party validation organization shall have legal 
authority to perform certification/validation activities.
    2. The validation organization shall demonstrate competence and 
experience in either power press design, manufacture or use, or testing, 
quality control or certification/validation of equipment comparable to 
power presses and associated control systems.
    3. The validation organization shall demonstrate a capability for 
selecting, reviewing, and/or validating appropriate standards and test 
methods to be used for validating the certification of PSDI safety 
systems, as well as for reviewing judgements on the safety of PSDI 
safety systems and their conformance with the requirements of this 
section.
    4. The validating organization may utilize the competence, 
experience, and capability of its employees to demonstrate this 
competence, experience and capability.

               B. Independence of Validation Organization

    1. The validation organization shall demonstrate that:
    a. It is financially capable to conduct the work;
    b. It is free of direct influence or control by manufacturers, 
suppliers, vendors, representatives of employers and employees, and 
employer or employee organizations; and
    c. Its employees are secure from discharge resulting from pressures 
from manufacturers, suppliers, vendors, employers or employee 
representatives.
    2. A validation organization may be considered independent even if 
it has ties with manufacturers, employers or employee representatives if 
these ties are with at least two of these three groups; it has a board 
of directors (or equivalent leadership responsible for the 
certification/validation activities) which includes representatives of 
the three groups; and it has a binding commitment of funding for a 
period of three years or more.

                        C. Validating Laboratory

    The validation organization's laboratory (which organizationally may 
be a part of the third-party validation organization):
    1. Shall have legal authority to perform the validation of 
certification;
    2. Shall be free of operational control and influence of 
manufacturers, suppliers, vendors, employers, or employee 
representatives that would impair its integrity of performance; and
    3. Shall not engage in the design, manufacture, sale, promotion, or 
use of the certified equipment.

                       D. Facilities and Equipment

    The validation organization's validating laboratory shall have 
available all testing facilities and necessary test and inspection 
equipment relevant to the validation of the certification of PSDI safety 
systems, installations and operations.

                              E. Personnel

    The validation organization and the validating laboratory shall be 
adequately staffed by personnel who are qualified by technical training 
and/or experience to conduct the validation of the certification of PSDI 
safety systems.
    1. The validation organization shall assign overall responsibility 
for the validation of PSDI certification to an Administrative Director. 
Minimum requirements for this position are a Bachelor's degree and five 
years professional experience, at least one of which

[[Page 641]]

shall have been in responsible charge of a function in the areas of 
power press design or manufacture or a broad range of power press use, 
or in the areas of testing, quality control, or certification/validation 
of equipment comparable to power presses or their associated control 
systems.
    2. The validating laboratory, if a separate organization from the 
validation organization, shall assign technical responsibility for the 
validation of PSDI certification to a Technical Director. Minimum 
requirements for this position are a Bachelor's degree in a technical 
field and five years of professional experience, at least one of which 
shall have been in responsible charge of a function in the area of 
testing, quality control or certification/validation of equipment 
comparable to power presses or their associated control systems.
    3. If the validation organization and the validating laboratory are 
the same organization, the administrative and technical responsibilities 
may be combined in a single position, with minimum requirements as 
described in E.1. and 2. for the combined position.
    4. The validation organization and validating laboratory shall have 
adequate administrative and technical staffs to conduct the validation 
of the certification of PSDI safety systems.

                F. Certification/Validation Mark or Logo

    1. The validation organization or the validating laboratory shall 
own a registered certification/validation mark or logo.
    2. The mark or logo shall be suitable for incorporation into the 
label required by paragraph (h)(11)(iii) of this section.

                        III. Program Requirements

             A. Test and Certification/Validation Procedures

    1. The validation organization and/or validating laboratory shall 
have established written procedures for test and certification/
validation of PSDI safety systems. The procedures shall be based on 
pertinent OSHA standards and test methods, or other publicly available 
standards and test methods generally recognized as appropriate in the 
field, such as national consensus standards or published standards of 
professional societies or trade associations.
    2. The written procedures for test and certification/validation of 
PSDI systems, and the standards and test methods on which they are 
based, shall be reproducible and be available to OSHA and to the public 
upon request.

                             B. Test Reports

    1. A test report shall be prepared for each PSDI safety system that 
is tested. The test report shall be signed by a technical staff 
representative and the Technical Director.
    2. The test report shall include the following:
    a. Name of manufacturer and catalog or model number of each 
subsystem or major component.
    b. Identification and description of test methods or procedures 
used. (This may be through reference to published sources which describe 
the test methods or procedures used.)
    c. Results of all tests performed.
    d. All safety distance calculations.
    3. A copy of the test report shall be maintained on file at the 
validation organization and/or validating laboratory, and shall be 
available to OSHA upon request.

                   C. Certification/Validation Reports

    1. A certification/validation report shall be prepared for each PSDI 
safety system for which the certification is validated. The 
certification/validation report shall be signed by the Administrative 
Director and the Technical Director.
    2. The certification/validation report shall include the following:
    a. Name of manufacturer and catalog or model number of each 
subsystem or major component.
    b. Results of all tests which serve as the basis for the 
certification.
    c. All safety distance calculations.
    d. Statement that the safety system conforms with all requirements 
of the PSDI standard and appendix A.
    3. A copy of the certification/validation report shall be maintained 
on file at the validation organization and/or validating laboratory, and 
shall be available to the public upon request.
    4. A copy of the certification/validation report shall be submitted 
to OSHA within 30 days of its completion.

                         D. Publications System

    The validation organization shall make available upon request a list 
of PSDI safety systems which have been certified/validated by the 
program.

                         E. Follow-up Activities

    1. The validation organization or validating laboratory shall have a 
follow-up system for inspecting or testing manufacturer's production of 
design certified/validated PSDI safety system components and 
subassemblies where deemed appropriate by the validation organization.
    2. The validation organization shall notify the appropriate product 
manufacturer(s) of any reports from employers of point of operation 
injuries which occur while a press is operated in a PSDI mode.

[[Page 642]]

                               F. Records

    The validation organization or validating laboratory shall maintain 
a record of each certification/validation of a PSDI safety system, 
including manufacturer and/or employer certification documentation, test 
and working data, test report, certification/validation report, any 
follow-up inspections or testing, and reports of equipment failures, any 
reports of accidents involving the equipment, and any other pertinent 
information. These records shall be available for inspection by OSHA and 
OSHA State Plan offices.

                    G. Dispute Resolution Procedures

    1. The validation organization shall have a reasonable written 
procedure for acknowledging and processing appeals or complaints from 
program participants (manufacturers, producers, suppliers, vendors and 
employers) as well as other interested parties (employees or their 
representatives, safety personnel, government agencies, etc.), 
concerning certification or validation.
    2. The validation organization may charge any complainant the 
reasonable charge for repeating tests needed for the resolution of 
disputes.

   Appendix D to Sec. 1910.217--Nonmandatory Supplementary Information

    This appendix provides nonmandatory supplementary information and 
guidelines to assist in the understanding and use of 29 CFR 1910.217(h) 
to allow presence sensing device initiation (PSDI) of mechanical power 
presses. Although this appendix as such is not mandatory, it references 
sections and requirements which are made mandatory by other parts of the 
PSDI standard and appendices.

                               1. General

    OSHA intends that PSDI continue to be prohibited where present 
state-of-the-art technology will not allow it to be done safely. Only 
part revolution type mechanical power presses are approved for PSDI. 
Similarly, only presses with a configuration such that a person's body 
cannot completely enter the bed area are approved for PSDI.

                           2. Brake and Clutch

    Flexible steel band brakes do not possess a long-term reliability 
against structural failure as compared to other types of brakes, and 
therefore are not acceptable on presses used in the PSDI mode of 
operation.
    Fast and consistent stopping times are important to safety for the 
PSDI mode of operation. Consistency of braking action is enhanced by 
high brake torque. The requirement in paragraph (h)(2)(ii) defines a 
high torque capability which should ensure fast and consistent stopping 
times.
    Brake design parameters important to PSDI are high torque, low 
moment of inertia, low air volume (if pneumatic) mechanisms, non-
interleaving engagement springs, and structural integrity which is 
enhanced by over-design. The requirement in paragrpah (h)(2)(iii) 
reduces the possibility of significantly increased stopping time if a 
spring breaks.
    As an added precaution to the requirements in paragraph (h)(2)(iii), 
brake adjustment locking means should be secured. Where brake springs 
are externally accessible, lock nuts or other means may be provided to 
reduce the possibility of backing off of the compression nut which holds 
the springs in place.

                          3. Pneumatic Systems

    Elevated clutch/brake air pressure results in longer stopping time. 
The requirement in paragraph (h)(3)(i)(C) is intended to prevent 
degradation in stoping speed from higher air pressure. Higher pressures 
may be permitted, however, to increase clutch torque to free ``jammed'' 
dies, provided positive measures are provided to prevent the higher 
pressure at other times.

                        4. Flywheels and Bearings

    Lubrication of bearings is considered the single greatest deterrent 
to their failure. The manufacturer's recommended procedures for 
maintenance and inspection should be closely followed.

                           5. Brake Monitoring

    The approval of brake monitor adjustments, as required in paragraph 
(h)(5)(ii), is not considered a recertification, and does not 
necessarily involve an on-site inspection by a representative of the 
validation organization. It is expected that the brake monitor 
adjustment normally could be evaluated on the basis of the effect on the 
safety system certification/validation documentation retained by the 
validation organization.
    Use of a brake monitor does not eliminate the need for periodic 
brake inspection and maintenance to reduce the possibility of 
catastrophic failures.

                  6. Cycle Control and Control Systems

    The PSDI set-up/reset means required by paragraph (h)(6)(iv) may be 
initiated by the actuation of a special momentary pushbutton or by the 
actuation of a special momentary pushbutton and the initiation of a 
first stroke with two hand controls.
    It would normally be preferable to limit the adjustment of the time 
required in paragraph (h)(6)(vi) to a maximum of 15 seconds. However, 
where an operator must do many

[[Page 643]]

operations outside the press, such as lubricating, trimming, deburring, 
etc., a longer interval up to 30 seconds is permitted.
    When a press is equipped for PSDI operation, it is recommended that 
the presence sensing device be active as a guarding device in other 
production modes. This should enhance the reliability of the device and 
ensure that it remains operable.
    An acceptable method for interlocking supplemental guards as 
required by paragraph (h)(6)(xiii) would be to incorporate the 
supplemental guard and the PSDI presence sensing device into a hinged 
arrangement in which the alignment of the presence sensing device 
serves, in effect, as the interlock. If the supplemental guards are 
moved, the presence sensing device would become misaligned and the press 
control would be deactivated. No extra microswitches or interlocking 
sensors would be required.
    Paragraph (h)(6)(xv) of the standard requires that the control 
system have provisions for an ``inch'' operating means; that die-setting 
not be done in the PSDI mode; and that production not be done in the 
``inch'' mode. It should be noted that the sensing device would be by-
passed in the ``inch'' mode. For that reason, the prohibitions against 
die-setting in the PSDI mode, and against production in the ``inch'' 
mode are cited to emphasize that ``inch'' operation is of reduced safety 
and is not compatible with PSDI or other production modes.

                      7. Environmental Requirements

    It is the intent of paragraph (h)(7) that control components be 
provided with inherent design protection against operating stresses and 
environmental factors affecting safety and reliability.

                            8. Safety system

    The safety system provision continues the concept of paragraph 
(b)(13) that the probability of two independent failures in the length 
of time required to make one press cycle is so remote as to be a 
negligible risk factor in the total array of equipment and human 
factors. The emphasis is on an integrated total system including all 
elements affecting point of operation safety.
    It should be noted that this does not require redundancy for press 
components such as structural elements, clutch/brake mechanisms, plates, 
etc., for which adequate reliability may be achieved by proper design, 
maintenance, and inspection.

                 9. Safeguarding the Point of Operation

    The intent of paragraph (h)(9)(iii) is to prohibit use of mirrors to 
``bend'' a single light curtain sensing field around corners to cover 
more than one side of a press. This prohibition is needed to increase 
the reliability of the presence sensing device in initiating a stroke 
only when the desired work motion has been completed.
    Object sensitivity describes the capability of a presence sensing 
device to detect an object in the sensing field, expressed as the linear 
measurement of the smallest interruption which can be detected at any 
point in the field. Minimum object sensitivity describes the largest 
acceptable size of the interruption in the sensing field. A minimum 
object sensitivity of one and one-fourth inches (31.75 mm) means that a 
one and one-fourth inch (31.75 mm) diameter object will be continuously 
detected at all locations in the sensing field.
    In deriving the safety distance required in paragraph (h)(9)(v), all 
stopping time measurements should be made with clutch/brake air pressure 
regulated to the press manufacturer's recommended value for full clutch 
torque capability. The stopping time measurements should be made with 
the heaviest upper die that is planned for use in the press. If the 
press has a slide counterbalance system, it is important that the 
counterbalance be adjusted correctly for upper die weight according to 
the manufacturer's instructions. While the brake monitor setting is 
based on the stopping time it actually measures, i.e., the normal 
stopping time at the top of the stroke, it is important that the safety 
distance be computed from the longest stopping time measured at any of 
the indicated three downstroke stopping positions listed in the 
explanation of Ts. The use in the formula of twice the stopping time 
increase, Tm, allowed by the brake monitor for brake wear allows for 
greater increases in the downstroke stopping time than occur in normal 
stopping time at the top of the stroke.

               10. Inspection and Maintenance. [Reserved]

               11. Safety System Certification/Validation

    Mandatory requirements for certification/validation of the PSDI 
safety system are provided in appendix A and appendix C to this 
standard. Nonmandatory supplementary information and guidelines relating 
to certification/validation of the PSDI safety system are provided to 
appendix B to this standard.
[39 FR 32502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 39 FR 41846, Dec. 23, 1974; 
40 FR 3982, Jan. 27, 1975; 43 FR 49750, Oct. 24, 1978; 45 FR 8594, Feb. 
8, 1980; 49 FR 18295, Apr. 30, 1984; 51 FR 34561, Sept. 29, 1986; 53 FR 
8353, 8358 Mar. 14, 1988; 54 FR 24333, June 7, 1989; 61 FR 9240, Mar. 7, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.218  Forging machines.

    (a) General requirements--(1) Use of lead. The safety requirements 
of this subparagraph apply to lead casts or

[[Page 644]]

other use of lead in the forge shop or die shop.
    (i) Thermostatic control of heating elements shall be provided to 
maintain proper melting temperature and prevent overheating.
    (ii) Fixed or permanent lead pot installations shall be exhausted.
    (iii) Portable units shall be used only in areas where good, general 
room ventilation is provided.
    (iv) Personal protective equipment (gloves, goggles, aprons, and 
other items) shall be worn.
    (v) A covered container shall be provided to store dross skimmings.
    (vi) Equipment shall be kept clean, particularly from accumulations 
of yellow lead oxide.
    (2) Inspection and maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of 
the employer to maintain all forge shop equipment in a condition which 
will insure continued safe operation. This responsibility includes:
    (i) Establishing periodic and regular maintenance safety checks and 
keeping certification records of these inspections which include the 
date of inspection, the signature of the person who performed the 
inspection and the serial number, or other identifier, for the forging 
machine which was inspected.
    (ii) Scheduling and recording the inspection of guards and point of 
operation protection devices at frequent and regular intervals. 
Recording of inspections shall be in the form of a certification record 
which includes the date the inspection was performed, the signature of 
the person who performed the inspection and the serial number, or other 
identifier, of the equipment inspected.
    (iii) Training personnel for the proper inspection and maintenance 
of forging machinery and equipment.
    (iv) All overhead parts shall be fastened or protected in such a 
manner that they will not fly off or fall in event of failure.
    (3) Hammers and presses. (i) All hammers shall be positioned or 
installed in such a manner that they remain on or are anchored to 
foundations sufficient to support them according to applicable 
engineering standards.
    (ii) All presses shall be installed in such a manner that they 
remain where they are positioned or they are anchored to foundations 
sufficient to support them according to applicable engineering 
standards.

                             Table O-11--Strength and Dimensions for Wood Ram Props
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Minimum
                                    allowable      Maximum static                     Maximum         Maximum
Size of timber,  Square inches      crushing         load within       Safety       recommended      allowable
   inches \1\       in cross        strength        short column       factor        weight of       length of
                    section        parallel to        range \3\                    forging hammer     timber,
                                grain, p.s.i.\2\                                  for timber used      inches
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4 x 4..........           16             5,000            80,000            10            8,000             44
6 x 6..........           36             5,000           180,000            10           18,000             66
8 x 8..........           64             5,000           320,000            10           32,000             88
10 x 10........          100             5,000           500,000            10           50,000            100
12 x 12........          144             5,000           720,000            10           72,000            132
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Actual dimension.
\2\ Adapted from U.S. Department of Agriculture Technical Bulletin 479. Hardwoods recommended are those whose
  ultimate crushing strengths in compression parallel to grain are 5,000 p.s.i. (pounds per square inch) or
  greater.
\3\ Slenderness ratio formula for short columns is L/d=11, where L=length of timber in inches and d=least
  dimension in inches; this ratio should not exceed 11.

    (iii) Means shall be provided for disconnecting the power to the 
machine and for locking out or rendering cycling controls inoperable.
    (iv) The ram shall be blocked when dies are being changed or other 
work is being done on the hammer. Blocks or wedges shall be made of 
material the strength and construction of which should meet or exceed 
the specifications and dimensions shown in Table O-11.
    (v) Tongs shall be of sufficient length to clear the body of the 
worker in case of kickback, and shall not have sharp handle ends.
    (vi) Oil swabs, or scale removers, or other devices to remove scale 
shall be provided. These devices shall be long enough to enable a man to 
reach the

[[Page 645]]

full length of the die without placing his hand or arm between the dies.
    (vii) Material handling equipment shall be of adequate strength, 
size, and dimension to handle diesetting operations safely.
    (viii) A scale guard of substantial construction shall be provided 
at the back of every hammer, so arranged as to stop flying scale.
    (ix) A scale guard of substantial construction shall be provided at 
the back of every press, so arranged as to stop flying scale.
    (b) Hammers, general--(1) Keys. Die keys and shims shall be made 
from a grade of material that will not unduly crack or splinter.
    (2) Foot operated devices. All foot operated devices (i.e., 
treadles, pedals, bars, valves, and switches) shall be substantially and 
effectively protected from unintended operation.
    (c) Presses. All manually operated valves and switches shall be 
clearly identified and readily accessible.
    (d) Power-driven hammers--(1) Safety cylinder head. Every steam or 
airhammer shall have a safety cylinder head to act as a cushion if the 
rod should break or pullout of the ram.
    (2) Shutoff valve. Steam hammers shall be provided with a quick 
closing emergency valve in the admission pipeline at a convenient 
location. This valve shall be closed and locked in the off position 
while the hammer is being adjusted, repaired, or serviced, or when the 
dies are being changed.
    (3) Cylinder draining. Steam hammers shall be provided with a means 
of cylinder draining, such as a self-draining arrangement or a quick-
acting drain cock.
    (4) Pressure pipes. Steam or air piping shall conform to the 
specifications of American National Standard ANSI B31.1.0-1967, Power 
Piping with Addenda issued before April 28, 1971, which is incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (e) Gravity hammers--(1) Air-lift hammers. (i) Air-lift hammers 
shall have a safety cylinder head as required in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section.
    (ii) Air-lift hammers shall have an air shutoff valve as required in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (iii) Air-lift hammers shall be provided with two drain cocks: one 
on main head cylinder, and one on clamp cylinder.
    (iv) Air piping shall conform to the specifications of the ANSI 
B31.1.0-1967, Power Piping with Addenda issued before April 28, 1971, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Board drophammers. (i) A suitable enclosure shall be provided to 
prevent damaged or detached boards from falling. The board enclosure 
shall be securely fastened to the hammer.
    (ii) All major assemblies and fittings which can loosen and fall 
shall be properly secured in place.
    (f) Forging presses--(1) Mechanical forging presses. When dies are 
being changed or maintenance is being performed on the press, the 
following shall be accomplished:
    (i) The power to the press shall be locked out.
    (ii) The flywheel shall be at rest.
    (iii) The ram shall be blocked with a material the strength of which 
shall meet or exceed the specifications or dimensions shown in Table O-
11.
    (2) Hydraulic forging presses. When dies are being changed or 
maintenance is being performed on the press, the following shall be 
accomplished:
    (i) The hydraulic pumps and power apparatus shall be locked out.
    (ii) The ram shall be blocked with a material the strength of which 
shall meet or exceed the specifications or dimensions shown in Table O-
11.
    (g) Trimming presses--(1) Hot trimming presses. The requirements of 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section shall also apply to hot trimming 
presses.
    (2) Cold trimming presses. Cold trimming presses shall be 
safeguarded in accordance with Sec. 1910.217(c).
    (h) Upsetters--(1) General requirements. All upsetters shall be 
installed so that they remain on their supporting foundations.
    (2) Lockouts. Upsetters shall be provided with a means for locking 
out the power at its entry point to the machine and rendering its 
cycling controls inoperable.
    (3) Manually operated controls. All manually operated valves and 
switches

[[Page 646]]

shall be clearly identified and readily accessible.
    (4) Tongs. Tongs shall be of sufficient length to clear the body of 
the worker in case of kickback, and shall not have sharp handle ends.
    (5) Changing dies. When dies are being changed, maintenance 
performed, or any work done on the machine, the power to the upsetter 
shall be locked out, and the flywheel shall be at rest.
    (i) Other forging equipment--(1) Boltheading. The provisions of 
paragraph (h) of this section shall apply to boltheading.
    (2) Rivet making. The provisions of paragraph (h) of this section 
shall apply to rivet making.
    (j) Other forge facility equipment--(1) Billet shears. A positive-
type lockout device for disconnecting the power to the shear shall be 
provided.
    (2) Saws. Every saw shall be provided with a guard of not less than 
one-eighth inch sheet metal positioned to stop flying sparks.
    (3) Conveyors. Conveyor power transmission equipment shall be 
guarded in accordance with ANSI B20.1-1957, Safety Code for Conveyors, 
Cableways, and Related Equipment, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (4) Shot blast. The cleaning chamber shall have doors or guards to 
protect operators.
    (5) Grinding. Personal protective equipment shall be used in 
grinding operations, and equipment shall be used and maintained in 
accordance with ANSI B7.1-1970, Safety Code for the Use, Care, and 
Protection of Abrasive Wheels, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6, and with Sec. 1910.215.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 51 
FR 34561, Sept. 29, 1986; 61 FR 9240, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.219  Mechanical power-transmission apparatus.

    (a) General requirements. (1) This section covers all types and 
shapes of power-transmission belts, except the following when operating 
at two hundred and fifty (250) feet per minute or less: (i) Flat belts 
one (1) inch or less in width, (ii) flat belts two (2) inches or less in 
width which are free from metal lacings or fasteners, (iii) round belts 
one-half (\1/2\) inch or less in diameter; and (iv) single strand V-
belts, the width of which is thirteen thirty-seconds (\13/32\) inch or 
less.
    (2) Vertical and inclined belts (paragraphs (e) (3) and (4) of this 
section) if not more than two and one-half (2\1/2\) inches wide and 
running at a speed of less than one thousand (1,000) feet per minute, 
and if free from metal lacings or fastenings may be guarded with a nip-
point belt and pulley guard.
    (3) For the Textile Industry, because of the presence of excessive 
deposits of lint, which constitute a serious fire hazard, the sides and 
face sections only of nip-point belt and pulley guards are required, 
provided the guard shall extend at least six (6) inches beyond the rim 
of the pulley on the in-running and off-running sides of the belt and at 
least two (2) inches away from the rim and face of the pulley in all 
other directions.
    (4) This section covers the principal features with which power 
transmission safeguards shall comply.
    (b) Prime-mover guards--(1) Flywheels. Flywheels located so that any 
part is seven (7) feet or less above floor or platform shall be guarded 
in accordance with the requirements of this subparagraph:
    (i) With an enclosure of sheet, perforated, or expanded metal, or 
woven wire;
    (ii) With guard rails placed not less than fifteen (15) inches nor 
more than twenty (20) inches from rim. When flywheel extends into pit or 
is within 12 inches of floor, a standard toeboard shall also be 
provided;
    (iii) When the upper rim of flywheel protrudes through a working 
floor, it shall be entirely enclosed or surrounded by a guardrail and 
toeboard.
    (iv) For flywheels with smooth rims five (5) feet or less in 
diameter, where the preceding methods cannot be applied, the following 
may be used: A disk attached to the flywheel in such manner as to cover 
the spokes of the wheel on the exposed side and present a smooth surface 
and edge, at the same time providing means for periodic inspection. An 
open space, not exceeding four (4) inches in width, may be left between 
the outside edge of the disk and

[[Page 647]]

the rim of the wheel if desired, to facilitate turning the wheel over. 
Where a disk is used, the keys or other dangerous projections not 
covered by disk shall be cut off or covered. This subdivision does not 
apply to flywheels with solid web centers.
    (v) Adjustable guard to be used for starting engine or for running 
adjustment may be provided at the flywheel of gas or oil engines. A slot 
opening for jack bar will be permitted.
    (vi) Wherever flywheels are above working areas, guards shall be 
installed having sufficient strength to hold the weight of the flywheel 
in the event of a shaft or wheel mounting failure.
    (2) Cranks and connecting rods. Cranks and connecting rods, when 
exposed to contact, shall be guarded in accordance with paragraphs (m) 
and (n) of this section, or by a guardrail as described in paragraph 
(o)(5) of this section.
    (3) Tail rods or extension piston rods. Tail rods or extension 
piston rods shall be guarded in accordance with paragraphs (m) and (o) 
of this section, or by a guardrail on sides and end, with a clearance of 
not less than fifteen (15) nor more than twenty (20) inches when rod is 
fully extended.
    (c) Shafting--(1) Installation. (i) Each continuous line of shafting 
shall be secured in position against excessive endwise movement.
    (ii) Inclined and vertical shafts, particularly inclined idler 
shafts, shall be securely held in position against endwise thrust.
    (2) Guarding horizontal shafting. (i) All exposed parts of 
horizontal shafting seven (7) feet or less from floor or working 
platform, excepting runways used exclusively for oiling, or running 
adjustments, shall be protected by a stationary casing enclosing 
shafting completely or by a trough enclosing sides and top or sides and 
bottom of shafting as location requires.
    (ii) Shafting under bench machines shall be enclosed by a stationary 
casing, or by a trough at sides and top or sides and bottom, as location 
requires. The sides of the trough shall come within at least six (6) 
inches of the underside of table, or if shafting is located near floor 
within six (6) inches of floor. In every case the sides of trough shall 
extend at least two (2) inches beyond the shafting or protuberance.
    (3) Guarding vertical and inclined shafting. Vertical and inclined 
shafting seven (7) feet or less from floor or working platform, 
excepting maintenance runways, shall be enclosed with a stationary 
casing in accordance with requirements of paragraphs (m) and (o) of this 
section.
    (4) Projecting shaft ends. (i) Projecting shaft ends shall present a 
smooth edge and end and shall not project more than one-half the 
diameter of the shaft unless guarded by nonrotating caps or safety 
sleeves.
    (ii) Unused keyways shall be filled up or covered.
    (5) Power-transmission apparatus located in basements. All 
mechanical power transmission apparatus located in basements, towers, 
and rooms used exclusively for power transmission equipment shall be 
guarded in accordance with this section, except that the requirements 
for safeguarding belts, pulleys, and shafting need not be complied with 
when the following requirements are met:
    (i) The basement, tower, or room occupied by transmission equipment 
is locked against unauthorized entrance.
    (ii) The vertical clearance in passageways between the floor and 
power transmission beams, ceiling, or any other objects, is not less 
than five feet six inches (5 ft. 6 in.).
    (iii) The intensity of illumination conforms to the requirements of 
ANSI A11.1-1965 (R-1970), which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) The route followed by the oiler is protected in such manner as 
to prevent accident.
    (d) Pulleys--(1) Guarding. Pulleys, any parts of which are seven (7) 
feet or less from the floor or working platform, shall be guarded in 
accordance with the standards specified in paragraphs (m) and (o) of 
this section. Pulleys serving as balance wheels (e.g., punch presses) on 
which the point of contact between belt and pulley is more than six feet 
six inches (6 ft. 6 in.) from the floor or platform may be guarded with 
a disk covering the spokes.

[[Page 648]]

    (2) Location of pulleys. (i) Unless the distance to the nearest 
fixed pulley, clutch, or hanger exceeds the width of the belt used, a 
guide shall be provided to prevent the belt from leaving the pulley on 
the side where insufficient clearance exists.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (3) Broken pulleys. Pulleys with cracks, or pieces broken out of 
rims, shall not be used.
    (4) Pulley speeds. Pulleys intended to operate at rim speed in 
excess of manufacturers normal recommendations shall be specially 
designed and carefully balanced for the speed at which they are to 
operate.
    (e) Belt, rope, and chain drives--(1) Horizontal belts and ropes. 
(i) Where both runs of horizontal belts are seven (7) feet or less from 
the floor level, the guard shall extend to at least fifteen (15) inches 
above the belt or to a standard height (see Table O-12), except that 
where both runs of a horizontal belt are 42 inches or less from the 
floor, the belt shall be fully enclosed in accordance with paragraphs 
(m) and (o) of this section.
    (ii) In powerplants or power-development rooms, a guardrail may be 
used in lieu of the guard required by subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph.
    (2) Overhead horizontal belts. (i) Overhead horizontal belts, with 
lower parts seven (7) feet or less from the floor or platform, shall be 
guarded on sides and bottom in accordance with paragraph (o)(3) of this 
section.
    (ii) Horizontal overhead belts more than seven (7) feet above floor 
or platform shall be guarded for their entire length under the following 
conditions:
    (a) If located over passageways or work places and traveling 1,800 
feet or more per minute.
    (b) If center to center distance between pulleys is ten (10) feet or 
more.
    (c) If belt is eight (8) inches or more in width.
    (iii) Where the upper and lower runs of horizontal belts are so 
located that passage of persons between them would be possible, the 
passage shall be either:
    (a) Completely barred by a guardrail or other barrier in accordance 
with paragraphs (m) and (o) of this section; or
    (b) Where passage is regarded as necessary, there shall be a 
platform over the lower run guarded on either side by a railing 
completely filled in with wire mesh or other filler, or by a solid 
barrier. The upper run shall be so guarded as to prevent contact 
therewith either by the worker or by objects carried by him. In 
powerplants only the lower run of the belt need be guarded.
    (iv) Overhead chain and link belt drives are governed by the same 
rules as overhead horizontal belts and shall be guarded in the same 
manner as belts.
    (3) Vertical and inclined belts. (i) Vertical and inclined belts 
shall be enclosed by a guard conforming to standards in paragraphs (m) 
and (o) of this section.
    (ii) All guards for inclined belts shall be arranged in such a 
manner that a minimum clearance of seven (7) feet is maintained between 
belt and floor at any point outside of guard.
    (4) Vertical belts. Vertical belts running over a lower pulley more 
than seven (7) feet above floor or platform shall be guarded at the 
bottom in the same manner as horizontal overhead belts, if conditions 
are as stated in paragraphs (e)(2)(ii) (a) and (c) of this section.
    (5) Cone-pulley belts. (i) The cone belt and pulley shall be 
equipped with a belt shifter so constructed as to adequately guard the 
nip point of the belt and pulley. If the frame of the belt shifter does 
not adequately guard the nip point of the belt and pulley, the nip point 
shall be further protected by means of a vertical guard placed in front 
of the pulley and extending at least to the top of the largest step of 
the cone.
    (ii) If the belt is of the endless type or laced with rawhide laces, 
and a belt shifter is not desired, the belt will be considered guarded 
if the nip point of the belt and pulley is protected by a nip point 
guard located in front of the cone extending at least to the top of the 
largest step of the cone, and formed to show the contour of the cone in 
order to give the nip point of the belt and pulley the maximum 
protection.
    (iii) If the cone is located less than 3 feet from the floor or 
working platform, the cone pulley and belt shall be guarded to a height 
of 3 feet regardless

[[Page 649]]

of whether the belt is endless or laced with rawhide.
    (6) Belt tighteners. (i) Suspended counterbalanced tighteners and 
all parts thereof shall be of substantial construction and securely 
fastened; the bearings shall be securely capped. Means must be provided 
to prevent tightener from falling, in case the belt breaks.
    (ii) Where suspended counterweights are used and not guarded by 
location, they shall be so encased as to prevent accident.
    (f) Gears, sprockets, and chains--(1) Gears. Gears shall be guarded 
in accordance with one of the following methods:
    (i) By a complete enclosure; or
    (ii) By a standard guard as described in paragraph (o) of this 
section, at least seven (7) feet high extending six (6) inches above the 
mesh point of the gears; or
    (iii) By a band guard covering the face of gear and having flanges 
extended inward beyond the root of the teeth on the exposed side or 
sides. Where any portion of the train of gears guarded by a band guard 
is less than six (6) feet from the floor a disk guard or a complete 
enclosure to the height of six (6) feet shall be required.
    (2) Hand-operated gears. Paragraph (f)(1) of this section does not 
apply to hand-operated gears used only to adjust machine parts and which 
do not continue to move after hand power is removed. However, the 
guarding of these gears is highly recommended.
    (3) Sprockets and chains. All sprocket wheels and chains shall be 
enclosed unless they are more than seven (7) feet above the floor or 
platform. Where the drive extends over other machine or working areas, 
protection against falling shall be provided. This subparagraph does not 
apply to manually operated sprockets.
    (4) Openings for oiling. When frequent oiling must be done, openings 
with hinged or sliding self-closing covers shall be provided. All points 
not readily accessible shall have oil feed tubes if lubricant is to be 
added while machinery is in motion.
    (g) Guarding friction drives. The driving point of all friction 
drives when exposed to contact shall be guarded, all arm or spoke 
friction drives and all web friction drives with holes in the web shall 
be entirely enclosed, and all projecting belts on friction drives where 
exposed to contact shall be guarded.
    (h) Keys, setscrews, and other projections. (1) All projecting keys, 
setscrews, and other projections in revolving parts shall be removed or 
made flush or guarded by metal cover. This subparagraph does not apply 
to keys or setscrews within gear or sprocket casings or other 
enclosures, nor to keys, setscrews, or oilcups in hubs of pulleys less 
than twenty (20) inches in diameter where they are within the plane of 
the rim of the pulley.
    (2) It is recommended, however, that no projecting setscrews or 
oilcups be used in any revolving pulley or part of machinery.
    (i) Collars and couplings--(1) Collars. All revolving collars, 
including split collars, shall be cylindrical, and screws or bolts used 
in collars shall not project beyond the largest periphery of the collar.
    (2) Couplings. Shaft couplings shall be so constructed as to present 
no hazard from bolts, nuts, setscrews, or revolving surfaces. Bolts, 
nuts, and setscrews will, however, be permitted where they are covered 
with safety sleeves or where they are used parallel with the shafting 
and are countersunk or else do not extend beyond the flange of the 
coupling.
    (j) Bearings and facilities for oiling. All drip cups and pans shall 
be securely fastened.
    (k) Guarding of clutches, cutoff couplings, and clutch pulleys--(1) 
Guards. Clutches, cutoff couplings, or clutch pulleys having projecting 
parts, where such clutches are located seven (7) feet or less above the 
floor or working platform, shall be enclosed by a stationary guard 
constructed in accordance with this section. A ``U'' type guard is 
permissible.
    (2) Engine rooms. In engine rooms a guardrail, preferably with 
toeboard, may be used instead of the guard required by paragraph (k)(1) 
of this section, provided such a room is occupied only by engine room 
attendants.
    (l) Belt shifters, clutches, shippers, poles, perches, and 
fasteners--(1) Belt

[[Page 650]]

shifters. (i) Tight and loose pulleys on all new installations made on 
or after August 31, 1971, shall be equipped with a permanent belt 
shifter provided with mechanical means to prevent belt from creeping 
from loose to tight pulley. It is recommended that old installations be 
changed to conform to this rule.
    (ii) Belt shifter and clutch handles shall be rounded and be located 
as far as possible from danger of accidental contact, but within easy 
reach of the operator. Where belt shifters are not directly located over 
a machine or bench, the handles shall be cut off six feet six inches (6 
ft. 6 in.) above floor level.
    (2) Belt shippers and shipper poles. The use of belt poles as 
substitutes for mechanical shifters is not recommended.
    (3) Belt perches. Where loose pulleys or idlers are not practicable, 
belt perches in form of brackets, rollers, etc., shall be used to keep 
idle belts away from the shafts.
    (4) Belt fasteners. Belts which of necessity must be shifted by hand 
and belts within seven (7) feet of the floor or working platform which 
are not guarded in accordance with this section shall not be fastened 
with metal in any case, nor with any other fastening which by 
construction or wear will constitute an accident hazard.
    (m) Standard guards--general requirements--(1) Materials. (i) 
Standard conditions shall be secured by the use of the following 
materials. Expanded metal, perforated or solid sheet metal, wire mesh on 
a frame of angle iron, or iron pipe securely fastened to floor or to 
frame of machine.
    (ii) All metal should be free from burrs and sharp edges.
    (2) Methods of manufacture. (i) Expanded metal, sheet or perforated 
metal, and wire mesh shall be securely fastened to frame.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (n) [Reserved]
    (o) Approved materials--(1) Minimum requirements. The materials and 
dimensions specified in this paragraph shall apply to all guards, except 
horizontal overhead belts, rope, cable, or chain guards more than seven 
(7) feet above floor, or platform.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (a) All guards shall be rigidly braced every three (3) feet or 
fractional part of their height to some fixed part of machinery or 
building structure. Where guard is exposed to contact with moving 
equipment additional strength may be necessary.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (2) Wood guards. (i) Wood guards may be used in the woodworking and 
chemical industries, in industries where the presence of fumes or where 
manufacturing conditions would cause the rapid deterioration of metal 
guards; also in construction work and in locations outdoors where 
extreme cold or extreme heat make metal guards and railings undesirable. 
In all other industries, wood guards shall not be used.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (3) Guards for horizontal overhead belts. (i) Guards for horizontal 
overhead belts shall run the entire length of the belt and follow the 
line of the pulley to the ceiling or be carried to the nearest wall, 
thus enclosing the belt effectively. Where belts are so located as to 
make it impracticable to carry the guard to wall or ceiling, 
construction of guard shall be such as to enclose completely the top and 
bottom runs of belt and the face of pulleys.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Suitable reinforcement shall be provided for the ceiling 
rafters or overhead floor beams, where such is necessary, to sustain 
safely the weight and stress likely to be imposed by the guard. The 
interior surface of all guards, by which is meant the surface of the 
guard with which a belt will come in contact, shall be smooth and free 
from all projections of any character, except where construction demands 
it; protruding shallow roundhead rivets may be used. Overhead belt 
guards shall be at least one-quarter wider than belt which they protect, 
except that this clearance need not in any case exceed six (6) inches on 
each side. Overhead rope drive and block and roller-chain-drive guards 
shall be not less than six (6) inches wider than the drive on each side. 
In overhead silent chain-drive guards where the chain is held from 
lateral displacement on the sprockets, the side clearances required on 
drives of twenty (20) inch centers or

[[Page 651]]

under shall be not less than one-fourth inch from the nearest moving 
chain part, and on drives of over twenty (20) inch centers a minimum of 
one-half inch from the nearest moving chain part.
    (4) Guards for horizontal overhead rope and chain drives. Overhead-
rope and chain-drive guard construction shall conform to the rules for 
overhead-belt guard.
    (5) Guardrails and toeboards. (i) Guardrail shall be forty-two (42) 
inches in height, with midrail between top rail and floor.
    (ii) Posts shall be not more than eight (8) feet apart; they are to 
be permanent and substantial, smooth, and free from protruding nails, 
bolts, and splinters. If made of pipe, the post shall be one and one-
fourth (1\1/4\) inches inside diameter, or larger. If made of metal 
shapes or bars, their section shall be equal in strength to that of one 
and one-half (1\1/2\) by one and one-half (1\1/2\) by three-sixteenths 
(\3/16\) inch angle iron. If made of wood, the posts shall be two by 
four (2  x  4) inches or larger. The upper rail shall be two by four (2 
x  4) inches, or two one by four (1  x  4) strips, one at the top and 
one at the side of posts. The midrail may be one by four (1  x  4) 
inches or more. Where panels are fitted with expanded metal or wire mesh 
as noted in Table O-12 the middle rails may be omitted. Where guard is 
exposed to contact with moving equipment, additional strength may be 
necessary.
    (iii) Toeboards shall be four (4) inches or more in height, of wood, 
metal, or of metal grill not exceeding one (1) inch mesh.
    (p) Care of equipment--(1) General. All power-transmission equipment 
shall be inspected at intervals not exceeding 60 days and be kept in 
good working condition at all times.
    (2) Shafting. (i) Shafting shall be kept in alignment, free from 
rust and excess oil or grease.
    (ii) Where explosives, explosive dusts, flammable vapors or 
flammable liquids exist, the hazard of static sparks from shafting shall 
be carefully considered.
    (3) Bearings. Bearings shall be kept in alignment and properly 
adjusted.
    (4) Hangers. Hangers shall be inspected to make certain that all 
supporting bolts and screws are tight and that supports of hanger boxes 
are adjusted properly.
    (5) Pulleys. (i) Pulleys shall be kept in proper alignment to 
prevent belts from running off.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (6) Care of belts.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Inspection shall be made of belts, lacings, and fasteners and 
such equipment kept in good repair.
    (7) Lubrication. The regular oilers shall wear tight-fitting 
clothing. Machinery shall be oiled when not in motion, wherever 
possible.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49750, Oct. 24, 1978; 
43 FR 51760; Nov. 7, 1978; 49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 FR 9240, Mar. 
7, 1996]


<R04>
Subpart P--Hand and Portable Powered Tools and Other Hand-Held Equipment

    Authority: Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 1-90 
(55 FR 9033), as applicable; 29 CFR part 1911.

    Section 1910.243 also issued under 29 CFR part 1910.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.241  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    (a) Explosive-actuated fastening tool terms--(1) Hammer-operated 
piston tool--low-velocity type. A tool which, by means of a heavy mass 
hammer supplemented by a load, moves a piston designed to be captive to 
drive a stud, pin, or fastener into a work surface, always starting the 
fastener at rest and in contact with the work surface. It shall be so 
designed that when used with any load that accurately chambers in it and 
that is commercially available at the time the tool is submitted for 
approval, it will not cause such stud, pin, or fastener to have a mean 
velocity in excess of 300 feet per second when measured 6.5 feet from 
the muzzle end of the barrel.
    (2) High-velocity tool. A tool or machine which, when used with a 
load, propels or discharges a stud, pin, or fastener, at velocities in 
excess of 300

[[Page 652]]

feet per second when measured 6.5 feet from the muzzle end of the 
barrel, for the purpose of impinging it upon, affixing it to, or 
penetrating another object or material.
    (3) Low-velocity piston tool. A tool that utilizes a piston designed 
to be captive to drive a stud, pin, or fastener into a work surface. It 
shall be so designed that when used with any load that accurately 
chambers in it and that is commercially available at the time the tool 
is submitted for approval, it will not cause such stud, pin, or fastener 
to have a mean velocity in excess of 300 feet per second when measured 
6.5 feet from the muzzle end of the barrel.
    (4) Stud, pin, or fastener. A fastening device specifically designed 
and manufactured for use in explosive-actuated fastening tools.
    (5) To chamber. To fit properly without the use of excess force, the 
case being duly supported.
    (6) Explosive powerload, also known as load. Any substance in any 
form capable of producing a propellant force.
    (7) Tool. An explosive-actuated fastening tool, unless otherwise 
indicated, and all accessories pertaining thereto.
    (8) Protective shield or guard. A device or guard attached to the 
muzzle end of the tool, which is designed to confine flying particles.
    (b) Abrasive wheel terms--(1) Mounted wheels. Mounted wheels, 
usually 2-inch diameter or smaller, and of various shapes, may be either 
organic or inorganic bonded abrasive wheels. They are secured to plain 
or threaded steel mandrels.
    (2) Tuck pointing. Removal, by grinding, of cement, mortar, or other 
nonmetallic jointing material.
    (3) Tuck pointing wheels. Tuck pointing wheels, usually Type 1, 
reinforced organic bonded wheels have diameter, thickness and hole size 
dimension. They are subject to the same limitations of use and mounting 
as Type 1 wheels defined in subparagraph (10) of this paragraph.

    Limitation: Wheels used for tuck pointing should be reinforced, 
organic bonded. (See Sec. 1910.243(c)(1)(ii)(c.))

    (4) Portable grinding. A grinding operation where the grinding 
machine is designed to be hand held and may be easily moved from one 
location to another.
    (5) Organic bonded wheels. Organic wheels are wheels which are 
bonded by means of an organic material such as resin, rubber, shellac, 
or other similar bonding agent.
    (6) Safety guard. A safety guard is an enclosure designed to 
restrain the pieces of the grinding wheel and furnish all possible 
protection in the event that the wheel is broken in operation.
    (7) Reinforced wheels. The term reinforced as applied to grinding 
wheels shall define a class of organic wheels which contain 
strengthening fabric or filament. The term reinforced does not cover 
wheels using such mechanical additions as steel rings, steel cup backs 
or wire or tape winding.
    (8) Type 11 flaring cup wheels. Type 11 flaring cup wheels have 
double diameter dimensions D and J, and in addition have thickness, hole 
size, rim and back thickness dimensions. Grinding is always performed on 
rim face, W dimension. Type 11 wheels are subject to all limitations of 
use and mounting listed for Type 6 straight sided cup wheels definition 
in subparagraph (9) of this paragraph.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] THEELSKI92EC27OC91.078

                               Figure P-1

                       Type 11--Flaring-cup Wheel

Side grinding wheel having a wall flared or tapered outward from the 
back. Wall thickness at the back is normally greater than at the 
grinding face (W).

    Limitation: Minimum back thickness, E dimension, should not be less 
than one-fourth T dimension. In addition when unthreaded hole wheels are 
specified the inside flat, K dimension, shall be large enough to 
accommodate a suitable flange.


[[Page 653]]


    (9) Type 6 straight cup wheels. Type 6 cup wheels have diameter, 
thickness, hole size, rim thickness, and back thickness dimensions. 
Grinding is always performed on rim face, W dimension.

    Limitation: Minimum back thickness, E dimension, should not be less 
than one-fourth T dimension. In addition, when unthreaded hole wheels 
are specified, the inside flat, K dimension, must be large enough to 
accommodate a suitable flange.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] THEELSKI92EC27OC91.079

                               Figure P-2

                       Type 6--Straight-cup Wheel

Side grinding wheel having a diameter, thickness and hole with one side 
straight or flat and the opposite side recessed. This type, however, 
differs from Type 5 in that the grinding is performed on the wall of the 
abrasive created by the difference between the diameter of the recess 
and the outside diameter of the wheel. Therefore, the wall dimension 
``W'' takes precedence over the diameter of the recess as an essential 
intermediate dimension to describe this shape type.

    (10) Type 1 straight wheels. Type 1 straight wheels have diameter, 
thickness, and hole size dimensions and should be used only on the 
periphery. Type 1 wheels shall be mounted between flanges.

    Limitation: Hole dimension (H) should not be greater than two-thirds 
of wheel diameter dimension (D) for precision, cylindrical, centerless, 
or surface grinding applications. Maximum hole size for all other 
applications should not exceed one-half wheel diameter.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] THEELSKI92EC27OC91.080

                               Figure P-3

                         Type 1--Straight Wheel

    Peripheral grinding wheel having a diameter, thickness and hole.

    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) Jack terms--(1) Jack. A jack is an appliance for lifting and 
lowering or moving horizontally a load by application of a pushing 
force.

    Note: Jacks may be of the following types: Lever and ratchet, screw 
and hydraulic.

    (2) Rating. The rating of a jack is the maximum working load for 
which it is designed to lift safely that load throughout its specified 
amount of travel.

    Note: To raise the rated load of a jack, the point of application of 
the load, the applied force, and the length of lever arm should be those 
designated by the manufacturer for the particular jack considered.

[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49750, Oct. 24, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.242  Hand and portable powered tools and equipment, general.

    (a) General requirements. Each employer shall be responsible for the 
safe condition of tools and equipment used by employees, including tools 
and equipment which may be furnished by employees.
    (b) Compressed air used for cleaning. Compressed air shall not be 
used for cleaning purposes except where reduced to less than 30 p.s.i. 
and then only with effective chip guarding and personal protective 
equipment.

[[Page 654]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.243  Guarding of portable powered tools.

    (a) Portable powered tool--(1) Portable circular saws. (i) All 
portable, power-driven circular saws having a blade diameter greater 
than 2 in. shall be equipped with guards above and below the base plate 
or shoe. The upper guard shall cover the saw to the depth of the teeth, 
except for the minimum arc required to permit the base to be tilted for 
bevel cuts. The lower guard shall cover the saw to the depth of the 
teeth, except for the minimum arc required to allow proper retraction 
and contact with the work. When the tool is withdrawn from the work, the 
lower guard shall automatically and instantly return to covering 
position.
    (ii) Paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section does not apply to circular 
saws used in the meat industry for meat cutting purposes.
    (2) Switches and controls. (i) All hand-held powered circular saws 
having a blade diameter greater than 2 inches, electric, hydraulic or 
pneumatic chain saws, and percussion tools without positive accessory 
holding means shall be equipped with a constant pressure switch or 
control that will shut off the power when the pressure is released. All 
hand-held gasoline powered chain saws shall be equipped with a constant 
pressure throttle control that will shut off the power to the saw chain 
when the pressure is released.
    (ii) All hand-held powered drills, tappers, fastener drivers, 
horizontal, vertical, and angle grinders with wheels greater than 2 
inches in diameter, disc sanders with discs greater than 2 inches in 
diameter, belt sanders, reciprocating saws, saber, scroll, and jig saws 
with blade shanks greater than a nominal one-fourth inch, and other 
similarly operating powered tools shall be equipped with a constant 
pressure switch or control, and may have a lock-on control provided that 
turnoff can be accomplished by a single motion of the same finger or 
fingers that turn it on.
    (iii)(a) All other hand-held powered tools, such as, but not limited 
to, platen sanders, grinders with wheels 2 inches in diameter or less, 
disc sanders with discs 2 inches in diameter or less, routers, planers, 
laminate trimmers, nibblers, shears, saber, scroll, and jig saws with 
blade shanks a nominal one-fourth of an inch wide or less, may be 
equipped with either a positive ``on-off'' control, or other controls as 
described by paragraph (a)(2)(i) and (ii) of this section.
    (b) Saber, scroll, and jig saws with nonstandard blade holders may 
use blades with shanks which are nonuniform in width, provided the 
narrowest portion of the blade shank is an integral part in mounting the 
blade.
    (c) Blade shank width shall be measured at the narrowest portion of 
the blade shank when saber, scroll, and jig saws have nonstandard blade 
holders.
    (d) Nominal in this subparagraph means 0.05 inch.
    (iv) The operating control on hand-held power tools shall be so 
located as to minimize the possibility of its accidental operation, if 
such accidental operation would constitute a hazard to employees.
    (v) This subparagraph does not apply to concrete vibrators, concrete 
breakers, powered tampers, jack hammers, rock drills, garden appliances, 
household and kitchen appliances, personal care appliances, medical or 
dental equipment, or to fixed machinery.
    (3) Portable belt sanding machines. Belt sanding machines shall be 
provided with guards at each nip point where the sanding belt runs onto 
a pulley. These guards shall effectively prevent the hands or fingers of 
the operator from coming in contact with the nip points. The unused run 
of the sanding belt shall be guarded against accidental contact.
    (4) Cracked saws. All cracked saws shall be removed from service.
    (5) Grounding. Portable electric powered tools shall meet the 
electrical requirements of subpart S of this part.
    (b) Pneumatic powered tools and hose--(1) Tool retainer. A tool 
retainer shall be installed on each piece of utilization equipment 
which, without such a retainer, may eject the tool.
    (2) Airhose. Hose and hose connections used for conducting 
compressed air to utilization equipment shall be designed for the 
pressure and service to which they are subjected.
    (c) Portable abrasive wheels--(1) General requirements. Abrasive 
wheels shall

[[Page 655]]

be used only on machine provided with safety guards as defined in 
paragraph (c) (1) through (4) of this section.
    (i) Exceptions. The requirements of this paragraph (c)(1) shall not 
apply to the following classes of wheels and conditions.
    (a) Wheels used for internal work while within the work being 
ground;
    (b) Mounted wheels used in portable operations 2 inches and smaller 
in diameter; (see definition Sec. 1910.241(b)(1)); and
    (c) Types 16, 17, 18, 18R, and 19 cones, and plugs, and threaded 
hole pot balls where the work offers protection.
    (ii)(a) A safety guard shall cover the spindle end, nut and flange 
projections. The safety guard shall be mounted so as to maintain proper 
alignment with the wheel, and the strength of the fastenings shall 
exceed the strength of the guard.
    (b) Exception. Safety guards on all operations where the work 
provides a suitable measure of protection to the operator may be so 
constructed that the spindle end, nut and outer flange are exposed. 
Where the nature of the work is such as to entirely cover the side of 
the wheel, the side covers of the guard may be omitted.
    (c) Exception. The spindle end, nut, and outer flange may be exposed 
on portable machines designed for, and used with, type 6, 11, 27, and 28 
abrasive wheels, cutting off wheels, and tuck pointing wheels.
    (2) Cup wheels. Cup wheels (Types 6 and 11) shall be protected by:
    (i) Safety guards as specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section; 
or,
    (ii) Special ``revolving cup guards'' which mount behind the wheel 
and turn with it. They shall be made of steel or other material with 
adequate strength and shall enclose the wheel sides upward from the back 
for one-third of the wheel thickness. The mounting features shall 
conform with all regulations. (See paragraph (c)(5) of this section.) It 
is necessary to maintain clearance between the wheel side and the guard. 
The clearance shall not exceed one-sixteenth inch; or,
    (iii) Some other form of guard that will insure as good protection 
as that which would be provided by the guards specified in paragraph 
(c)(1) (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph.
    (3) Vertical portable grinders. Safety guards used on machines known 
as right angle head or vertical portable grinders shall have a maximum 
exposure angle of 180 deg., and the guard shall be so located so as to 
be between the operator and the wheel during use. Adjustment of guard 
shall be such that pieces of an accidentally broken wheel will be 
deflected away from the operator. (See Figure P-4.)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.081

                             Figure No. P-4
    (4) Other portable grinders. The maximum angular exposure of the 
grinding wheel periphery and sides for safety guards used on other 
portable grinding machines shall not exceed 180 deg. and the top half of 
the wheel shall be enclosed at all times. (See Figures P-5 and P-6.)
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.082

                             Figure No. P-5

[[Page 656]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.083


                             Figure No. P-6
    (5) Mounting and inspection of abrasive wheels. (i) Immediately 
before mounting, all wheels shall be closely inspected and sounded by 
the user (ring test, see subpart O, Sec. 1910.215(d)(1)) to make sure 
they have not been damaged in transit, storage, or otherwise. The 
spindle speed of the machine shall be checked before mounting of the 
wheel to be certain that it does not exceed the maximum operating speed 
marked on the wheel.
    (ii) Grinding wheels shall fit freely on the spindle and remain free 
under all grinding conditions. A controlled clearance between the wheel 
hole and the machine spindle (or wheel sleeves or adaptors) is essential 
to avoid excessive pressure from mounting and spindle expansion. To 
accomplish this, the machine spindle shall be made to nominal (standard) 
size plus zero minus .002 inch, and the wheel hole shall be made 
suitably oversize to assure safety clearance under the conditions of 
operating heat and pressure.
    (iii) All contact surfaces of wheels, blotters, and flangers shall 
be flat and free of foreign matter.
    (iv) When a bushing is used in the wheel hole it shall not exceed 
the width of the wheel and shall not contact the flanges.
    (v) Requirements for the use of flanges and blotters, see subpart O, 
Sec. 1910.215(c).
    (6) Excluded machinery. Natural sandstone wheels and metal, wooden, 
cloth, or paper discs, having a layer of abrasive on the surface are not 
covered by this paragraph.
    (d) Explosive actuated fastening tools--(1) General requirements. 
(i) Explosive-actuated fastening tools which are actuated by explosives 
or any similar means and propel a stud, pin, fastener, or other object 
for the purpose of affixing it by penetration to any other object shall 
meet the design requirements in ``American National Standard Safety 
Requirements for Explosive-Actuated Fastening Tools,'' ANSI A10.3-1970, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. This 
requirement does not apply to devices designed for attaching objects to 
soft construction materials, such as wood, plaster, tar, dry wallboard, 
and the like, or to stud welding equipment.
    (ii) Operators and assistants using tools shall be safeguarded by 
means of eye protection. Head and face protection shall be used, as 
required by working conditions, as set forth in subpart I.
    (2) Inspection, maintenance, and tool handling--(i) High-velocity 
tools. Tools of this type shall have the characteristics outlined in (a) 
through (h) of this section.
    (a) The muzzle end of the tool shall have a protective shield or 
guard at least 3\1/2\ inches in diameter, mounted perpendicular to and 
concentric with the barrel, and designed to confine any flying fragments 
or particles that might otherwise create a hazard at the time of firing.
    (b) Where a standard shield or guard cannot be used, or where it 
does not cover all apparent avenues through which flying particles might 
escape, a special shield, guard, fixture, or jig designed and built by 
the manufacturer of the tool being used, which provides this degree of 
protection, shall be used as a substitute.
    (c) The tool shall be so designed that it cannot be fired unless it 
is equipped with a standard protective shield or guard, or a special 
shield, guard, fixture, or jig.
    (d)(1) The firing mechanism shall be so designed that the tool 
cannot fire during loading or preparation to fire, or if the tool should 
be dropped while loaded.
    (2) Firing of the tool shall be dependent upon at least two separate 
and distinct operations of the operator, with the final firing movement 
being separate from the operation of bringing the tool into the firing 
position.
    (e) The tool shall be so designed as not to be operable other than 
against a work surface, and unless the operator

[[Page 657]]

is holding the tool against the work surface with a force at least 5 
pounds greater than the total weight of the tool.
    (f) The tool shall be so designed that it will not operate when 
equipped with the standard guard indexed to the center position if any 
bearing surface of the guard is tilted more than 8 deg. from contact 
with the work surface.
    (g) The tool shall be so designed that positive means of varying the 
power are available or can be made available to the operator as part of 
the tool, or as an auxiliary, in order to make it possible for the 
operator to select a power level adequate to perform the desired work 
without excessive force.
    (h) The tool shall be so designed that all breeching parts will be 
reasonably visible to allow a check for any foreign matter that may be 
present.
    (ii) Tools of the low-velocity-piston type shall have the 
characteristics outlined in paragraphs (d)(2)(ii) (a) through (e) of 
this section and any additional safety features he may wish to 
incorporate.
    (a) The muzzle end of the tool shall be designed so that suitable 
protective shields, guards, jigs, or fixtures, designed and built by the 
manufacturer of the tool being used, can be mounted perpendicular to the 
barrel. A standard spall shield shall be supplied with each tool.
    (b)(1) The tool shall be designed so that it shall not in ordinary 
usage propel or discharge a stud, pin, or fastener while loading or 
during preparation to fire, or if the tool should be dropped while 
loaded.
    (2) Firing of the tool shall be dependent upon at least two separate 
and distinct operations of the operator, with the final firing movement 
being separate from the operation of bringing the tool into the firing 
position.
    (c) The tool shall be so designed as not to be operable other than 
against a work surface, and unless the operator is holding the tool 
against the work surface with a force at least 5 pounds greater than the 
total weight of the tool.
    (d) The tool shall be so designed that positive means of varying the 
power are available or can be made available to the operator as part of 
the tool, or as an auxiliary, in order to make it possible for the 
operator to select a power level adequate to perform the desired work 
without excessive force.
    (e) The tool shall be so designed that all breeching parts will be 
reasonably visible to allow a check for any foreign matter that may be 
present.
    (iii) Tools of the hammer-operated piston tools--low-velocity type 
shall have the characteristics outlined in paragraphs (d)(2)(iii) (a) 
through (e) of this section.
    (a) The muzzle end of the tool shall be so designed that suitable 
protective shields, guards, jigs, or fixtures, designed and built by the 
manufacturer of the tool being used, can be mounted perpendicular to the 
barrel. A standard spall shield shall be supplied with each tool.
    (b) The tool shall be so designed that it shall not in ordinary 
usage propel or discharge a stud, pin, or fastener while loading, or 
during preparation to fire, or if the tool should be dropped while 
loaded.
    (c) Firing of the tool shall be dependent upon at least two separate 
and distinct operations of the operator, with the final firing movement 
being separate from the operation of bringing the tool into the firing 
position.
    (d) The tool shall be so designed that positive means of varying the 
power are available or can be made available to the operator as part of 
the tool, or as an auxiliary, in order to make it possible for the 
operator to select a power level adequate to perform the desired work 
without excessive force.
    (e) The tool shall be so designed that all breeching parts will be 
reasonably visible to allow a check for any foreign matter that may be 
present.
    (3) Requirements for loads and fasteners. (i) There shall be a 
standard means of identifying the power levels of loads used in tools.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) No load (cased or caseless) shall be used if it will 
accurately chamber in any existing approved commercially available low-
velocity piston tool or hammer operated piston tool--low-velocity type 
and will cause a fastener to have a mean velocity in excess of 300 feet 
per second when measured 6.5 feet from the muzzle end of the barrel. No

[[Page 658]]

individual test firing of a series shall exceed 300 feet per second by 
more than 8 percent.
    (iv) Fasteners used in tools shall be only those specifically 
manufactured for use in such tools.
    (4) Operating requirements. (i) Before using a tool, the operator 
shall inspect it to determine to his satisfaction that it is clean, that 
all moving parts operate freely, and that the barrel is free from 
obstructions.
    (ii) When a tool develops a defect during use, the operator shall 
immediately cease to use it, until it is properly repaired.
    (iii) Tools shall not be loaded until just prior to the intended 
firing time. Neither loaded nor empty tools are to be pointed at any 
workmen.
    (iv) No tools shall be loaded unless being prepared for immediate 
use, nor shall an unattended tool be left loaded.
    (v) In case of a misfire, the operator shall hold the tool in the 
operating position for at least 30 seconds. He shall then try to operate 
the tool a second time. He shall wait another 30 seconds, holding the 
tool in the operating position; then he shall proceed to remove the 
explosive load in strict accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions.
    (vi) A tool shall never be left unattended in a place where it would 
be available to unauthorized persons.
    (vii) Fasteners shall not be driven into very hard or brittle 
materials including, but not limited to, cast iron, glazed tile, 
surface-hardened steel, glass block, live rock, face brick, or hollow 
tile.
    (viii) Driving into materials easily penetrated shall be avoided 
unless such materials are backed by a substance that will prevent the 
pin or fastener from passing completely through and creating a flying-
missile hazard on the other side.
    (ix)(a) Fasteners shall not be driven directly into materials such 
as brick or concrete closer than 3 inches from the unsupported edge or 
corner, or into steel surfaces closer than one-half inch from the 
unsupported edge or corner, unless a special guard, fixture, or jig is 
used. (Exception: Low-velocity tools may drive no closer than 2 inches 
from an edge in concrete or one-fourth inch in steel.)
    (b) When fastening other materials, such as a 2- by 4-inch wood 
section to a concrete surface, it is permissible to drive a fastener of 
no greater than \7/32\-inch shank diameter not closer than 2 inches from 
the unsupported edge or corner of the work surface.
    (x) Fasteners shall not be driven through existing holes unless a 
positive guide is used to secure accurate alignment.
    (xi) No fastener shall be driven into a spalled area caused by an 
unsatisfactory fastening.
    (xii) Tools shall not be used in an explosive or flammable 
atmosphere.
    (xiii) All tools shall be used with the correct shield, guard, or 
attachment recommended by the manufacturer.
    (xiv) Any tool found not in proper working order shall be 
immediately removed from service. The tool shall be inspected at regular 
intervals and shall be repaired in accordance with the manufacturer's 
specifications.
    (e) Power lawnmowers--(1) General requirements. (i) Power lawnmowers 
of the walk-behind, riding-rotary, and reel power lawnmowers designed 
for sale to the general public shall meet the design specifications in 
``American National Standard Safety Specifications for Power 
Lawnmowers'' ANSI B71.1-X1968, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6. These specifications do not apply to a walk-
behind mower which has been converted to a riding mower by the addition 
of a sulky. Also, these specifications do not apply to flail mowers, 
sicklebar mowers, or mowers designed for commercial use.
    (ii) All power-driven chains, belts, and gears shall be so 
positioned or otherwise guarded to prevent the operator's accidental 
contact therewith, during normal starting, mounting, and operation of 
the machine.
    (iii) A shutoff device shall be provided to stop operation of the 
motor or engine. This device shall require manual and intentional 
reactivation to restart the motor or engine.
    (iv) All positions of the operating controls shall be clearly 
identified.
    (v) The words, ``Caution. Be sure the operating control(s) is in 
neutral before starting the engine,'' or similar wording shall be 
clearly visible at an engine

[[Page 659]]

starting control point on self-propelled mowers.
    (2) Walk-behind and riding rotary mowers. (i) The mower blade shall 
be enclosed except on the bottom and the enclosure shall extend to or 
below the lowest cutting point of the blade in the lowest blade 
position.
    (ii) Guards which must be removed to install a catcher assembly 
shall comply with the following:
    (a) Warning instructions shall be affixed to the mower near the 
opening stating that the mower shall not be used without either the 
catcher assembly or the guard in place.
    (b) The catcher assembly or the guard shall be shipped and sold as 
part of the mower.
    (c) The instruction manual shall state that the mower shall not be 
used without either the catcher assembly or the guard in place.
    (d) The catcher assembly, when properly and completely installed, 
shall not create a condition which violates the limits given for the 
guarded opening.
    (iii) Openings in the blade enclosure, intended for the discharge of 
grass, shall be limited to a maximum vertical angle of the opening of 
30 deg.. Measurements shall be taken from the lowest blade position.
    (iv) The total effective opening area of the grass discharge 
opening(s) shall not exceed 1,000 square degrees on units having a width 
of cut less than 27\1/2\ inches, or 2,000 square degrees on units having 
a width of cut 27\1/2\ inches or over.
    (v) The word ``Caution.'' or stronger wording, shall be placed on 
the mower at or near each discharge opening.
    (vi) [Reserved]
    (vii) Blade(s) shall stop rotating from the manufacturer's specified 
maximum speed within 15 seconds after declutching, or shutting off 
power.
    (viii) In a multipiece blade, the means of fastening the cutting 
members to the body of the blade or disc shall be so designed that they 
will not become worn to a hazardous condition before the cutting members 
themselves are worn beyond use.
    (ix) The maximum tip speed of any blade shall be 19,000 feet per 
minute.
    (3) Walk-behind rotary mowers. (i) The horizontal angle of the 
opening(s) in the blade enclosure, intended for the discharge of grass, 
shall not contact the operator area.
    (ii) There shall be one of the following at all openings in the 
blade enclosure intended for the discharge of grass:
    (a) A minimum unobstructed horizontal distance of 3 inches from the 
end of the discharge chute to the blade tip circle.
    (b) A rigid bar fastened across the discharge opening, secured to 
prevent removal without the use of tools. The bottom of the bar shall be 
no higher than the bottom edge of the blade enclosure.
    (iii) The highest point(s) of the front of the blade enclosure, 
except discharge openings, shall be such that any line extending a 
maximum of 15 deg. downward from the horizontal toward the blade shaft 
axis (axes) shall not intersect the horizontal plane within the blade 
tip circle. The highest point(s) on the blade enclosure front, except 
discharge-openings, shall not exceed 1\1/4\ inches above the lowest 
cutting point of the blade in the lowest blade position. Mowers with a 
swingover handle are to be considered as having no front in the blade 
enclosure and therefore shall comply with paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this 
section.
    (iv) The mower handle shall be fastened to the mower so as to 
prevent loss of control by unintentional uncoupling while in operation.
    (v) A positive upstop or latch shall be provided for the mower 
handle in the normal operating position(s). The upstop shall not be 
subject to unintentional disengagement during normal operation of the 
mower. The upstop or latch shall not allow the center or the handle 
grips to come closer than 17 inches horizontally behind the closest path 
of the mower blade(s) unless manually disengaged.
    (vi) A swing-over handle, which complies with the above 
requirements, will be permitted.
    (vii) Wheel drive disengaging controls, except deadman controls, 
shall move opposite to the direction of the vehicle motion in order to 
disengage the drive. Deadman controls shall automatically interrupt 
power to a drive when the operator's actuating

[[Page 660]]

force is removed, and may operate in any direction to disengage the 
drive.
    (4) Riding rotary mowers. (i) The highest point(s) of all openings 
in the blade enclosure, front shall be limited by a vertical angle of 
opening of 15 deg. and a maximum distance of 1\1/4\ inches above the 
lowest cutting point of the blade in the lowest blade position.
    (ii) Opening(s) shall be placed so that grass or debris will not 
discharge directly toward any part of an operator seated in a normal 
operator position.
    (iii) There shall be one of the following at all openings in the 
blade enclosure intended for the discharge of grass:
    (a) A minimum unobstructed horizontal distance of 6 inches from the 
end of the discharge chute to the blade tip circle.
    (b) A rigid bar fastened across the discharge opening, secured to 
prevent removal without the use of tools. The bottom of the bar shall be 
no higher than the bottom edge of the blade enclosure.
    (iv) Mowers shall be provided with stops to prevent jackknifing or 
locking of the steering mechanism.
    (v) Vehicle stopping means shall be provided.
    (vi) Hand-operated wheel drive disengaging controls shall move 
opposite to the direction of vehicle motion in order to disengage the 
drive. Foot-operated wheel drive disengaging controls shall be depressed 
to disengage the drive. Deadman controls, both hand and foot operated, 
shall automatically interrupt power to a drive when the operator's 
actuating force is removed, and may operate in any direction to 
disengage the drive.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49750, Oct. 24, 1978; 
49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 50 FR 4649, Feb. 1, 1985; 61 FR 9240, Mar. 7, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.244  Other portable tools and equipment.

    (a) Jacks--(1) Loading and marking. (i) The operator shall make sure 
that the jack used has a rating sufficient to lift and sustain the load.
    (ii) The rated load shall be legibly and permanently marked in a 
prominent location on the jack by casting, stamping, or other suitable 
means.
    (2) Operation and maintenance. (i) In the absence of a firm 
foundation, the base of the jack shall be blocked. If there is a 
possibility of slippage of the cap, a block shall be placed in between 
the cap and the load.
    (ii) The operator shall watch the stop indicator, which shall be 
kept clean, in order to determine the limit of travel. The indicated 
limit shall not be overrun.
    (iii) After the load has been raised, it shall be cribbed, blocked, 
or otherwise secured at once.
    (iv) Hydraulic jacks exposed to freezing temperatures shall be 
supplied with an adequate antifreeze liquid.
    (v) All jacks shall be properly lubricated at regular intervals.
    (vi) Each jack shall be thoroughly inspected at times which depend 
upon the service conditions. Inspections shall be not less frequent than 
the following:
    (a) For constant or intermittent use at one locality, once every 6 
months,
    (b) For jacks sent out of shop for special work, when sent out and 
when returned,
    (c) For a jack subjected to abnormal load or shock, immediately 
before and immediately thereafter.
    (vii) Repair or replacement parts shall be examined for possible 
defects.
    (viii) Jacks which are out of order shall be tagged accordingly, and 
shall not be used until repairs are made.
    (b) Abrasive blast cleaning nozzles. The blast cleaning nozzles 
shall be equipped with an operating valve which must be held open 
manually. A support shall be provided on which the nozzle may be mounted 
when it is not in use.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984]


<R04>
                 Subpart Q--Welding, Cutting and Brazing

    Authority:  Secs. 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Orders 12-71 
(36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), 1-90 (55 FR 9033), 
or 6-96 (62 FR 111), as applicable; and 29 CFR part 1911.

    Source: 55 FR 13696, Apr. 11, 1990, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 661]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.251  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    (a) Welder and welding operator mean any operator of electric or gas 
welding and cutting equipment.
    (b) Approved means listed or approved by a nationally recognized 
testing laboratory. Refer to Sec. 1910.155(c)(3) for definitions of 
listed and approved, and Sec. 1910.7 for nationally recognized testing 
laboratory.
    (c) All other welding terms are used in accordance with American 
Welding Society--Terms and Definitions--A3.0--1969, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
[55 FR 13696, Apr. 11, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 9240, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.252  General requirements.

    (a) Fire prevention and protection--(1) Basic precautions. For 
elaboration of these basic precautions and of the special precautions of 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section as well as a delineation of the fire 
protection and prevention responsibilities of welders and cutters, their 
supervisors (including outside contractors) and those in management on 
whose property cutting and welding is to be performed, see Standard for 
Fire Prevention in Use of Cutting and Welding Processes, NFPA Standard 
51B, 1962, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6. The basic precautions for fire prevention in welding or 
cutting work are:
    (i) Fire hazards. If the object to be welded or cut cannot readily 
be moved, all movable fire hazards in the vicinity shall be taken to a 
safe place.
    (ii) Guards. If the object to be welded or cut cannot be moved and 
if all the fire hazards cannot be removed, then guards shall be used to 
confine the heat, sparks, and slag, and to protect the immovable fire 
hazards.
    (iii) Restrictions. If the requirements stated in paragraphs 
(a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii) of this section cannot be followed then welding 
and cutting shall not be performed.
    (2) Special precautions. When the nature of the work to be performed 
falls within the scope of paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section certain 
additional precautions may be necessary:
    (i) Combustible material. Wherever there are floor openings or 
cracks in the flooring that cannot be closed, precautions shall be taken 
so that no readily combustible materials on the floor below will be 
exposed to sparks which might drop through the floor. The same 
precautions shall be observed with regard to cracks or holes in walls, 
open doorways and open or broken windows.
    (ii) Fire extinquishers. Suitable fire extinguishing equipment shall 
be maintained in a state of readiness for instant use. Such equipment 
may consist of pails of water, buckets of sand, hose or portable 
extinguishers depending upon the nature and quantity of the combustible 
material exposed.
    (iii) Fire watch. (A) Fire watchers shall be required whenever 
welding or cutting is performed in locations where other than a minor 
fire might develop, or any of the following conditions exist:
    (1) Appreciable combustible material, in building construction or 
contents, closer than 35 feet (10.7 m) to the point of operation.
    (2) Appreciable combustibles are more than 35 feet (10.7 m) away but 
are easily ignited by sparks.
    (3) Wall or floor openings within a 35-foot (10.7 m) radius expose 
combustible material in adjacent areas including concealed spaces in 
walls or floors.
    (4) Combustible materials are adjacent to the opposite side of metal 
partitions, walls, ceilings, or roofs and are likely to be ignited by 
conduction or radiation.
    (B) Fire watchers shall have fire extinguishing equipment readily 
available and be trained in its use. They shall be familiar with 
facilities for sounding an alarm in the event of a fire. They shall 
watch for fires in all exposed areas, try to extinguish them only when 
obviously within the capacity of the equipment available, or otherwise 
sound the alarm. A fire watch shall be maintained for at least a half 
hour after completion of welding or cutting operations to detect and 
extinguish possible smoldering fires.
    (iv) Authorization. Before cutting or welding is permitted, the area 
shall be inspected by the individual responsible

[[Page 662]]

for authorizing cutting and welding operations. He shall designate 
precautions to be followed in granting authorization to proceed 
preferably in the form of a written permit.
    (v) Floors. Where combustible materials such as paper clippings, 
wood shavings, or textile fibers are on the floor, the floor shall be 
swept clean for a radius of 35 feet (10.7 m). Combustible floors shall 
be kept wet, covered with damp sand, or protected by fire-resistant 
shields. Where floors have been wet down, personnel operating arc 
welding or cutting equipment shall be protected from possible shock.
    (vi) Prohibited areas. Cutting or welding shall not be permitted in 
the following situations:
    (A) In areas not authorized by management.
    (B) In sprinklered buildings while such protection is impaired.
    (C) In the presence of explosive atmospheres (mixtures of flammable 
gases, vapors, liquids, or dusts with air), or explosive atmospheres 
that may develop inside uncleaned or improperly prepared tanks or 
equipment which have previously contained such materials, or that may 
develop in areas with an accumulation of combustible dusts.
    (D) In areas near the storage of large quantities of exposed, 
readily ignitible materials such as bulk sulfur, baled paper, or cotton.
    (vii) Relocation of combustibles. Where practicable, all 
combustibles shall be relocated at least 35 feet (10.7 m) from the work 
site. Where relocation is impracticable, combustibles shall be protected 
with flameproofed covers or otherwise shielded with metal or asbestos 
guards or curtains.
    (viii) Ducts. Ducts and conveyor systems that might carry sparks to 
distant combustibles shall be suitably protected or shut down.
    (ix) Combustible walls. Where cutting or welding is done near walls, 
partitions, ceiling or roof of combustible construction, fire-resistant 
shields or guards shall be provided to prevent ignition.
    (x) Noncombustible walls. If welding is to be done on a metal wall, 
partition, ceiling or roof, precautions shall be taken to prevent 
ignition of combustibles on the other side, due to conduction or 
radiation, preferably by relocating combustibles. Where combustibles are 
not relocated, a fire watch on the opposite side from the work shall be 
provided.
    (xi) Combustible cover. Welding shall not be attempted on a metal 
partition, wall, ceiling or roof having a combustible covering nor on 
walls or partitions of combustible sandwich-type panel construction.
    (xii) Pipes. Cutting or welding on pipes or other metal in contact 
with combustible walls, partitions, ceilings or roofs shall not be 
undertaken if the work is close enough to cause ignition by conduction.
    (xiii) Management. Management shall recognize its responsibility for 
the safe usage of cutting and welding equipment on its property and:
    (A) Based on fire potentials of plant facilities, establish areas 
for cutting and welding, and establish procedures for cutting and 
welding, in other areas.
    (B) Designate an individual responsible for authorizing cutting and 
welding operations in areas not specifically designed for such 
processes.
    (C) Insist that cutters or welders and their supervisors are 
suitably trained in the safe operation of their equipment and the safe 
use of the process.
    (D) Advise all contractors about flammable materials or hazardous 
conditions of which they may not be aware.
    (xiv) Supervisor. The Supervisor:
    (A) Shall be responsible for the safe handling of the cutting or 
welding equipment and the safe use of the cutting or welding process.
    (B) Shall determine the combustible materials and hazardous areas 
present or likely to be present in the work location.
    (C) Shall protect combustibles from ignition by the following:
    (1) Have the work moved to a location free from dangerous 
combustibles.
    (2) If the work cannot be moved, have the combustibles moved to a 
safe distance from the work or have the combustibles properly shielded 
against ignition.
    (3) See that cutting and welding are so scheduled that plant 
operations that might expose combustibles to ignition

[[Page 663]]

are not started during cutting or welding.
    (D) Shall secure authorization for the cutting or welding operations 
from the designated management representative.
    (E) Shall determine that the cutter or welder secures his approval 
that conditions are safe before going ahead.
    (F) Shall determine that fire protection and extinguishing equipment 
are properly located at the site.
    (G) Where fire watches are required, he shall see that they are 
available at the site.
    (xv) Fire prevention precautions. Cutting or welding shall be 
permitted only in areas that are or have been made fire safe. When work 
cannot be moved practically, as in most construction work, the area 
shall be made safe by removing combustibles or protecting combustibles 
from ignition sources.
    (3) Welding or cutting containers--(i) Used containers. No welding, 
cutting, or other hot work shall be performed on used drums, barrels, 
tanks or other containers until they have been cleaned so thoroughly as 
to make absolutely certain that there are no flammable materials present 
or any substances such as greases, tars, acids, or other materials which 
when subjected to heat, might produce flammable or toxic vapors. Any 
pipe lines or connections to the drum or vessel shall be disconnected or 
blanked.
    (ii) Venting and purging. All hollow spaces, cavities or containers 
shall be vented to permit the escape of air or gases before preheating, 
cutting or welding. Purging with inert gas is recommended.
    (4) Confined spaces--(i) Accidental contact. When arc welding is to 
be suspended for any substantial period of time, such as during lunch or 
overnight, all electrodes shall be removed from the holders and the 
holders carefully located so that accidental contact cannot occur and 
the machine be disconnected from the power source.
    (ii) Torch valve. In order to eliminate the possibility of gas 
escaping through leaks or improperly closed valves, when gas welding or 
cutting, the torch valves shall be closed and the gas supply to the 
torch positively shut off at some point outside the confined area 
whenever the torch is not to be used for a substantial period of time, 
such as during lunch hour or overnight. Where practicable, the torch and 
hose shall also be removed from the confined space.
    (b) Protection of personnel--(1) General--(i) Railing. A welder or 
helper working on platforms, scaffolds, or runways shall be protected 
against falling. This may be accomplished by the use of railings, safety 
belts, life lines, or some other equally effective safeguards.
    (ii) Welding cable. Welders shall place welding cable and other 
equipment so that it is clear of passageways, ladders, and stairways.
    (2) Eye protection--(i) Selection. (A) Helmets or hand shields shall 
be used during all arc welding or arc cutting operations, excluding 
submerged arc welding. Helpers or attendants shall be provided with 
proper eye protection.
    (B) Goggles or other suitable eye protection shall be used during 
all gas welding or oxygen cutting operations. Spectacles without side 
shields, with suitable filter lenses are permitted for use during gas 
welding operations on light work, for torch brazing or for inspection.
    (C) All operators and attendants of resistance welding or resistance 
brazing equipment shall use transparent face shields or goggles, 
depending on the particular job, to protect their faces or eyes, as 
required.
    (D) Eye protection in the form of suitable goggles shall be provided 
where needed for brazing operations not covered in paragraphs 
(b)(2)(i)(A) through (b)(2)(i)(C) of this section.
    (ii) Specifications for protectors. (A) Helmets and hand shields 
shall be made of a material which is an insulator for heat and 
electricity. Helmets, shields and goggles shall be not readily flammable 
and shall be capable of withstanding sterilization.
    (B) Helmets and hand shields shall be arranged to protect the face, 
neck and ears from direct radiant energy from the arc.
    (C) Helmets shall be provided with filter plates and cover plates 
designed for easy removal.

[[Page 664]]

    (D) All parts shall be constructed of a material which will not 
readily corrode or discolor the skin.
    (E) Goggles shall be ventilated to prevent fogging of the lenses as 
much as practicable.
    (F) All glass for lenses shall be tempered, substantially free from 
striae, air bubbles, waves and other flaws. Except when a lens is ground 
to provide proper optical correction for defective vision, the front and 
rear surfaces of lenses and windows shall be smooth and parallel.
    (G) Lenses shall bear some permanent distinctive marking by which 
the source and shade may be readily identified.
    (H) The following is a guide for the selection of the proper shade 
numbers. These recommendations may be varied to suit the individual's 
needs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Shade
                       Welding operation                           No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shielded metal-arc welding--\1/16\-, \3/32\-, \1/8\-, \5/32\-
 inch electrodes...............................................       10
Gas-shielded arc welding (nonferrous)--\1/16\-, \3/32\-, \1/8\-
 , \5/32\-inch electrodes......................................       11
Gas-shielded arc welding (ferrous)--\1/16\-, \3/32\-, \1/8\-,
 \5/32\-inch electrodes........................................       12
Shielded metal-arc welding:
    \3/16\-, \7/32\-, \1/4\-inch electrodes....................       12
    \5/16\-, \3/8\-inch electrodes.............................       14
Atomic hydrogen welding........................................    10-14
Carbon arc welding.............................................       14
Soldering......................................................        2
Torch brazing..................................................   3 or 4
Light cutting, up to 1 inch....................................   3 or 4
Medium cutting, 1 inch to 6 inches.............................   4 or 5
Heavy cutting, 6 inches and over...............................   5 or 6
Gas welding (light) up to \1/8\ inch...........................   4 or 5
Gas welding (medium) \1/8\ inch to \1/2\ inch..................   5 or 6
Gas welding (heavy) \1/2\ inch and over........................   6 or 8
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: In gas welding or oxygen cutting where the torch produces a high
  yellow light, it is desirable to use a filter or lens that absorbs the
  yellow or sodium line in the visible light of the operation.

    (I) All filter lenses and plates shall meet the test for 
transmission of radiant energy prescribed in ANSI Z87.1--1968--American 
National Standard Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye and Face 
Protection, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (iii) Protection from arc welding rays. Where the work permits, the 
welder should be enclosed in an individual booth painted with a finish 
of low reflectivity such as zinc oxide (an important factor for 
absorbing ultraviolet radiations) and lamp black, or shall be enclosed 
with noncombustible screens similarly painted. Booths and screens shall 
permit circulation of air at floor level. Workers or other persons 
adjacent to the welding areas shall be protected from the rays by 
noncombustible or flameproof screens or shields or shall be required to 
wear appropriate goggles.
    (3) Protective clothing--General requirements. Employees exposed to 
the hazards created by welding, cutting, or brazing operations shall be 
protected by personal protective equipment in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.132 of this part. Appropriate protective 
clothing required for any welding operation will vary with the size, 
nature and location of the work to be performed.
    (4) Work in confined spaces--(i) General. As used herein confined 
space is intended to mean a relatively small or restricted space such as 
a tank, boiler, pressure vessel, or small compartment of a ship.
    (ii) Ventilation. Ventilation is a prerequisite to work in confined 
spaces. For ventilation requirements see paragraph (c) of this section.
    (iii) Securing cylinders and machinery. When welding or cutting is 
being performed in any confined spaces the gas cylinders and welding 
machines shall be left on the outside. Before operations are started, 
heavy portable equipment mounted on wheels shall be securely blocked to 
prevent accidental movement.
    (iv) Lifelines. Where a welder must enter a confined space through a 
manhole or other small opening, means shall be provided for quickly 
removing him in case of emergency. When safety belts and lifelines are 
used for this purpose they shall be so attached to the welder's body 
that his body cannot be jammed in a small exit opening. An attendant 
with a preplanned rescue procedure shall be stationed outside to observe 
the welder at all times and be capable of putting rescue operations into 
effect.
    (v) Electrode removal. When arc welding is to be suspended for any 
substantial period of time, such as during lunch or overnight, all 
electrodes shall be removed from the holders and the holders carefully 
located so that accidental contact cannot occur and the

[[Page 665]]

machine disconnected from the power source.
    (vi) Gas cylinder shutoff. In order to eliminate the possibility of 
gas escaping through leaks of improperly closed valves, when gas welding 
or cutting, the torch valves shall be closed and the fuel-gas and oxygen 
supply to the torch positively shut off at some point outside the 
confined area whenever the torch is not to be used for a substantial 
period of time, such as during lunch hour or overnight. Where 
practicable the torch and hose shall also be removed from the confined 
space.
    (vii) Warning sign. After welding operations are completed, the 
welder shall mark the hot metal or provide some other means of warning 
other workers.
    (c) Health protection and ventilation--(1) General--(i) 
Contamination. The requirements in this paragraph have been established 
on the basis of the following three factors in arc and gas welding which 
govern the amount of contamination to which welders may be exposed:
    (A) Dimensions of space in which welding is to be done (with special 
regard to height of ceiling).
    (B) Number of welders.
    (C) Possible evolution of hazardous fumes, gases, or dust according 
to the metals involved.
    (ii) Screens. When welding must be performed in a space entirely 
screened on all sides, the screens shall be so arranged that no serious 
restriction of ventilation exists. It is desirable to have the screens 
so mounted that they are about 2 feet (0.61 m) above the floor unless 
the work is performed at so low a level that the screen must be extended 
nearer to the floor to protect nearby workers from the glare of welding.
    (iii) Maximum allowable concentration. Local exhaust or general 
ventilating systems shall be provided and arranged to keep the amount of 
toxic fumes, gases, or dusts below the maximum allowable concentration 
as specified in Sec. 1910.1000 of this part.
    (iv) Precautionary labels. A number of potentially hazardous 
materials are employed in fluxes, coatings, coverings, and filler metals 
used in welding and cutting or are released to the atmosphere during 
welding and cutting. These include but are not limited to the materials 
itemized in paragraphs (c)(5) through (c)(12) of this section. The 
suppliers of welding materials shall determine the hazard, if any, 
associated with the use of their materials in welding, cutting, etc.
    (A) All filler metals and fusible granular materials shall carry the 
following notice, as a minimum, on tags, boxes, or other containers:

                                 CAUTION

    Welding may produce fumes and gases hazardous to health. Avoid 
breathing these fumes and gases. Use adequate ventilation. See ANSI 
Z49.1 - 1967 Safety in Welding and Cutting published by the American 
Welding Society.

    (B) Brazing (welding) filler metals containing cadmium in 
significant amounts shall carry the following notice on tags, boxes, or 
other containers:

                                 WARNING

       CONTAINS CADMIUM--POISONOUS FUMES MAY BE FORMED ON HEATING

    Do not breathe fumes. Use only with adequate ventilation such as 
fume collectors, exhaust ventilators, or air-supplied respirators. See 
ANSI Z49.1 - 1967. If chest pain, cough, or fever develops after use 
call physician immediately.

    (C) Brazing and gas welding fluxes containing fluorine compounds 
shall have a cautionary wording to indicate that they contain fluorine 
compounds. One such cautionary wording recommended by the American 
Welding Society for brazing and gas welding fluxes reads as follows:

                                 CAUTION

                           CONTAINS FLUORIDES

    This flux when heated gives off fumes that may irritate eyes, nose 
and throat.
    1. Avoid fumes--use only in well-ventilated spaces.
    2. Avoid contact of flux with eyes or skin.
    3. Do not take internally.

    (2) Ventilation for general welding and cutting--(i) General. 
Mechanical ventilation shall be provided when welding or cutting is done 
on metals not covered in paragraphs (c)(5) through (c)(12)

[[Page 666]]

of this section. (For specific materials, see the ventilation 
requirements of paragraphs (c)(5) through (c)(12) of this section.)
    (A) In a space of less than 10,000 cubic feet (284 m \3\) per 
welder.
    (B) In a room having a ceiling height of less than 16 feet (5 m).
    (C) In confined spaces or where the welding space contains 
partitions, balconies, or other structural barriers to the extent that 
they significantly obstruct cross ventilation.
    (ii) Minimum rate. Such ventilation shall be at the minimum rate of 
2,000 cubic feet (57 m<SUP>3</SUP>) per minute per welder, except where 
local exhaust hoods and booths as per paragraph (c)(3) of this section, 
or airline respirators approved by the Mine Safety and Health 
Administration and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, pursuant to the provisions of 30 CFR part 11, are provided. 
Natural ventilation is considered sufficient for welding or cutting 
operations where the restrictions in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section 
are not present.
    (3) Local exhaust hoods and booths. Mechanical local exhaust 
ventilation may be by means of either of the following:
    (i) Hoods. Freely movable hoods intended to be placed by the welder 
as near as practicable to the work being welded and provided with a rate 
of air-flow sufficient to maintain a velocity in the direction of the 
hood of 100 linear feet (30 m) per minute in the zone of welding when 
the hood is at its most remote distance from the point of welding. The 
rates of ventilation required to accomplish this control velocity using 
a 3-inch (7.6 cm) wide flanged suction opening are shown in the 
following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Minimum air
                                                  flow \1\       Duct
                 Welding zone                   cubic feet/   diameter,
                                                   minute     inches \2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4 to 6 inches from arc or torch...............          150          3
6 to 8 inches from arc or torch...............          275       3\1/2\
8 to 10 inches from arc or torch..............          425       4\1/2\
10 to 12 inches from arc or torch.............          600       5\1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ When brazing with cadmium bearing materials or when cutting on such
  materials increased rates of ventilation may be required.
\2\ Nearest half-inch duct diameter based on 4,000 feet per minute
  velocity in pipe.

    (ii) Fixed enclosure. A fixed enclosure with a top and not less than 
two sides which surround the welding or cutting operations and with a 
rate of airflow sufficient to maintain a velocity away from the welder 
of not less than 100 linear feet (30 m) per minute.
    (4) Ventilation in confined spaces--(i) Air replacement. All welding 
and cutting operations carried on in confined spaces shall be adequately 
ventilated to prevent the accumulation of toxic materials or possible 
oxygen deficiency. This applies not only to the welder but also to 
helpers and other personnel in the immediate vicinity. All air replacing 
that withdrawn shall be clean and respirable.
    (ii) Airline respirators. In circumstances for which it is 
impossible to provide such ventilation, airline respirators or hose 
masks approved for this purpose by the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) under 42 CFR part 84 must be 
used.
    (iii) Self-contained units. In areas immediately hazardous to life, 
a full-facepiece, pressure-demand, self-contained breathing apparatus or 
a combination full-facepiece, pressure-demand supplied-air respirator 
with an auxiliary, self-contained air supply approved by NIOSH under 42 
CFR part 84 must be used.
    (iv) Outside helper. Where welding operations are carried on in 
confined spaces and where welders and helpers are provided with hose 
masks, hose masks with blowers or self-contained breathing equipment 
approved by the Mine Safety and Health Administration and the National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, a worker shall be 
stationed on the outside of such confined spaces to insure the safety of 
those working within.
    (v) Oxygen for ventilation. Oxygen shall never be used for 
ventilation.
    (5) Fluorine compounds--(i) General. In confined spaces, welding or 
cutting involving fluxes, coverings, or other materials which contain 
fluorine compounds shall be done in accordance with paragraph (c)(4) of 
this section. A fluorine compound is one that contains fluorine, as an 
element in chemical combination, not as a free gas.

[[Page 667]]

    (ii) Maximum allowable concentration. The need for local exhaust 
ventilation or airline respirators for welding or cutting in other than 
confined spaces will depend upon the individual circumstances. However, 
experience has shown such protection to be desirable for fixed-location 
production welding and for all production welding on stainless steels. 
Where air samples taken at the welding location indicate that the 
fluorides liberated are below the maximum allowable concentration, such 
protection is not necessary.
    (6) Zinc--(i) Confined spaces. In confined spaces welding or cutting 
involving zinc-bearing base or filler metals or metals coated with zinc-
bearing materials shall be done in accordance with paragraph (c)(4) of 
this section.
    (ii) Indoors. Indoors, welding or cutting involving zinc-bearing 
base or filler metals coated with zinc-bearing materials shall be done 
in accordance with paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (7) Lead--(i) Confined spaces. In confined spaces, welding involving 
lead-base metals (erroneously called lead-burning) shall be done in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
    (ii) Indoors. Indoors, welding involving lead-base metals shall be 
done in accordance with paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (iii) Local ventilation. In confined spaces or indoors, welding or 
cutting operations involving metals containing lead, other than as an 
impurity, or metals coated with lead-bearing materials, including paint, 
must be done using local exhaust ventilation or airline respirators. 
Such operations, when done outdoors, must be done using respirators 
approved for this purpose by NIOSH under 42 CFR part 84. In all cases, 
workers in the immediate vicinity of the cutting operation must be 
protected by local exhaust ventilation or airline respirators.
    (8) Beryllium. Welding or cutting indoors, outdoors, or in confined 
spaces involving beryllium-containing base or filler metals shall be 
done using local exhaust ventilation and airline respirators unless 
atmospheric tests under the most adverse conditions have established 
that the workers' exposure is within the acceptable concentrations 
defined by Sec. 1910.1000 of this part. In all cases, workers in the 
immediate vicinity of the welding or cutting operations shall be 
protected as necessary by local exhaust ventilation or airline 
respirators.
    (9) Cadmium--(i) General. In confined spaces or indoors, welding or 
cutting operations involving cadmium-bearing or cadmium-coated base 
metals must be done using local exhaust ventilation or airline 
respirators unless atmospheric tests under the most adverse conditions 
show that employee exposure is within the acceptable concentrations 
specified by 29 CFR 1910.1000. Such operations, when done outdoors, must 
be done using respirators, such as fume respirators, approved for this 
purpose by NIOSH under 42 CFR part 84.
    (ii) Confined space. Welding (brazing) involving cadmium-bearing 
filler metals shall be done using ventilation as prescribed in paragraph 
(c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section if the work is to be done in a confined 
space.
    (10) Mercury. In confined spaces or indoors, welding or cutting 
operations involving metals coated with mercury-bearing materials, 
including paint, must be done using local exhaust ventilation or airline 
respirators unless atmospheric tests under the most adverse conditions 
show that employee exposure is within the acceptable concentrations 
specified by 29 CFR 1910.1000. Such operations, when done outdoors, must 
be done using respirators approved for this purpose by NIOSH under 42 
CFR part 84.
    (11) Cleaning compounds--(i) Manufacturer's instructions. In the use 
of cleaning materials, because of their possible toxicity or 
flammability, appropriate precautions such as manufacturers instructions 
shall be followed.
    (ii) Degreasing. Degreasing and other cleaning operations involving 
chlorinated hydrocarbons shall be so located that no vapors from these 
operations will reach or be drawn into the atmosphere surrounding any 
welding operation. In addition, trichloroethylene and perchlorethylene 
should be kept out of atmospheres penetrated by the ultraviolet 
radiation of gas-shielded welding operations.
    (12) Cutting of stainless steels. Oxygen cutting, using either a 
chemical flux or

[[Page 668]]

iron powder or gas-shielded arc cutting of stainless steel, shall be 
done using mechanical ventilation adequate to remove the fumes 
generated.
    (13) First-aid equipment. First-aid equipment shall be available at 
all times. All injuries shall be reported as soon as possible for 
medical attention. First aid shall be rendered until medical attention 
can be provided.
    (d) Industrial applications--(1) Transmission pipeline--(i) General. 
The requirements of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section and 
Sec. 1910.254 of this part shall be observed.
    (ii) Field shop operations. Where field shop operations are involved 
for fabrication of fittings, river crossings, road crossings, and 
pumping and compressor stations the requirements of paragraphs (a), (b), 
and (c) of this section and Secs. 1910.253 and 1910.254 of this part 
shall be observed.
    (iii) Electric shock. When arc welding is performed in wet 
conditions, or under conditions of high humidity, special protection 
against electric shock shall be supplied.
    (iv) Pressure testing. In pressure testing of pipelines, the workers 
and the public shall be protected against injury by the blowing out of 
closures or other pressure restraining devices. Also, protection shall 
be provided against expulsion of loose dirt that may have become trapped 
in the pipe.
    (v) Construction standards. The welded construction of transmission 
pipelines shall be conducted in accordance with the Standard for Welding 
Pipe Lines and Related Facilities, API Std. 1104--1968, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (vi) Flammable substance lines. The connection, by welding, of 
branches to pipelines carrying flammable substances shall be performed 
in accordance with Welding or Hot Tapping on Equipment Containing 
Flammables, API Std. PSD No. 2201--1963, which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (vii) X-ray inspection. The use of X-rays and radioactive isotopes 
for the inspection of welded pipeline joints shall be carried out in 
conformance with the American National Standard Safety Standard for Non-
Medical X-ray and Sealed Gamma-Ray Sources, ANSI Z54.1--1963, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Mechanical piping systems--(i) General. The requirements of 
paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section and Secs. 1910.253 and 
1910.254 of this part shall be observed.
    (ii) X-ray inspection. The use of X-rays and radioactive isotopes 
for the inspection of welded piping joints shall be in conformance with 
the American National Standard Safety Standard for Non-Medical X-ray and 
Sealed Gamma-Ray Sources, ANSI Z54.1--1963.
[55 FR 13696, Apr. 11, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 9240, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 
FR 1284, Jan. 8, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.253  Oxygen-fuel gas welding and cutting.

    (a) General requirements--(1) Flammable mixture. Mixtures of fuel 
gases and air or oxygen may be explosive and shall be guarded against. 
No device or attachment facilitating or permitting mixtures of air or 
oxygen with flammable gases prior to consumption, except at the burner 
or in a standard torch, shall be allowed unless approved for the 
purpose.
    (2) Maximum pressure. Under no condition shall acetylene be 
generated, piped (except in approved cylinder manifolds) or utilized at 
a pressure in excess of 15 psig (103 kPa gauge pressure) or 30 psia (206 
kPa absolute). The 30 psia (206 kPa absolute) limit is intended to 
prevent unsafe use of acetylene in pressurized chambers such as 
caissons, underground excavations or tunnel construction.) This 
requirement is not intended to apply to storage of acetylene dissolved 
in a suitable solvent in cylinders manufactured and maintained according 
to U.S. Department of Transportation requirements, or to acetylene for 
chemical use. The use of liquid acetylene shall be prohibited.
    (3) Apparatus. Only approved apparatus such as torches, regulators 
or pressure-reducing valves, acetylene generators, and manifolds shall 
be used.
    (4) Personnel. Workmen in charge of the oxygen or fuel-gas supply 
equipment, including generators, and oxygen or fuel-gas distribution 
piping systems shall be instructed and judged competent by their 
employers for this important work before being left in

[[Page 669]]

charge. Rules and instructions covering the operation and maintenance of 
oxygen or fuel-gas supply equipment including generators, and oxygen or 
fuel-gas distribution piping systems shall be readily available.
    (b) Cylinders and containers--(1) Approval and marking. (i) All 
portable cylinders used for the storage and shipment of compressed gases 
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the regulations 
of the U.S. Department of Transportation, 49 CFR parts 171-179.
    (ii) Compressed gas cylinders shall be legibly marked, for the 
purpose of identifying the gas content, with either the chemical or the 
trade name of the gas. Such marking shall be by means of stenciling, 
stamping, or labeling, and shall not be readily removable. Whenever 
practical, the marking shall be located on the shoulder of the cylinder. 
This method conforms to the American National Standard Method for 
Marking Portable Compressed Gas Containers to Identify the Material 
Contained, ANSI Z48.1--1954, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iii) Compressed gas cylinders shall be equipped with connections 
complying with the American National Standard Compressed Gas Cylinder 
Valve Outlet and Inlet Connections, ANSI B57.1--1965, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iv) All cylinders with a water weight capacity of over 30 pounds 
(13.6 kg) shall be equipped with means of connecting a valve protection 
cap or with a collar or recess to protect the valve.
    (2) Storage of cylinders--general. (i) Cylinders shall be kept away 
from radiators and other sources of heat.
    (ii) Inside of buildings, cylinders shall be stored in a well-
protected, well-ventilated, dry location, at least 20 feet (6.1 m) from 
highly combustible materials such as oil or excelsior. Cylinders should 
be stored in definitely assigned places away from elevators, stairs, or 
gangways. Assigned storage spaces shall be located where cylinders will 
not be knocked over or damaged by passing or falling objects, or subject 
to tampering by unauthorized persons. Cylinders shall not be kept in 
unventilated enclosures such as lockers and cupboards.
    (iii) Empty cylinders shall have their valves closed.
    (iv) Valve protection caps, where cylinder is designed to accept a 
cap, shall always be in place, hand-tight, except when cylinders are in 
use or connected for use.
    (3) Fuel-gas cylinder storage. Inside a building, cylinders, except 
those in actual use or attached ready for use, shall be limited to a 
total gas capacity of 2,000 cubic feet (56 m<SUP>3</SUP>) or 300 pounds 
(135.9 kg) of liquefied petroleum gas.
    (i) For storage in excess of 2,000 cubic feet (56 m<SUP>3</SUP>) 
total gas capacity of cylinders or 300 (135.9 kg) pounds of liquefied 
petroleum gas, a separate room or compartment conforming to the 
requirements specified in paragraphs (f)(6)(i)(H) and (f)(6)(i)(I) of 
this section shall be provided, or cylinders shall be kept outside or in 
a special building. Special buildings, rooms or compartments shall have 
no open flame for heating or lighting and shall be well ventilated. They 
may also be used for storage of calcium carbide in quantities not to 
exceed 600 (271.8 kg) pounds, when contained in metal containers 
complying with paragraphs (g)(1)(i) and (g)(1)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) Acetylene cylinders shall be stored valve end up.
    (4) Oxygen storage. (i) Oxygen cylinders shall not be stored near 
highly combustible material, especially oil and grease; or near reserve 
stocks of carbide and acetylene or other fuel-gas cylinders, or near any 
other substance likely to cause or accelerate fire; or in an acetylene 
generator compartment.
    (ii) Oxygen cylinders stored in outside generator houses shall be 
separated from the generator or carbide storage rooms by a 
noncombustible partition having a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 
hour. This partition shall be without openings and shall be gastight.
    (iii) Oxygen cylinders in storage shall be separated from fuel-gas 
cylinders or combustible materials (especially oil or grease), a minimum 
distance of 20 feet (6.1 m) or by a noncombustible barrier at least 5 
feet (1.5 m) high having a fire-resistance rating of at least one-half 
hour.
    (iv) Where a liquid oxygen system is to be used to supply gaseous 
oxygen for

[[Page 670]]

welding or cutting and the system has a storage capacity of more than 
13,000 cubic feet (364 m<SUP>3</SUP>) of oxygen (measured at 14.7 psia 
(101 kPa) and 70  deg.F (21.1  deg.C)), connected in service or ready 
for service, or more than 25,000 cubic feet (700 m<SUP>3</SUP>) of 
oxygen (measured at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) and 70  deg.F (21.1  deg.C)), 
including unconnected reserves on hand at the site, it shall comply with 
the provisions of the Standard for Bulk Oxygen Systems at Consumer 
Sites, NFPA No. 566--1965, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (5) Operating procedures. (i) Cylinders, cylinder valves, couplings, 
regulators, hose, and apparatus shall be kept free from oily or greasy 
substances. Oxygen cylinders or apparatus shall not be handled with oily 
hands or gloves. A jet of oxygen must never be permitted to strike an 
oily surface, greasy clothes, or enter a fuel oil or other storage tank.
    (ii)(A) When transporting cylinders by a crane or derrick, a cradle, 
boat, or suitable platform shall be used. Slings or electric magnets 
shall not be used for this purpose. Valve-protection caps, where 
cylinder is designed to accept a cap, shall always be in place.
    (B) Cylinders shall not be dropped or struck or permitted to strike 
each other violently.
    (C) Valve-protection caps shall not be used for lifting cylinders 
from one vertical position to another. Bars shall not be used under 
valves or valve-protection caps to pry cylinders loose when frozen to 
the ground or otherwise fixed; the use of warm (not boiling) water is 
recommended. Valve-protection caps are designed to protect cylinder 
valves from damage.
    (D) Unless cylinders are secured on a special truck, regulators 
shall be removed and valve-protection caps, when provided for, shall be 
put in place before cylinders are moved.
    (E) Cylinders not having fixed hand wheels shall have keys, handles, 
or nonadjustable wrenches on valve stems while these cylinders are in 
service. In multiple cylinder installations only one key or handle is 
required for each manifold.
    (F) Cylinder valves shall be closed before moving cylinders.
    (G) Cylinder valves shall be closed when work is finished.
    (H) Valves of empty cylinders shall be closed.
    (I) Cylinders shall be kept far enough away from the actual welding 
or cutting operation so that sparks, hot slag, or flame will not reach 
them, or fire-resistant shields shall be provided.
    (J) Cylinders shall not be placed where they might become part of an 
electric circuit. Contacts with third rails, trolley wires, etc., shall 
be avoided. Cylinders shall be kept away from radiators, piping systems, 
layout tables, etc., that may be used for grounding electric circuits 
such as for arc welding machines. Any practice such as the tapping of an 
electrode against a cylinder to strike an arc shall be prohibited.
    (K) Cylinders shall never be used as rollers or supports, whether 
full or empty.
    (L) The numbers and markings stamped into cylinders shall not be 
tampered with.
    (M) No person, other than the gas supplier, shall attempt to mix 
gases in a cylinder. No one, except the owner of the cylinder or person 
authorized by him, shall refill a cylinder.
    (N) No one shall tamper with safety devices in cylinders or valves.
    (O) Cylinders shall not be dropped or otherwise roughly handled.
    (P) Unless connected to a manifold, oxygen from a cylinder shall not 
be used without first attaching an oxygen regulator to the cylinder 
valve. Before connecting the regulator to the cylinder valve, the valve 
shall be opened slightly for an instant and then closed. Always stand to 
one side of the outlet when opening the cylinder valve.
    (Q) A hammer or wrench shall not be used to open cylinder valves. If 
valves cannot be opened by hand, the supplier shall be notified.
    (R)(1) Cylinder valves shall not be tampered with nor should any 
attempt be made to repair them. If trouble is experienced, the supplier 
should be sent a report promptly indicating the character of the trouble 
and the cylinder's serial number. Supplier's instructions as to its 
disposition shall be followed.

[[Page 671]]

    (2) Complete removal of the stem from a diaphragm-type cylinder 
valve shall be avoided.
    (iii)(A) Fuel-gas cylinders shall be placed with valve end up 
whenever they are in use. Liquefied gases shall be stored and shipped 
with the valve end up.
    (B) Cylinders shall be handled carefully. Rough handling, knocks, or 
falls are liable to damage the cylinder, valve or safety devices and 
cause leakage.
    (C) Before connecting a regulator to a cylinder valve, the valve 
shall be opened slightly and closed immediately. The valve shall be 
opened while standing to one side of the outlet; never in front of it. 
Never crack a fuel-gas cylinder valve near other welding work or near 
sparks, flame, or other possible sources of ignition.
    (D) Before a regulator is removed from a cylinder valve, the 
cylinder valve shall be closed and the gas released from the regulator.
    (E) Nothing shall be placed on top of an acetylene cylinder when in 
use which may damage the safety device or interfere with the quick 
closing of the valve.
    (F) If cylinders are found to have leaky valves or fittings which 
cannot be stopped by closing of the valve, the cylinders shall be taken 
outdoors away from sources of ignition and slowly emptied.
    (G) A warning should be placed near cylinders having leaking fuse 
plugs or other leaking safety devices not to approach them with a 
lighted cigarette or other source of ignition. Such cylinders should be 
plainly tagged; the supplier should be promptly notified and his 
instructions followed as to their return.
    (H) Safety devices shall not be tampered with.
    (I) Fuel-gas shall never be used from cylinders through torches or 
other devices equipped with shutoff valves without reducing the pressure 
through a suitable regulator attached to the cylinder valve or manifold.
    (J) The cylinder valve shall always be opened slowly.
    (K) An acetylene cylinder valve shall not be opened more than one 
and one-half turns of the spindle, and preferably no more than three-
fourths of a turn.
    (L) Where a special wrench is required it shall be left in position 
on the stem of the valve while the cylinder is in use so that the fuel-
gas flow can be quickly turned off in case of emergency. In the case of 
manifolded or coupled cylinders at least one such wrench shall always be 
available for immediate use.
    (c) Manifolding of cylinders--(1) Fuel-gas manifolds. (i) Manifolds 
shall be approved either separately for each component part or as an 
assembled unit.
    (ii) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section 
fuel-gas cylinders connected to one manifold inside a building shall be 
limited to a total capacity not exceeding 300 pounds (135.9 kg) of 
liquefied petroleum gas or 3,000 cubic feet (84 m \3\) of other fuel-
gas. More than one such manifold with connected cylinders may be located 
in the same room provided the manifolds are at least 50 feet (15 m) 
apart or separated by a noncombustible barrier at least 5 feet (1.5 m) 
high having a fire-resistance rating of at least one-half hour.
    (iii) Fuel-gas cylinders connected to one manifold having an 
aggregate capacity exceeding 300 pounds (135.9 kg) of liquefied 
petroleum gas or 3,000 cubic feet (84 m \3\) of other fuel-gas shall be 
located outdoors, or in a separate building or room constructed in 
accordance with paragraphs (f)(6)(i)(H) and (f)(6)(i)(I) of this 
section.
    (iv) Separate manifold buildings or rooms may also be used for the 
storage of drums of calcium carbide and cylinders containing fuel gases 
as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section. Such buildings or rooms 
shall have no open flames for heating or lighting and shall be well-
ventilated.
    (v) High-pressure fuel-gas manifolds shall be provided with approved 
pressure regulating devices.
    (2) High-pressure oxygen manifolds (for use with cylinders having a 
Department of Transportation service pressure above 200 psig (1.36 
MPa)). (i) Manifolds shall be approved either separately for each 
component part or as an assembled unit.
    (ii) Oxygen manifolds shall not be located in an acetylene generator 
room.

[[Page 672]]

Oxygen manifolds shall be separated from fuel-gas cylinders or 
combustible materials (especially oil or grease), a minimum distance of 
20 feet (6.1 m) or by a noncombustible barrier at least 5 feet (1.5 m) 
high having a fire-resistance rating of at least one-half hour.
    (iii) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2)(iv) of this section, 
oxygen cylinders connected to one manifold shall be limited to a total 
gas capacity of 6,000 cubic feet (168 m \3\). More than one such 
manifold with connected cylinders may be located in the same room 
provided the manifolds are at least 50 feet (15 m) apart or separated by 
a noncombustible barrier at least 5 feet (1.5 m) high having a fire-
resistance rating of at least one-half hour.
    (iv) An oxygen manifold, to which cylinders having an aggregate 
capacity of more than 6,000 cubic feet (168 m \3\) of oxygen are 
connected, should be located outdoors or in a separate noncombustible 
building. Such a manifold, if located inside a building having other 
occupancy, shall be located in a separate room of noncombustible 
construction having a fire-resistance rating of at least one-half hour 
or in an area with no combustible material within 20 feet (6.1 m) of the 
manifold.
    (v) An oxygen manifold or oxygen bulk supply system which has 
storage capacity of more than 13,000 cubic feet (364 m \3\) of oxygen 
(measured at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) and 70  deg.F (21.1  deg.C)), connected 
in service or ready for service, or more than 25,000 cubic feet (700 m 
\3\) of oxygen (measured at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) and 70  deg.F (21.1 
deg.C)), including unconnected reserves on hand at the site, shall 
comply with the provisions of the Standard for Bulk Oxygen Systems at 
Consumer Sites, NFPA No. 566-1965.
    (vi) High-pressure oxygen manifolds shall be provided with approved 
pressure-regulating devices.
    (3) Low-pressure oxygen manifolds (for use with cylinders having a 
Department of Transportation service pressure not exceeding 200 psig 
(1.36 MPa)). (i) Manifolds shall be of substantial construction suitable 
for use with oxygen at a pressure of 250 psig (1.7 MPa). They shall have 
a minimum bursting pressure of 1,000 psig (6.8 MPa) and shall be 
protected by a safety relief device which will relieve at a maximum 
pressure of 500 psig (3.4 MPa). DOT-4L200 cylinders have safety devices 
which relieve at a maximum pressure of 250 psig (1.7 MPa) (or 235 psig 
(1.6 MPa) if vacuum insulation is used).
    (ii) Hose and hose connections subject to cylinder pressure shall 
comply with paragraph (e)(5) of this section. Hose shall have a minimum 
bursting pressure of 1,000 psig (6.8 MPa).
    (iii) The assembled manifold including leads shall be tested and 
proven gas-tight at a pressure of 300 psig (2.04 MPa). The fluid used 
for testing oxygen manifolds shall be oil-free and not combustible.
    (iv) The location of manifolds shall comply with paragraphs 
(c)(2)(ii), (c)(2)(iii), (c)(2)(iv), and (c)(2)(v) of this section.
    (v) The following sign shall be conspicuously posted at each 
manifold:

Low-Pressure Manifold
Do Not Connect High-Pressure Cylinders
Maximum Pressure--250 psig (1.7 MPa)

    (4) Portable outlet headers. (i) Portable outlet headers shall not 
be used indoors except for temporary service where the conditions 
preclude a direct supply from outlets located on the service piping 
system.
    (ii) Each outlet on the service piping from which oxygen or fuel-gas 
is withdrawn to supply a portable outlet header shall be equipped with a 
readily accessible shutoff valve.
    (iii) Hose and hose connections used for connecting the portable 
outlet header to the service piping shall comply with paragraph (e)(5) 
of this section.
    (iv) Master shutoff valves for both oxygen and fuel-gas shall be 
provided at the entry end of the portable outlet header.
    (v) Portable outlet headers for fuel-gas service shall be provided 
with an approved hydraulic back-pressure valve installed at the inlet 
and preceding the service outlets, unless an approved pressure-reducing 
regulator, an approved back-flow check valve, or an approved hydraulic 
back-pressure valve is installed at each outlet. Outlets provided on 
headers for oxygen service may be fitted for use with pressure-reducing 
regulators or for direct hose connection.

[[Page 673]]

    (vi) Each service outlet on portable outlet headers shall be 
provided with a valve assembly that includes a detachable outlet seal 
cap, chained or otherwise attached to the body of the valve.
    (vii) Materials and fabrication procedures for portable outlet 
headers shall comply with paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), and (d)(5) of this 
section.
    (viii) Portable outlet headers shall be provided with frames which 
will support the equipment securely in the correct operating position 
and protect them from damage during handling and operation.
    (5) Manifold operation procedures. (i) Cylinder manifolds shall be 
installed under the supervision of someone familiar with the proper 
practices with reference to their construction and use.
    (ii) All manifolds and parts used in methods of manifolding shall be 
used only for the gas or gases for which they are approved.
    (iii) When acetylene cylinders are coupled, approved flash arresters 
shall be installed between each cylinder and the coupler block. For 
outdoor use only, and when the number of cylinders coupled does not 
exceed three, one flash arrester installed between the coupler block and 
regulator is acceptable.
    (iv) The aggregate capacity of fuel-gas cylinders connected to a 
portable manifold inside a building shall not exceed 3,000 cubic feet 
(84 m \3\) of gas.
    (v) Acetylene and liquefied fuel-gas cylinders shall be manifolded 
in a vertical position.
    (vi) The pressure in the gas cylinders connected to and discharged 
simultaneously through a common manifold shall be approximately equal.
    (d) Service piping systems--(1) Materials and design. (i)(A) Piping 
and fittings shall comply with section 2, Industrial Gas and Air Piping 
Systems, of the American National Standard Code for Pressure Piping ANSI 
B31.1, 1967, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6, insofar as it does not conflict with paragraphs 
(d)(1)(i)(A)(1) and (d)(1)(i)(A)(2) of this section:
    (1) Pipe shall be at least Schedule 40 and fittings shall be at 
least standard weight in sizes up to and including 6-inch nominal.
    (2) Copper tubing shall be Types K or L in accordance with the 
Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube, ASTM B88-66a, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (B) Piping shall be steel, wrought iron, brass or copper pipe, or 
seamless copper, brass or stainless steel tubing, except as provided in 
paragraphs (d)(1)(ii) and (d)(1)(iii) of this section.
    (ii)(A) Oxygen piping and fittings at pressures in excess of 700 psi 
(4.8 MPa), shall be stainless steel or copper alloys.
    (B) Hose connections and hose complying with paragraph (e)(5) of 
this section may be used to connect the outlet of a manifold pressure 
regulator to piping providing the working pressure of the piping is 250 
psi (1.7 MPa) or less and the length of the hose does not exceed 5 feet 
(1.5 m). Hose shall have a minimum bursting pressure of 1,000 psig (6.8 
MPa).
    (C) When oxygen is supplied to a service piping system from a low-
pressure oxygen manifold without an intervening pressure regulating 
device, the piping system shall have a minimum design pressure of 250 
psig (1.7 MPa). A pressure regulating device shall be used at each 
station outlet when the connected equipment is for use at pressures less 
than 250 psig (1.7 MPa).
    (iii)(A) Piping for acetylene or acetylenic compounds shall be steel 
or wrought iron.
    (B) Unalloyed copper shall not be used for acetylene or acetylenic 
compounds except in listed equipment.
    (2) Piping joints. (i) Joints in steel or wrought iron piping shall 
be welded, threaded or flanged. Fittings, such as ells, tees, couplings, 
and unions, may be rolled, forged or cast steel, malleable iron or 
nodular iron. Gray or white cast iron fittings are prohibited.
    (ii) Joints in brass or copper pipe shall be welded, brazed, 
threaded, or flanged. If of the socket type, they shall be brazed with 
silver-brazing alloy or similar high melting point (not less than 
800 deg.F (427 deg.C)) filler metal.
    (iii) Joints in seamless copper, brass, or stainless steel tubing 
shall be approved gas tubing fittings or the joints shall be brazed. If 
of the socket type, they shall be brazed with silver-brazing

[[Page 674]]

alloy or similar high melting point (not less than 800 deg.F 
(427 deg.C)) filler metal.
    (3) Installation. (i) Distribution lines shall be installed and 
maintained in a safe operating condition.
    (ii) All piping shall be run as directly as practicable, protected 
against physical damage, proper allowance being made for expansion and 
contraction, jarring and vibration. Pipe laid underground in earth shall 
be located below the frost line and protected against corrosion. After 
assembly, piping shall be thoroughly blown out with air, nitrogen, or 
carbon dioxide to remove foreign materials. For oxygen piping, only oil-
free air, oil-free nitrogen, or oil-free carbon dioxide shall be used.
    (iii) Only piping which has been welded or brazed shall be installed 
in tunnels, trenches or ducts. Shutoff valves shall be located outside 
such conduits. Oxygen piping may be placed in the same tunnel, trench or 
duct with fuel-gas pipelines, provided there is good natural or forced 
ventilation.
    (iv) Low points in piping carrying moist gas shall be drained into 
drip pots constructed so as to permit pumping or draining out the 
condensate at necessary intervals. Drain valves shall be installed for 
this purpose having outlets normally closed with screw caps or plugs. No 
open end valves or petcocks shall be used, except that in drips located 
out of doors, underground, and not readily accessible, valves may be 
used at such points if they are equipped with means to secure them in 
the closed position. Pipes leading to the surface of the ground shall be 
cased or jacketed where necessary to prevent loosening or breaking.
    (v) Gas cocks or valves shall be provided for all buildings at 
points where they will be readily accessible for shutting off the gas 
supply to these buildings in any emergency. There shall also be provided 
a shutoff valve in the discharge line from the generator, gas holder, 
manifold or other source of supply.
    (vi) Shutoff valves shall not be installed in safety relief lines in 
such a manner that the safety relief device can be rendered ineffective.
    (vii) Fittings and lengths of pipe shall be examined internally 
before assembly and, if necessary freed from scale or dirt. Oxygen 
piping and fittings shall be washed out with a suitable solution which 
will effectively remove grease and dirt but will not react with oxygen. 
Hot water solutions of caustic soda or trisodium phosphate are effective 
cleaning agents for this purpose.
    (viii) Piping shall be thoroughly blown out after assembly to remove 
foreign materials. For oxygen piping, oil-free air, oil-free nitrogen, 
or oil-free carbon dioxide shall be used. For other piping, air or inert 
gas may be used.
    (ix) When flammable gas lines or other parts of equipment are being 
purged of air or gas, open lights or other sources of ignition shall not 
be permitted near uncapped openings.
    (x) No welding or cutting shall be performed on an acetylene or 
oxygen pipeline, including the attachment of hangers or supports, until 
the line has been purged. Only oil-free air, oil-free nitrogen, or oil-
free carbon dioxide shall be used to purge oxygen lines.
    (4) Painting and signs. (i) Underground pipe and tubing and outdoor 
ferrous pipe and tubing shall be covered or painted with a suitable 
material for protection against corrosion.
    (ii) Aboveground piping systems shall be marked in accordance with 
the American National Standard Scheme for the Identification of Piping 
Systems, ANSI A13.1-1956, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (iii) Station outlets shall be marked to indicate the name of the 
gas.
    (5) Testing. (i) Piping systems shall be tested and proved gastight 
at 1\1/2\ times the maximum operating pressure, and shall be thoroughly 
purged of air before being placed in service. The material used for 
testing oxygen lines shall be oil free and noncombustible. Flames shall 
not be used to detect leaks.
    (ii) When flammable gas lines or other parts of equipment are being 
purged of air or gas, sources of ignition shall not be permitted near 
uncapped openings.
    (e) Protective equipment, hose, and regulators--(1) General. 
Equipment shall be installed and used only in the service for which it 
is approved and as recommended by the manufacturer.

[[Page 675]]

    (2) Pressure relief devices. Service piping systems shall be 
protected by pressure relief devices set to function at not more than 
the design pressure of the systems and discharging upwards to a safe 
location.
    (3) Piping protective equipment. (i) The fuel-gas and oxygen piping 
systems, including portable outlet headers shall incorporate the 
protective equipment shown in Figures Q-1, Q-2, and Q-3. When only a 
portion of a fuel-gas system is to be used with oxygen, only that 
portion need comply with this paragraph (e)(3)(i).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.084

    (ii) Approved protective equipment (designated P<INF>F</INF> in 
Figures Q-1, Q-2, and Q-3) shall be installed in fuel-gas piping to 
prevent:
    (A) Backflow of oxygen into the fuel-gas supply system;
    (B) Passage of a flash back into the fuel-gas supply system; and
    (C) Excessive back pressure of oxygen in the fuel-gas supply system. 
The three functions of the protective equipment may be combined in one 
device or may be provided by separate devices.
    (1) The protective equipment shall be located in the main supply 
line, as in Figure Q-1 or at the head of each branch line, as in Figure 
Q-2 or at each location where fuel-gas is withdrawn, as in Figure Q-3. 
Where branch lines are of 2-inch pipe size or larger or of substantial 
length, protective equipment (designated as P<INF>F</INF>) shall be 
located as shown in either Q-2 and Q-3.
    (2) Backflow protection shall be provided by an approved device that 
will prevent oxygen from flowing into the

[[Page 676]]

fuel-gas system or fuel from flowing into the oxygen system (see 
S<INF>F</INF>, Figures Q-l and Q-2).
    (3) Flash-back protection shall be provided by an approved device 
that will prevent flame from passing into the fuel-gas system.
    (4) Back-pressure protection shall be provided by an approved 
pressure-relief device set at a pressure not greater than the pressure 
rating of the backflow or the flashback protection device, whichever is 
lower. The pressure-relief device shall be located on the downstream 
side of the backflow and flashback protection devices. The vent from the 
pressure-relief device shall be at least as large as the relief device 
inlet and shall be installed without low points that may collect 
moisture. If low points are unavoidable, drip pots with drains closed 
with screw plugs or caps shall be installed at the low points. The vent 
terminus shall not endanger personnel or property through gas discharge; 
shall be located away from ignition sources; and shall terminate in a 
hood or bend.
    (iii) If pipeline protective equipment incorporates a liquid, the 
liquid level shall be maintained, and a suitable antifreeze may be used 
to prevent freezing.
    (iv) Fuel gas for use with equipment not requiring oxygen shall be 
withdrawn upstream of the piping protective devices.
    (4) Station outlet protective equipment. (i) A check valve, pressure 
regulator, hydraulic seal, or combination of these devices shall be 
provided at each station outlet, including those on portable headers, to 
prevent backflow, as shown in Figures Q-1, Q-2, and Q-3 and designated 
as S<INF>F</INF> and S<INF>O</INF>.
    (ii) When approved pipeline protective equipment (designated 
P<INF>F</INF>) is located at the station outlet as in Figure Q-3, no 
additional check valve, pressure regulator, or hydraulic seal is 
required.
    (iii) A shutoff valve (designated V<INF>F</INF> and V<INF>O</INF>) 
shall be installed at each station outlet and shall be located on the 
upstream side of other station outlet equipment.
    (iv) If the station outlet is equipped with a detachable regulator, 
the outlet shall terminate in a union connection that complies with the 
Regulator Connection Standards, 1958, Compressed Gas Association, which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (v) If the station outlet is connected directly to a hose, the 
outlet shall terminate in a union connection complying with the Standard 
Hose Connection Specifications, 1957, Compressed Gas Association, which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (vi) Station outlets may terminate in pipe threads to which 
permanent connections are to be made, such as to a machine.
    (vii) Station outlets shall be equipped with a detachable outlet 
seal cap secured in place. This cap shall be used to seal the outlet 
except when a hose, a regulator, or piping is attached.
    (viii) Where station outlets are equipped with approved backflow and 
flashback protective devices, as many as four torches may be supplied 
from one station outlet through rigid piping, provided each outlet from 
such piping is equipped with a shutoff valve and provided the fuel-gas 
capacity of any one torch does not exceed 15 cubic feet (0.42 
m<SUP>3</SUP>) per hour. This paragraph (e)(4)(viii) does not apply to 
machines.
    (5) Hose and hose connections. (i) Hose for oxy-fuel gas service 
shall comply with the Specification for Rubber Welding Hose, 1958, 
Compressed Gas Association and Rubber Manufacturers Association, which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) When parallel lengths of oxygen and acetylene hose are taped 
together for convenience and to prevent tangling, not more than 4 inches 
(10.2 cm) out of 12 inches (30.5 cm) shall be covered by tape.
    (iii) Hose connections shall comply with the Standard Hose 
Connection Specifications, 1957, Compressed Gas Association.
    (iv) Hose connections shall be clamped or otherwise securely 
fastened in a manner that will withstand, without leakage, twice the 
pressure to which they are normally subjected in service, but in no case 
less than a pressure of 300 psi (2.04 MPa). Oil-free air or an oil-free 
inert gas shall be used for the test.
    (v) Hose showing leaks, burns, worn places, or other defects 
rendering it

[[Page 677]]

unfit for service shall be repaired or replaced.
    (6) Pressure-reducing regulators. (i) Pressure-reducing regulators 
shall be used only for the gas and pressures for which they are 
intended. The regulator inlet connections shall comply with Regulator 
Connection Standards, 1958, Compressed Gas Association.
    (ii) When regulators or parts of regulators, including gages, need 
repair, the work shall be performed by skilled mechanics who have been 
properly instructed.
    (iii) Gages on oxygen regulators shall be marked ``USE NO OIL.''
    (iv) Union nuts and connections on regulators shall be inspected 
before use to detect faulty seats which may cause leakage of gas when 
the regulators are attached to the cylinder valves.
    (f) Acetylene generators--(1) Approval and marking. (i) Generators 
shall be of approved construction and shall be plainly marked with the 
maximum rate of acetylene in cubic feet per hour for which they are 
designed; the weight and size of carbide necessary for a single charge; 
the manufacturer's name and address; and the name or number of the type 
of generator.
    (ii) Carbide shall be of the size marked on the generator nameplate.
    (2) Rating and pressure limitations. (i) The total hourly output of 
a generator shall not exceed the rate for which it is approved and 
marked. Unless specifically approved for higher ratings, carbide-feed 
generators shall be rated at 1 cubic foot (0.028 m<SUP>3</SUP>) per hour 
per pound of carbide required for a single complete charge.
    (ii) Relief valves shall be regularly operated to insure proper 
functioning. Relief valves for generating chambers shall be set to open 
at a pressure not in excess of 15 psig (103 kPa gauge pressure). Relief 
valves for hydraulic back pressure valves shall be set to open at a 
pressure not in excess of 20 psig (137 kPa gauge pressure).
    (iii) Nonautomatic generators shall not be used for generating 
acetylene at pressures exceeding l psig (7 kPa gauge pressure), and all 
water overflows shall be visible.
    (3) Location. The space around the generator shall be ample for 
free, unobstructed operation and maintenance and shall permit ready 
adjustment and charging.
    (4) Stationary acetylene generators (automatic and nonautomatic). 
(i)(A) The foundation shall be so arranged that the generator will be 
level and so that no excessive strain will be placed on the generator or 
its connections. Acetylene generators shall be grounded.
    (B) Generators shall be placed where water will not freeze. The use 
of common salt (sodium chloride) or other corrosive chemicals for 
protection against freezing is not permitted. (For heating systems see 
paragraph (f)(6)(iii) of this section.)
    (C) Except when generators are prepared in accordance with paragraph 
(f)(7)(v) of this section, sources of ignition shall be prohibited in 
outside generator houses or inside generator rooms.
    (D) Water shall not be supplied through a continuous connection to 
the generator except when the generator is provided with an adequate 
open overflow or automatic water shutoff which will effectively prevent 
overfilling of the generator. Where a noncontinuous connection is used, 
the supply line shall terminate at a point not less than 2 inches (5 cm) 
above the regularly provided opening for filling so that the water can 
be observed as it enters the generator.
    (E) Unless otherwise specifically approved, generators shall not be 
fitted with continuous drain connections leading to sewers, but shall 
discharge through an open connection into a suitably vented outdoor 
receptacle or residue pit which may have such connections. An open 
connection for the sludge drawoff is desirable to enable the generator 
operator to observe leakage of generating water from the drain valve or 
sludge cock.
    (ii)(A) Each generator shall be provided with a vent pipe.
    (B) The escape or relief pipe shall be rigidly installed without 
traps and so that any condensation will drain back to the generator.
    (C) The escape or relief pipe shall be carried full size to a 
suitable point outside the building. It shall terminate in a hood or 
bend located at least 12 feet (3.7 m) above the ground, preferably

[[Page 678]]

above the roof, and as far away as practicable from windows or other 
openings into buildings and as far away as practicable from sources of 
ignition such as flues or chimneys and tracks used by locomotives. 
Generating chamber relief pipes shall not be inter-connected but shall 
be separately led to the outside air. The hood or bend shall be so 
constructed that it will not be obstructed by rain, snow, ice, insects, 
or birds. The outlet shall be at least 3 feet (0.9 m) from combustible 
construction.
    (iii)(A) Gas holders shall be constructed on the gasometer 
principle, the bell being suitably guided. The gas bell shall move 
freely without tendency to bind and shall have a clearance of at least 2 
inches (5 cm) from the shell.
    (B) The gas holder may be located in the generator room, in a 
separate room or out of doors. In order to prevent collapse of the gas 
bell or infiltration of air due to a vacuum caused by the compressor or 
booster pump or cooling of the gas, a compressor or booster cutoff shall 
be provided at a point 12 inches (0.3 m) or more above the landing point 
of the bell. When the gas holder is located indoors, the room shall be 
ventilated in accordance with paragraph (f)(6)(ii) of this section and 
heated and lighted in accordance with paragraphs (f)(6)(iii) and 
(f)(6)(iv) of this section.
    (C) When the gas holder is not located within a heated building, gas 
holder seals shall be protected against freezing.
    (D) Means shall be provided to stop the generator-feeding mechanism 
before the gas holder reaches the upper limit of its travel.
    (E) When the gas holder is connected to only one generator, the gas 
capacity of the holder shall be not less than one-third of the hourly 
rating of the generator.
    (F) If acetylene is used from the gas holder without increase in 
pressure at some points but with increase in pressure by a compressor or 
booster pump at other points, approved piping protective devices shall 
be installed in each supply line. The low-pressure protective device 
shall be located between the gas holder and the shop piping, and the 
medium-pressure protective device shall be located between the 
compressor or booster pump and the shop piping (see Figure     Q-4). 
Approved protective equipment (designated P<INF>F</INF>) is used to 
prevent: Backflow of oxygen into the fuel-gas supply system; passage of 
a flashback into the fuel-gas supply system; and excessive back pressure 
of oxygen in the fuel-gas supply system. The three functions of the 
protective equipment may be combined in one device or may be provided by 
separate devices.

[[Page 679]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC27OC91.085


    (iv)(A) The compressor or booster system shall be of an approved 
type.
    (B) Wiring and electric equipment in compressor or booster pump 
rooms or enclosures shall conform to the provisions of subpart S of this 
part for Class I, Division 2 locations.
    (C) Compressors and booster pump equipment shall be located in well-
ventilated areas away from open flames, electrical or mechanical sparks, 
or other ignition sources.
    (D) Compressor or booster pumps shall be provided with pressure 
relief valves which will relieve pressure exceeding 15 psig (103 kPa 
gauge pressure) to a safe outdoor location as provided in paragraph 
(f)(4)(ii) of this section, or by returning the gas to the inlet side or 
to the gas supply source.
    (E) Compressor or booster pump discharge outlets shall be provided 
with approved protective equipment. (See paragraph (e) of this section.)
    (5) Portable acetylene generators. (i)(A) All portable generators 
shall be of a type approved for portable use.
    (B) Portable generators shall not be used within 10 feet (3 m) of 
combustible material other than the floor.
    (C) Portable generators shall not be used in rooms of total volume 
less than 35 times the total gas-generating capacity per charge of all 
generators in the room. Generators shall not be used in rooms having a 
ceiling height of less than 10 feet (3 m). (To obtain the gas-generating 
capacity in cubic feet per charge, multiply the pounds of carbide per 
charge by 4.5.)
    (D) Portable generators shall be protected against freezing. The use 
of salt or other corrosive chemical to prevent freezing is prohibited.
    (ii)(A) Portable generators shall be cleaned and recharged and the 
air mixture blown off outside buildings.
    (B) When charged with carbide, portable generators shall not be 
moved by crane or derrick.
    (C) When not in use, portable generators shall not be stored in 
rooms in which open flames are used unless the generators contain no 
carbide and have been thoroughly purged of acetylene. Storage rooms 
shall be well ventilated.
    (D) When portable acetylene generators are to be transported and 
operated on vehicles, they shall be securely anchored to the vehicles. 
If transported

[[Page 680]]

by truck, the motor shall be turned off during charging, cleaning, and 
generating periods.
    (E) Portable generators shall be located at a safe distance from the 
welding position so that they will not be exposed to sparks, slag, or 
misdirection of the torch flame or overheating from hot materials or 
processes.
    (6) Outside generator houses and inside generator rooms for 
stationary acetylene generators. (i)(A) No opening in any outside 
generator house shall be located within 5 feet (1.5 m) of any opening in 
another building.
    (B) Walls, floors, and roofs of outside generator houses shall be of 
noncombustible construction.
    (C) When a part of the generator house is to be used for the storage 
or manifolding of oxygen cylinders, the space to be so occupied shall be 
separated from the generator or carbide storage section by partition 
walls continuous from floor to roof or ceiling, of the type of 
construction stated in paragraph (f)(6)(i)(H) of this section. Such 
separation walls shall be without openings and shall be joined to the 
floor, other walls and ceiling or roof in a manner to effect a permanent 
gas-tight joint.
    (D) Exit doors shall be located so as to be readily accessible in 
case of emergency.
    (E) Explosion venting for outside generator houses and inside 
generator rooms shall be provided in exterior walls or roofs. The 
venting areas shall be equal to not less than 1 square foot (0.09 m\2\) 
per 50 cubic feet (1.4 m\3\) of room volume and may consist of any one 
or any combination of the following: Walls of light, noncombustible 
material preferably single-thickness, single-strength glass; lightly 
fastened hatch covers; lightly fastened swinging doors in exterior walls 
opening outward; lightly fastened walls or roof designed to relieve at a 
maximum pressure of 25 pounds per square foot (0.001 MPa).
    (F) The installation of acetylene generators within buildings shall 
be restricted to buildings not exceeding one story in height; provided, 
however, that this will not be construed as prohibiting such 
installations on the roof or top floor of a building exceeding such 
height.
    (G) Generators installed inside buildings shall be enclosed in a 
separate room.
    (H) The walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings of inside generator 
rooms shall be of noncombustible construction having a fire-resistance 
rating of at least 1 hour. The walls or partitions shall be continuous 
from floor to ceiling and shall be securely anchored. At least one wall 
of the room shall be an exterior wall.
    (I) Openings from an inside generator room to other parts of the 
building shall be protected by a swinging type, self-closing fire door 
for a Class B opening and having a rating of at least 1 hour. Windows in 
partitions shall be wired glass and approved metal frames with fixed 
sash. Installation shall be in accordance with the Standard for the 
Installation of Fire Doors and Windows, NFPA 80-1970, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) Inside generator rooms or outside generator houses shall be 
well ventilated with vents located at floor and ceiling levels.
    (iii) Heating shall be by steam, hot water, enclosed electrically 
heated elements or other indirect means. Heating by flames or fires 
shall be prohibited in outside generator houses or inside generator 
rooms, or in any enclosure communicating with them.
    (iv)(A) Generator houses or rooms shall have natural light during 
daylight hours. Where artificial lighting is necessary it shall be 
restricted to electric lamps installed in a fixed position. Unless 
specifically approved for use in atmospheres containing acetylene, such 
lamps shall be provided with enclosures of glass or other noncombustible 
material so designed and constructed as to prevent gas vapors from 
reaching the lamp or socket and to resist breakage. Rigid conduit with 
threaded connections shall be used.
    (B) Lamps installed outside of wired-glass panels set in gas-tight 
frames in the exterior walls or roof of the generator house or room are 
acceptable.
    (v) Electric switches, telephones, and all other electrical 
apparatus which may cause a spark, unless specifically

[[Page 681]]

approved for use inside acetylene generator rooms, shall be located 
outside the generator house or in a room or space separated from the 
generator room by a gas-tight partition, except that where the generator 
system is designed so that no carbide fill opening or other part of the 
generator is open to the generator house or room during the operation of 
the generator, and so that residue is carried in closed piping from the 
residue discharge valve to a point outside the generator house or room, 
electrical equipment in the generator house or room shall conform to the 
provisions of subpart S of this part for Class I, Division 2 locations.
    (7) Maintenance and operation. (i) Unauthorized persons shall not be 
permitted in outside generator houses or inside generator rooms.
    (A) Operating instructions shall be posted in a conspicuous place 
near the generator or kept in a suitable place available for ready 
reference.
    (B) When recharging generators the order of operations specified in 
the instructions supplied by the manufacturer shall be followed.
    (C) In the case of batch-type generators, when the charge of carbide 
is exhausted and before additional carbide is added, the generating 
chamber shall always be flushed out with water, renewing the water 
supply in accordance with the instruction card furnished by the 
manufacturer.
    (D) The water-carbide residue mixture drained from the generator 
shall not be discharged into sewer pipes or stored in areas near open 
flames. Clear water from residue settling pits may be discharged into 
sewer pipes.
    (ii) The carbide added each time the generator is recharged shall be 
sufficient to refill the space provided for carbide without ramming the 
charge. Steel or other ferrous tools shall not be used in distributing 
the charge.
    (iii) Generator water chambers shall be kept filled to proper level 
at all times except while draining during the recharging operation.
    (iv) Whenever repairs are to be made or the generator is to be 
charged or carbide is to be removed, the water chamber shall be filled 
to the proper level.
    (v) Previous to making repairs involving welding, soldering, or 
other hot work or other operations which produce a source of ignition, 
the carbide charge and feed mechanism shall be completely removed. All 
acetylene shall be expelled by completely flooding the generator shell 
with water and the generator shall be disconnected from the piping 
system. The generator shall be kept filled with water, if possible, or 
positioned to hold as much water as possible.
    (vi) Hot repairs shall not be made in a room where there are other 
generators unless all the generators and piping have been purged of 
acetylene.
    (g) Calcium carbide storage--(1) Packaging. (i) Calcium carbide 
shall be contained in metal packages of sufficient strength to prevent 
rupture. The packages shall be provided with a screw top or equivalent. 
These packages shall be constructed water- and air-tight. Solder shall 
not be used in such a manner that the package would fail if exposed to 
fire.
    (ii) Packages containing calcium carbide shall be conspicuously 
marked ``Calcium Carbide--Dangerous If Not Kept Dry'' or with equivalent 
warning.
    (iii) Caution: Metal tools, even the so-called spark resistant type 
may cause ignition of an acetylene and air mixture when opening carbide 
containers.
    (iv) Sprinkler systems shall not be installed in carbide storage 
rooms.
    (2) Storage indoors. (i) Calcium carbide in quantities not to exceed 
600 pounds (272.2 kg) may be stored indoors in dry, waterproof, and 
well-ventilated locations.
    (A) Calcium carbide not exceeding 600 pounds (272.2 kg) may be 
stored indoors in the same room with fuel-gas cylinders.
    (B) Packages of calcium carbide, except for one of each size, shall 
be kept sealed. The seals shall not be broken when there is carbide in 
excess of 1 pound (0.5 kg) in any other unsealed package of the same 
size of carbide in the room.
    (ii) Calcium carbide exceeding 600 pounds (272.2 kg) but not 
exceeding 5,000 pounds (2,268 kg) shall be stored:
    (A) In accordance with paragraph (g)(2)(iii) of this section;

[[Page 682]]

    (B) In an inside generator room or outside generator house; or
    (C) In a separate room in a one-story building which may contain 
other occupancies, but without cellar or basement beneath the carbide 
storage section. Such rooms shall be constructed in accordance with 
paragraphs (f)(6)(i)(H) and (f)(6)(i)(I) of this section and ventilated 
in accordance with paragraph (f)(6)(ii) of this section. These rooms 
shall be used for no other purpose.
    (iii) Calcium carbide in excess of 5,000 pounds (2,268 kg) shall be 
stored in one-story buildings without cellar or basement and used for no 
other purpose, or in outside generator houses. If the storage building 
is of noncombustible construction, it may adjoin other one-story 
buildings if separated therefrom by unpierced firewalls; if it is 
detached less than 10 feet (3 m) from such building or buildings, there 
shall be no opening in any of the mutually exposing sides of such 
buildings within 10 feet (3 m). If the storage building is of 
combustible construction, it shall be at least 20 feet (6.1 m) from any 
other one- or two-story building, and at least 30 feet (9.1 m) from any 
other building exceeding two stories.
    (3) Storage outdoors. (i) Calcium carbide in unopened metal 
containers may be stored outdoors.
    (ii) Carbide containers to be stored outdoors shall be examined to 
make sure that they are in good condition. Periodic reexaminations shall 
be made for rusting or other damage to a container that might affect its 
water or air tightness.
    (iii) The bottom tier of each row shall be placed on wooden planking 
or equivalent, so that the containers will not come in contact with the 
ground or ground water.
    (iv) Containers of carbide which have been in storage the longest 
shall be used first.
[55 FR 13696, Apr. 11, 1990, as amended at 55 FR 32015, Aug 6, 1990; 55 
FR 46053, Nov. 1, 1990; 61 FR 9241, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.254  Arc welding and cutting.

    (a) General--(1) Equipment selection. Welding equipment shall be 
chosen for safe application to the work to be done as specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (2) Installation. Welding equipment shall be installed safely as 
specified by paragraph (c) of this section.
    (3) Instruction. Workmen designated to operate arc welding equipment 
shall have been properly instructed and qualified to operate such 
equipment as specified in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (b) Application of arc welding equipment--(1) General. Assurance of 
consideration of safety in design is obtainable by choosing apparatus 
complying with the Requirements for Electric Arc-Welding Apparatus, NEMA 
EW-1-1962, National Electrical Manufacturers Association or the Safety 
Standard for Transformer-Type Arc-Welding Machines, ANSI C33.2--1956, 
Underwriters' Laboratories, both of which are incorporated by reference 
as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Environmental conditions. (i) Standard machines for arc welding 
service shall be designed and constructed to carry their rated load with 
rated temperature rises where the temperature of the cooling air does 
not exceed 40  deg.C (104  deg.F) and where the altitude does not exceed 
3,300 feet (1,005.8 m), and shall be suitable for operation in 
atmospheres containing gases, dust, and light rays produced by the 
welding arc.
    (ii) Unusual service conditions may exist, and in such circumstances 
machines shall be especially designed to safely meet the requirements of 
the service. Chief among these conditions are:
    (A) Exposure to unusually corrosive fumes.
    (B) Exposure to steam or excessive humidity.
    (C) Exposure to excessive oil vapor.
    (D) Exposure to flammable gases.
    (E) Exposure to abnormal vibration or shock.
    (F) Exposure to excessive dust.
    (G) Exposure to weather.
    (H) Exposure to unusual seacoast or shipboard conditions.
    (3) Voltage. The following limits shall not be exceeded:
    (i) Alternating-current machines
    (A) Manual arc welding and cutting--80 volts.

[[Page 683]]

    (B) Automatic (machine or mechanized) arc welding and cutting--100 
volts.
    (ii) Direct-current machines
    (A) Manual arc welding and cutting--100 volts.
    (B) Automatic (machine or mechanized) arc welding and cutting-100 
volts.
    (iii) When special welding and cutting processes require values of 
open circuit voltages higher than the above, means shall be provided to 
prevent the operator from making accidental contact with the high 
voltage by adequate insulation or other means.
    (iv) For a.c. welding under wet conditions or warm surroundings 
where perspiration is a factor, the use of reliable automatic controls 
for reducing no load voltage is recommended to reduce the shock hazard.
    (4) Design. (i) A controller integrally mounted in an electric motor 
driven welder shall have capacity for carrying rated motor current, 
shall be capable of making and interrupting stalled rotor current of the 
motor, and may serve as the running overcurrent device if provided with 
the number of overcurrent units as specified by subpart S of this part.
    (ii) On all types of arc welding machines, control apparatus shall 
be enclosed except for the operating wheels, levers, or handles.
    (iii) Input power terminals, tap change devices and live metal parts 
connected to input circuits shall be completely enclosed and accessible 
only by means of tools.
    (iv) Terminals for welding leads should be protected from accidental 
electrical contact by personnel or by metal objects, i.e., vehicles, 
crane hooks, etc. Protection may be obtained by use of: Dead-front 
receptacles for plug connections; recessed openings with nonremovable 
hinged covers; heavy insulating sleeving or taping or other equivalent 
electrical and mechanical protection. If a welding lead terminal which 
is intended to be used exclusively for connection to the work is 
connected to the grounded enclosure, it must be done by a conductor at 
least two AWG sizes smaller than the grounding conductor and the 
terminal shall be marked to indicate that it is grounded.
    (v) No connections for portable control devices such as push buttons 
to be carried by the operator shall be connected to an a.c. circuit of 
higher than 120 volts. Exposed metal parts of portable control devices 
operating on circuits above 50 volts shall be grounded by a grounding 
conductor in the control cable.
    (vi) Auto transformers or a.c. reactors shall not be used to draw 
welding current directly from any a.c. power source having a voltage 
exceeding 80 volts.
    (c) Installation of arc weldinq equipment--(1) General. Installation 
including power supply shall be in accordance with the requirements of 
subpart S of this part.
    (2) Grounding. (i) The frame or case of the welding machine (except 
engine-driven machines) shall be grounded under the conditions and 
according to the methods prescribed in subpart S of this part.
    (ii) Conduits containing electrical conductors shall not be used for 
completing a work-lead circuit. Pipelines shall not be used as a 
permanent part of a work-lead circuit, but may be used during 
construction, extension or repair providing current is not carried 
through threaded joints, flanged bolted joints, or caulked joints and 
that special precautions are used to avoid sparking at connection of the 
work-lead cable.
    (iii) Chains, wire ropes, cranes, hoists, and elevators shall not be 
used to carry welding current.
    (iv) Where a structure, conveyor, or fixture is regularly employed 
as a welding current return circuit, joints shall be bonded or provided 
with adequate current collecting devices.
    (v) All ground connections shall be checked to determine that they 
are mechanically strong and electrically adequate for the required 
current.
    (3) Supply connections and conductors. (i) A disconnecting switch or 
controller shall be provided at or near each welding machine which is 
not equipped with such a switch or controller mounted as an integral 
part of the machine. The

[[Page 684]]

switch shall be in accordance with subpart S of this part. Overcurrent 
protection shall be provided as specified in subpart S of this part. A 
disconnect switch with overload protection or equivalent disconnect and 
protection means, permitted by subpart S of this part, shall be provided 
for each outlet intended for connection to a portable welding machine.
    (ii) For individual welding machines, the rated current-carrying 
capacity of the supply conductors shall be not less than the rated 
primary current of the welding machines.
    (iii) For groups of welding machines, the rated current-carrying 
capacity of conductors may be less than the sum of the rated primary 
currents of the welding machines supplied. The conductor rating shall be 
determined in each case according to the machine loading based on the 
use to be made of each welding machine and the allowance permissible in 
the event that all the welding machines supplied by the conductors will 
not be in use at the same time.
    (iv) In operations involving several welders on one structure, d.c. 
welding process requirements may require the use of both polarities; or 
supply circuit limitations for a.c. welding may require distribution of 
machines among the phases of the supply circuit. In such cases no load 
voltages between electrode holders will be 2 times normal in d.c. or 1, 
1.41, 1.73, or 2 times normal on a.c. machines. Similar voltage 
differences will exist if both a.c. and d.c. welding are done on the 
same structure.
    (A) All d.c. machines shall be connected with the same polarity.
    (B) All a.c. machines shall be connected to the same phase of the 
supply circuit and with the same instantaneous polarity.
    (d) Operation and maintenance--(1) General. Workmen assigned to 
operate or maintain arc welding equipment shall be acquainted with the 
requirements of this section and with Sec. 1910.252 (a), (b) and (c) of 
this part; if doing gas-shielded arc welding, also Recommended Safe 
Practices for Gas-Shielded Arc Welding, A6.1-1966, American Welding 
Society, which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Machine hook up. Before starting operations all connections to 
the machine shall be checked to make certain they are properly made. The 
work lead shall be firmly attached to the work; magnetic work clamps 
shall be freed from adherent metal particles of spatter on contact 
surfaces. Coiled welding cable shall be spread out before use to avoid 
serious overheating and damage to insulation.
    (3) Grounding. Grounding of the welding machine frame shall be 
checked. Special attention shall be given to safety ground connections 
of portable machines.
    (4) Leaks. There shall be no leaks of cooling water, shielding gas 
or engine fuel.
    (5) Switches. It shall be determined that proper switching equipment 
for shutting down the machine is provided.
    (6) Manufacturers' instructions. Printed rules and instructions 
covering operation of equipment supplied by the manufacturers shall be 
strictly followed.
    (7) Electrode holders. Electrode holders when not in use shall be so 
placed that they cannot make electrical contact with persons, conducting 
objects, fuel or compressed gas tanks.
    (8) Electric shock. Cables with splices within 10 feet (3 m) of the 
holder shall not be used. The welder should not coil or loop welding 
electrode cable around parts of his body.
    (9) Maintenance. (i) The operator should report any equipment defect 
or safety hazard to his supervisor and the use of the equipment shall be 
discontinued until its safety has been assured. Repairs shall be made 
only by qualified personnel.
    (ii) Machines which have become wet shall be thoroughly dried and 
tested before being used.
    (iii) Cables with damaged insulation or exposed bare conductors 
shall be replaced. Joining lengths of work and electrode cables shall be 
done by the use of connecting means specifically intended for the 
purpose. The connecting means shall have insulation adequate for the 
service conditions.
[55 FR 13696, Apr. 11, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 9241, Mar. 7, 1996]

[[Page 685]]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.255  Resistance welding.

    (a) General--(1) Installation. All equipment shall be installed by a 
qualified electrician in conformance with subpart S of this part. There 
shall be a safety-type disconnecting switch or a circuit breaker or 
circuit interrupter to open each power circuit to the machine, 
conveniently located at or near the machine, so that the power can be 
shut off when the machine or its controls are to be serviced.
    (2) Thermal protection. Ignitron tubes used in resistance welding 
equipment shall be equipped with a thermal protection switch.
    (3) Personnel. Workmen designated to operate resistance welding 
equipment shall have been properly instructed and judged competent to 
operate such equipment.
    (4) Guarding. Controls of all automatic or air and hydraulic clamps 
shall be arranged or guarded to prevent the operator from accidentally 
activating them.
    (b) Spot and seam welding machines (nonportable)--(1) Voltage. All 
external weld initiating control circuits shall operate on low voltage, 
not over 120 volts, for the safety of the operators.
    (2) Capacitor welding. Stored energy or capacitor discharge type of 
resistance welding equipment and control panels involving high voltage 
(over 550 volts) shall be suitably insulated and protected by complete 
enclosures, all doors of which shall be provided with suitable 
interlocks and contacts wired into the control circuit (similar to 
elevator interlocks). Such interlocks or contacts shall be so designed 
as to effectively interrupt power and short circuit all capacitors when 
the door or panel is open. A manually operated switch or suitable 
positive device shall be installed, in addition to the mechanical 
interlocks or contacts, as an added safety measure assuring absolute 
discharge of all capacitors.
    (3) Interlocks. All doors and access panels of all resistance 
welding machines and control panels shall be kept locked and interlocked 
to prevent access, by unauthorized persons, to live portions of the 
equipment.
    (4) Guarding. All press welding machine operations, where there is a 
possibility of the operator's fingers being under the point of 
operation, shall be effectively guarded by the use of a device such as 
an electronic eye safety circuit, two hand controls or protection 
similar to that prescribed for punch press operation, Sec. 1910.217 of 
this part. All chains, gears, operating bus linkage, and belts shall be 
protected by adequate guards, in accordance with Sec. 1910.219 of this 
part.
    (5) Shields. The hazard of flying sparks shall be, wherever 
practical, eliminated by installing a shield guard of safety glass or 
suitable fire-resistant plastic at the point of operation. Additional 
shields or curtains shall be installed as necessary to protect passing 
persons from flying sparks. (See Sec. 1910.252(b)(2)(i)(C) of this 
part.)
    (6) Foot switches. All foot switches shall be guarded to prevent 
accidental operation of the machine.
    (7) Stop buttons. Two or more safety emergency stop buttons shall be 
provided on all special multispot welding machines, including 2-post and 
4-post weld presses.
    (8) Safety pins. On large machines, four safety pins with plugs and 
receptacles (one in each corner) shall be provided so that when safety 
pins are removed and inserted in the ram or platen, the press becomes 
inoperative.
    (9) Grounding. Where technically practical, the secondary of all 
welding transformers used in multispot, projection and seam welding 
machines shall be grounded. This may be done by permanently grounding 
one side of the welding secondary current circuit. Where not technically 
practical, a center tapped grounding reactor connected across the 
secondary or the use of a safety disconnect switch in conjunction with 
the welding control are acceptable alternates. Safety disconnect shall 
be arranged to open both sides of the line when welding current is not 
present.
    (c) Portable welding machines--(1) Counterbalance. All portable 
welding guns shall have suitable counterbalanced devices for supporting 
the guns, including cables, unless the design of the gun or fixture 
makes counterbalancing impractical or unnecessary.

[[Page 686]]

    (2) Safety chains. All portable welding guns, transformers and 
related equipment that is suspended from overhead structures, eye beams, 
trolleys, etc., shall be equipped with safety chains or cables. Safety 
chains or cables shall be capable of supporting the total shock load in 
the event of failure of any component of the supporting system.
    (3) Clevis. Each clevis shall be capable of supporting the total 
shock load of the suspended equipment in the event of trolley failure.
    (4) Switch guards. All initiating switches, including retraction and 
dual schedule switches, located on the portable welding gun shall be 
equipped with suitable guards capable of preventing accidental 
initiation through contact with fixturing, operator's clothing, etc. 
Initiating switch voltage shall not exceed 24 volts.
    (5) Moving holder. The movable holder, where it enters the gun 
frame, shall have sufficient clearance to prevent the shearing of 
fingers carelessly placed on the operating movable holder.
    (6) Grounding. The secondary and case of all portable welding 
transformers shall be grounded. Secondary grounding may be by center 
tapped secondary or by a center tapped grounding reactor connected 
across the secondary.
    (d) Flash welding equipment--(1) Ventilation and flash guard. Flash 
welding machines shall be equipped with a hood to control flying flash. 
In cases of high production, where materials may contain a film of oil 
and where toxic elements and metal fumes are given off, ventilation 
shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 1910.252(c) of this part.
    (2) Fire curtains. For the protection of the operators of nearby 
equipment, fire-resistant curtains or suitable shields shall be set up 
around the machine and in such a manner that the operators movements are 
not hampered.
    (e) Maintenance. Periodic inspection shall be made by qualified 
maintenance personnel, and a certification record maintained. The 
certification record shall include the date of inspection, the signature 
of the person who performed the inspection and the serial number, or 
other identifier, for the equipment inspected. The operator shall be 
instructed to report any equipment defects to his supervisor and the use 
of the equipment shall be discontinued until safety repairs have been 
completed.


<R04>
                      Subpart R--Special Industries

    Authority:  Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657); Secretary of Labor's Order 
No. 12-71 (36 FR 8754), 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 FR 35736), or 6-96 
(62 FR 111), as applicable; and 29 CFR part 1911.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.261  Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills.

    (a) General requirements--(1) Application. This section applies to 
establishments where pulp, paper, and paperboard are manufactured and 
converted. This section does not apply to logging and the transportation 
of logs to pulp, paper, and paperboard mills.
    (2) Standards incorporated by reference. Standards covering issues 
of occupational safety and health which have general application without 
regard to any specific industry are incorporated by reference in 
paragraphs (b) through (m) of this section and in subparagraphs (3) and 
(4) of this paragraph and made applicable under this section. Such 
standards shall be construed according to the rules set forth in 
Sec. 1910.5.
    (3) General incorporation of standards. Establishments subject to 
this section shall comply with the following standards of the American 
National Standards Institute, which are incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6:
    (i) Practice for Industrial Lighting, A11.1--1965 (R-1970).
    (ii) Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems, A13.1--1956.
    (iii) Safety Code for Elevators, Dumbwaiters, and Moving Walks, 
A17.1--1965, including Supplements A17.1a--1967, A17.1b--1968, A17.1c--
1969, and A17.1d--1970.
    (iv) Practice for the Inspection of Elevators (Inspector's Manual), 
A17.2--1960, including Suppelements A17.2a--1965 and A17.2b--1967.
    (v) Safety Code for Conveyors, Cableways, and Related Equipment, 
B20.1--1957.

[[Page 687]]

    (vi) Power Piping, B31.1.0--1967 and addenda B31.10a--1969. Fuel Gas 
Piping, B31.2--1968.
    (vii) Identification of Gas-Mask Canisters, K13.1--1967.
    (viii) Prevention of Sulfur Fires and Explosions, Z12.12--1968.
    (ix) Installation of Blower and Exhaust Systems for Dust, Stock, and 
Vapor Removal or Conveying, Z33.1--1961.
    (4) Other standards. The following standards, which are incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, shall be considered standards 
under this section:
    (i) ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Unfired 
Pressure Vessels, including addenda 1969.
    (ii) Building Exits Code for Life Safety from Fire, NFPA 101--1970.
    (iii) Safety in the Handling and Use of Explosives, IME Pamphlet No. 
17, July 1960, Institute of Makers of Explosives.
    (b) Safe practices--(1) Lockouts. Devices such as padlocks shall be 
provided for locking out the source of power at the main disconnect 
switch. Before any maintenance, inspection, cleaning, adjusting, or 
servicing of equipment (electrical, mechanical, or other) that requires 
entrance into or close contact with the machinery or equipment, the main 
power disconnect switch or valve, or both, controlling its source of 
power or flow of material, shall be locked out or blocked off with 
padlock, blank flange, or similar device.
    (2) Emergency lighting. Emergency lighting shall be provided 
wherever it is necessary for employees to remain at their machines or 
stations to shut down equipment in case of power failure. Emergency 
lighting shall be provided at stairways and passageways or aisleways 
used by employees for emergency exit in case of power failure. Emergency 
lighting shall be provided in all plant first aid and medical 
facilities.
    (c) Handling and storage of pulpwood and pulp chips--(1) Handling 
pulpwood with forklift trucks. Where large forklift trucks, or lift 
trucks with clam-jaws, are used in the yard, the operator's enclosed cab 
shall be provided with an escape hatch, whenever the hydraulic arm 
blocks escape through the side doors.
    (2) Handling pulpwood with cranes or stackers. (i) Where locomotive 
cranes are used for loading or unloading pulpwood, the pulpwood shall be 
piled so as to allow a clearance of not less than 24 inches between the 
pile and the end of the cab of any locomotive crane in use, when the cab 
is turned in any working position.
    (ii) The minimum distance of the pulpwood pile from the centerline 
of a standard-gage track shall be maintained at not less than 8\1/2\ 
feet.
    (iii) Logs shall be piled in an orderly and stable manner, with no 
projection into walkways or roadways.
    (iv) Railroad cars shall not be spotted on tracks adjacent to the 
locomotive cranes unless a 24-inch clearance is maintained, as required 
in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section.
    (v) The handling and storage of other materials shall conform to 
paragraphs (c)(2) (i) and (ii) of this section with respect to 
clearance.
    (vi) No person shall be permitted to walk beneath a suspended load, 
bucket, or hook.
    (3) Handling pulpwood from ships.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) The hatch tender shall be required to signal the hoisting 
engineer to move the load only after the men working in the hold are in 
the clear.
    (iii) The air in the ship's hold, tanks, or closed vessels shall be 
tested for oxygen deficiency and for both toxic and explosive gases and 
vapors.
    (4) Handling pulpwood from flatcars and all other railway cars. (i) 
Railroad flatcars for the conveyance of pulpwood loaded parallel to the 
length of the car shall be equipped with safety-stake pockets.
    (ii) Where pulpwood is loaded crosswise on a flatcar sufficient 
stakes of sizes not smaller than 4 by 4 inches shall be used to prevent 
the load from shifting.
    (iii) When it is necessary to cut stakes, those on the unloading 
side should be partially cut through first, and then the binder wires 
cut on the opposite side. Wire cutters equipped with long extension 
handles shall be used. No person shall be permitted

[[Page 688]]

along the dumping side of the car after the stakes have been cut.
    (iv) When steel straps without stakes are used, the steel straps 
shall be cut from a safe area to prevent employees from being struck by 
the falling logs.
    (v) Flatcars and all other cars shall be chocked during unloading. 
Where equipment is not provided with hand brakes, rail clamping chocks 
shall be used.
    (vi) A derail shall be used to prevent movement of other rail 
equipment into cars where persons are working.
    (5) Handling pulpwood from trucks. (i) Cutting of stakes and binder 
wires shall be done in accordance with paragraph (c)4(iii) of this 
section.
    (ii) Where binder chain and steel stakes are used, the binder chains 
shall be released and the stakes tripped from the opposite side of the 
load spillage.
    (iii) Where binder chains and crane slings are used, the crane 
slings shall be attached and taut before the binder chains are released. 
The hooker shall see that the helper is clear before signaling for the 
movement of the load.
    (6) Handling pulp chips from railway cars. All cars shall be 
securely fastened in place and all employees in the clear before dumping 
is started.
    (7) Handling pulp chips from trucks and trailers. All trucks and 
trailers shall be securely fastened in place and all employees in the 
clear before dumping is started.
    (8) Cranes.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) A safety device such as a heavy chain or cable at least equal 
in strength to the lifting cables shall be fastened to the boom and to 
the frame of the boom crane (if it is other than locomotive) at the 
base. Alternatively, a telescoping safety device shall be fastened to 
the boom and to the cab frame, so as to prevent the boom from snapping 
back over the cab in the event of lifting cable breakage.
    (iii) A crane shall not be operated where any part thereof may come 
within 10 feet of overhead powerlines (or other overhead obstructions) 
unless the powerlines have been deenergized. The boom shall be painted 
bright yellow from and including the head sheave to a point 6 feet down 
the boom towards the cab.
    (iv) Standard signals for the operation of cranes shall be 
established for all movements of the crane, in accordance with American 
National Standards B30.2--1943 (reaffirmed 1968) and B30.2.0--1967.
    (v) Only one member of the crew shall be authorized to give signals 
to the crane operator.
    (vi) All cranes shall be equipped with a suitable warning device 
such as a horn or whistle.
    (vii) A sheave guard shall be provided beneath the head sheave of 
the boom.
    (9) Traffic warning signs or signals. (i) A flagman shall direct the 
movement of cranes or locomotives being moved across railroad tracks or 
roads, and at any points where the vision of the operator is restricted. 
The flagman must always remain in sight of the operator when the crane 
or locomotive is in motion. The blue flag policy shall be used to mark 
stationary cars day and night. This policy shall include marking the 
track in advance of the spotted cars (flag for daytime, light for 
darkness).
    (ii) After cars are spotted for loading or unloading, warning flags 
or signs shall be placed in the center of the track at least 50 feet 
away from the cars and a derail set to protect workmen in the car.
    (10) Illumination. Artificial illumination shall be provided when 
loading or unloading is performed after dark, in accordance with 
American National Standard A11.1--1965 (R--1970).
    (11) [Reserved]
    (12) Barking devices. When barking drums are employed in the yard, 
the requirements of paragraph (e)(12) of this section shall apply.
    (13) Hand tools. Handles of wood hooks shall be locked to the shank 
to prevent them from rotating.
    (14) Removal of pulpwood. (i) The ends of a woodpile shall be 
properly sloped and cross-tiered into the pile. Upright poles shall not 
be used at the ends of woodpiles. To knock down wood from the woodpile, 
mechanical equipment shall be used to permit employees to keep in the 
clear of loosened wood.
    (ii) If dynamite is used to loosen the pile, only authorized 
personnel shall be permitted to handle and discharge the explosive. An 
electric detonator is preferable for firing; if a fuse is used, it

[[Page 689]]

shall be an approved safety fuse with a burning rate of not less than 
120 seconds per yard and a minimum length of 3 feet, in accordance with 
Safety in the Handling and Use of Explosives, IME Pamphlet No. 17, July 
1960.
    (15) Belt conveyors. (i) The sides of the conveyor shall be 
constructed so that the wood will not fall off.
    (ii) Where conveyors cross passageways or roadways, a horizontal 
platform shall be provided under the conveyor extending out from the 
sides of the conveyor a distance equal to 1\1/2\ times the length of the 
wood handled. The platform shall extend the width of the road plus 2 
feet on each side and shall be kept free of wood and rubbish. The edges 
of the platform shall be provided with toeboards or other protection to 
prevent wood from falling, in accordance with American National Standard 
A12.1--1967.
    (iii) All conveyors for pulpwood shall have the inrunning nips 
between chain and sprockets guarded; also, turning drums shall be 
guarded.
    (iv) Every belt conveyor shall have an emergency stop cable 
extending the length of the conveyor so that it may be stopped from any 
location along the line, or conveniently located stop buttons within 10 
feet of each work station, in accordance with American National Standard 
B20.1--1957.
    (16) Signs. Where conveyors cross walkways or roadways in the yards, 
signs reading ``Danger--Overhead Conveyor'' or an equivalent warning 
shall be erected, in accordance with American National Standard Z35.1--
1968.
    (d) Handling and storage of raw materials other than pulpwood or 
pulp chips--(1) Personal protective equipment. Whenever possible, all 
dust, fumes, and gases incident to handling materials shall be 
controlled at the source, in accordance with American National Standard 
Z9.2--1960. Where control at the source is not possible, respirators 
with goggles or protective masks shall be provided, and employees shall 
wear them when handling alum, clay, soda ash, lime, bleach powder, 
sulfur, chlorine, and similar materials, and when opening rag bales.
    (2) Clearance. (i) When materials are being piled inside a building 
and upon platforms, an aisle clearance at least 3 feet greater than the 
widest truck in use shall be provided.
    (ii) Baled paper and rags stored inside a building shall not be 
piled closer than 18 inches to walls, partitions, or sprinkler heads.
    (3) Piling and unpiling pulp. (i) Piles of wet lap pulp (unless 
palletized) shall be stepped back one-half the width of the sheet for 
each 8 feet of pile height. Sheets of pulp shall be interlapped to make 
the pile secure. Pulp shall not be piled over pipelines to jeopardize 
pipes, or so as to cause overloading of floors, or to within 18 inches 
below sprinkler heads.
    (ii) Piles of pulp shall not be undermined when being unpiled.
    (iii) Floor capacities shall be clearly marked on all floors.
    (4)(i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Where rolls are pyramided two or more high, chocks shall be 
installed between each roll on the floor and at every row. Where pulp 
and paper rolls are stored on smooth floors in processing areas, rubber 
chocks with wooden core shall be used.
    (iii) When rolls are decked two or more high, the bottom rolls shall 
be chocked on each side to prevent shifting in either direction.
    (e) Preparing pulpwood--(1) Gang and slasher saws. A guard shall be 
provided in front of all gang and slasher saws to protect workers from 
wood thrown by saws. A guard shall be placed over tail sprockets.
    (2) Slasher tables. Saws shall be stopped and power switches shall 
be locked out and tagged whenever it is necessary for any person to be 
on the slasher table.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Runway to the jack ladder. The runway from the pond or unloading 
dock to the table shall be protected with standard handrails and 
toeboards. Inclined portions shall have cleats or equivalent nonslip 
surfacing, in accordance with American National Standard A12.1--1967. 
Protective equipment shall be provided for persons working over water.
    (5) Guards below table. Where not protected by the frame of the 
machine, the underside of the slasher saws shall be enclosed with 
guards.

[[Page 690]]

    (6) Conveyors. The requirements of paragraph (c)(15)(iv) of this 
section shall apply.
    (7) [Reserved]
    (8) Barker feed. Each barker shall be equipped with a feed and 
turnover device which will make it unnecessary for the operator to hold 
a bolt or log by hand during the barking operation. Eye, ear, and head 
protection shall be provided for the operator, in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (9) [Reserved]
    (10) Stops. All control devices shall be locked out and tagged when 
knives are being changed.
    (11) Speed governor. Water wheels, when directly connected to barker 
disks or grinders, shall be provided with speed governors, if operated 
with gate wide open.
    (12) Continuous barking drums. (i) When platforms or floors allow 
access to the sides of the drums, a standard railing shall be 
constructed around the drums. When two or more drums are arranged side 
by side, proper walkways with standard handrails shall be provided 
between each set, in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (ii) Sprockets and chains, gears, and trunnions shall have standard 
guards, in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (iii) Whenever it becomes necessary for a workman to go within a 
drum, the driving mechanism shall be locked and tagged, at the main 
disconnect switch, in accordance with paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (13) Intermittent barking drums. In addition to motor switch, 
clutch, belt shifter, or other power disconnecting device, intermittent 
barking drums shall be equipped with a device which may be locked to 
prevent the drum from moving while it is being emptied or filled.
    (14) Hydraulic barkers. Hydraulic barkers shall be enclosed with 
strong baffles at the inlet and the outlet. The operator shall be 
protected by at least five-ply laminated glass.
    (15) Splitter block. The block upon or against which the wood is 
rested shall have a corrugated surface or other means provided that the 
wood will not slip. Wood to be split, and also the splitting block, 
shall be free of ice, snow, or chips. The operator shall be provided 
with eye and foot protection. A clear and unobstructed view shall be 
maintained between equipment and workers around the block and the 
workers' help area.
    (16) Power control. Power for the operation of the splitter shall be 
controlled by a clutch or equivalent device.
    (17) Knot cleaners. The operators of knot cleaners of the woodpecker 
type shall wear eye protection equipment.
    (18) Chipper spout. The feed system to the chipper spout shall be 
arranged in such a way that the operator does not stand in a direct line 
with the chipper spout. All chipper spouts shall be enclosed to a height 
of at least 42 inches from the floor or operator's platform. When other 
protection is not sufficient, the operator shall wear a safety belt 
line. The safety belt line shall be fastened in such a manner as to make 
it impossible for the operator to fall into the throat of the chipper. 
Ear protection equipment shall be worn by the operator and others in the 
immediate area if there is any possibility that the noise level may be 
harmful (see Sec. 1910.95).
    (19) Carriers for knives. Carriers shall be provided and used for 
transportation of knives.
    (f) Rag and old paper preparation--(1) Ripping and trimming tools. 
(i) Hand knives and scissors shall have blunt points, shall be fastened 
to the table with chain or thong, and shall not be carried on the person 
but placed safely in racks or sheaths when not in use.
    (ii) Hand knives and sharpening steels shall be provided with guards 
at the junction of the handle and the blade.
    (2) Shredders, cutters, and dusters. (i) Rotating heads or cylinders 
shall be completely enclosed except for an opening at the feed side 
sufficient to permit only the entry of stock. The enclosure shall extend 
over the top of the feed rolls. It shall be constructed either of solid 
material or with mesh or openings not exceeding one-half inch and 
substantial enough to contain flying particles and prevent accidental 
contact with moving parts. The enclosure shall be bolted or locked into 
place.

[[Page 691]]

    (ii) A smooth-pivoted idler roll resting on the stock or feed table 
shall be provided in front of feed rolls except when arrangements 
prevent the operator from standing closer than 36 inches to any part of 
the feed rolls.
    (iii) Any manually fed cutter, shredder, or duster shall be provided 
with an idler roll as per subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph or the 
operator shall use special hand-feeding tools.
    (iv) Hoods of cutters, shredders, and dusters shall have exhaust 
ventilation, in accordance with American National Standard Z9.2--1960.
    (3) Blowers. (i) Blowers used for transporting rags shall be 
provided with feed hoppers having outer edges located not less than 48 
inches from the fan.
    (ii) The arrangement of the blower discharge outlets and work areas 
shall be such as to prevent material from falling on workers.
    (4) Conveyors. Conveyors and conveyor drive belts and pulleys shall 
be fully enclosed or, if open and within 7 feet of the floor, shall be 
constructed and guarded in accordance with paragraph (c)(15) of this 
section and American National Standards B15.1--1953 (Reaffirmed 1958) 
and B20.1--1957.
    (5) Dust. Measures for the control of dust shall be provided, in 
accordance with American National Standards Z33.1--1961, Z87.1--1968, 
and Z88.2--1969.
    (6) Rag cookers. (i) When cleaning, inspection, or other work 
requires that persons enter rag cookers, all steam and water valves, or 
other control devices, shall be locked and tagged in the closed or 
``off'' position. Blank flanging of pipelines is acceptable in place of 
closed and locked valves.
    (ii) When cleaning, inspection, or other work requires that persons 
must enter the cooker, one person shall be stationed outside in a 
position to observe and assist in case of emergency, in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section.
    (iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) Rag cookers shall be provided with safety valves in accordance 
with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Unfired 
Pressure Vessels--1968, with Addenda.
    (g) Chemical processes of making pulp--(1) Sulfur burners. (i) 
Sulfur-burner houses shall be safely and adequately ventilated, and 
every precaution shall be taken to guard against dust explosion hazards 
and fires, in accordance with American National Standards Z9.2--1960 and 
Z12.12--1968.
    (ii) Nonsparking tools and equipment shall be used in handling dry 
sulfur.
    (iii) Sulfur storage bins shall be kept free of sulfur dust 
accumulation, in accordance with American National Standard Z9.2--1960.
    (iv) Sulfur-melting equipment shall not be located in the burner 
room.
    (2) Protection for employees (acid plants). (i) Supplied air 
respirators shall be strategically located for emergency and rescue use.
    (ii) During inspection, repairs, or maintenance of acid towers, the 
workman shall be provided with eye protection, a supplied air 
respirator, a safety belt, and an attached lifeline. The line shall be 
extended to an attendant stationed outside the tower opening.
    (3) Acid tower structure. Outside elevators shall be inspected daily 
during winter months when ice materially affects safety. Elevators, 
runways, stairs, etc., for the acid tower shall be inspected monthly for 
defects that may occur because of exposure to acid or corrosive gases.
    (4) Tanks (acid). (i) Tanks shall be free of acid and shall be 
washed out with water, and fresh air shall be blown into them before 
allowing men to enter. Men entering the tanks shall be provided with 
supplied air respirators, lifebelts, and attached lifelines.
    (ii) A man shall be stationed outside to summon assistance if 
necessary. All intake valves to a tank shall be blanked off or 
disconnected.
    (5) Clothing. Where lime slaking takes place, employees shall be 
provided with rubber boots, rubber gloves, protective aprons, and eye 
protection. A deluge shower and eye fountain shall be provided to flush 
the skin and eyes to counteract lime or acid burns.
    (6) Lead burning. When lead burning is being done within tanks, 
fresh air shall be forced into the tanks so that fresh air will reach 
the face of the worker first and the direction of the current will never 
be from the source of the fumes toward the face of the workers. Supplied 
air respirators (constant-flow type) shall be provided.

[[Page 692]]

    (7) Hoops for acid storage tanks. Hoops of tanks shall be made of 
rods rather than flat strips and shall be safely maintained by scheduled 
inspections.
    (8) Chip and sawdust bins. Steam or compressed-air lances, or other 
facilities, shall be used for breaking down the arches caused by jamming 
in chip lofts. No worker shall be permitted to enter a bin unless 
provided with a safety belt, with line attached, and an attendant 
stationed at the bin to summon assistance.
    (9) Exits (digester building). At least one unobstructed exit at 
each end of the room shall be provided on each floor of a digester 
building.
    (10) Gas masks (digester building). Gas masks must be available, and 
they must furnish adequate protection against sulfurous acid and 
chlorine gases and be inspected and repaired in accordance with 29 CFR 
1910.134.
    (11) Elevators. (i) Elevators shall be constructed in accordance 
with American National Standard A17.1--1965.
    (ii) Elevators shall be equipped with gas masks for the maximum 
number of passengers.
    (iii) Elevators shall be equipped with an alarm system to advise of 
failure.
    (12) Blowoff valves and piping. (i) The blowoff valve of a digester 
shall be arranged so as to be operated from another room, remote from 
safety valves.
    (ii) Through bolts instead of cap bolts shall be used on all 
digester pipings.
    (iii) Heavy duty pipe, valves, and fittings shall be used between 
the digester and blow pit. These valves, fittings, and pipes shall be 
inspected at least semiannually to determine the degree of 
deterioration.
    (iv) Digester blow valves shall be pinned or locked in closed 
position throughout the entire cooking period.
    (13) Blow pits and blow tanks. (i) Blow-pit openings shall be 
preferably on the side of the pit instead of on top. When located on 
top, openings shall be as small as possible and shall be provided with 
railings, in accordance with American National Standard A12.1--1967.
    (ii) A specially constructed ladder shall be used for access to blow 
pits, to be constructed so that the door of the blow pit cannot be 
closed when the ladder is in place; other means shall be provided to 
prevent the closing of the pit door when anyone is in the pit.
    (iii) A signaling device shall be installed in the digester and 
blow-pit rooms and chip bins to be operated as a warning before and 
while digesters are being blown.
    (iv) Blow-pit hoops shall be maintained in a safe condition.
    (14) Blowing digester. (i) Blowoff valves shall be opened slowly.
    (ii) After the digester has started to be blown, the blowoff valve 
shall be left open, and the hand plate shall not be removed until the 
digester cook signals the blow-pit man that the blow is completed. 
Whenever it becomes necessary to remove the hand plate to clear stock, 
operators shall wear eye protection equipment and protective clothing to 
guard against burns from hot stock.
    (iii) Means shall be provided whereby the digester cook shall signal 
the man in the chip bin before starting to load the digester.
    (15) Inspecting and repairing digester. (i) Valves controlling lines 
leading into a digester shall be locked out and tagged. The keys to the 
locks shall be in the possession of a person or persons doing the 
inspecting or making repairs.
    (ii) Fresh air shall be blown into the digester constantly while 
workmen are inside. Supplied air respirators shall be available in the 
event the fresh air supply fails or is inadequate.
    (iii) No inspector shall enter a digester unless a lifeline is 
securely fastened to his body by means of a safety belt and at least one 
other experienced employee is stationed outside the digester to handle 
the line and to summon assistance. All ladders and lifelines shall be 
inspected before each use.
    (iv) All employees entering digesters for inspection or repair work 
shall be provided with protective headgear. Eye protection and dust 
masks shall be provided to workmen while the old brick lining is being 
removed, in accordance with American National Standards, Z87.1--1968, 
Z88.2--1969, and Z99.1--1969.
    (16) Pressure tanks-accumulators (acid). (i) Safety regulations 
governing inspection and repairing of pressure tanks-accumulators (acid) 
shall be the same as those specified in subparagraph (15) of this 
paragraph.

[[Page 693]]

    (ii) The pressure tanks-accumulators shall be inspected twice 
annually. (See the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, 
Unfired Pressure Vessels--1968, with Addenda.)
    (17) Pressure vessels (safety devices). (i) A safety valve shall be 
installed in a separate line from each pressure vessel; no hand valve 
shall be installed between this safety valve and the pressure vessel. 
Safety valves shall be checked between each cook to be sure they have 
not become plugged or corroded to the point of being inoperative. (See 
the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Unfired Pressure 
Vessels--1968, with Addenda.)
    (ii) All safety devices shall conform to Paragraph U-2 in the ASME 
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Unfired Pressure 
Vessels--1968, with Addenda.
    (18) Miscellaneous. Insofar as the processes of the sulfate and soda 
operations are similar to those of the sulfite processes, the standard 
of paragraphs (g) (1) through (17) of this section shall apply.
    (i) Quick operating showers, bubblers, etc., shall be available for 
emergency use in case of caustic soda burns.
    (ii) Rotary tenders, smelter operators, and those cleaning smelt 
spouts shall be provided with eye protection equipment (fitted with 
lenses that filter out the harmful rays emanating from the light source) 
when actively engaged in their duties, in accordance with American 
National Standard Z87.1--1968.
    (iii) Heavy-duty pipe, valves, and fittings shall be used between 
digester and blow pit. These shall be inspected at least semiannually to 
determine the degree of deterioration and repaired or replaced when 
necessary, in accordance with American National Standards B31.1--1955, 
B31.1a--1963, B31.1.0--1967, and B31.2--1968.
    (iv) Smelt-dissolving tanks shall be covered and the cover kept 
closed, except when samples are being taken.
    (v) Smelt tanks shall be provided with vent stacks and explosion 
doors, in accordance with American National Standard Z9.1--1951.
    (19) Blow lines.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) When blow lines from more than one digester lead into one 
pipe, the cock or valve of the blow line from the tank being inspected 
or repaired shall be locked or tagged out, or the line shall be 
disconnected and blocked off.
    (20) Furnace room. Exhaust ventilation shall be provided where niter 
cake is fed into a rotary furnace and shall be so designed and 
maintained as to keep the concentration of hydrogen sulfide gas below 
the parts per million listed in Sec. 1910.1000.
    (21) Inspection and repair of tanks. All piping leading to tanks 
shall be blanked off or valved and locked or tagged. Any lines to sewers 
shall be blanked off to protect workers from air contaminants.
    (22) Welding. Welding on blow tanks, accumulator tanks, or any other 
vessels where turpentine vapor or other combustible vapor could gather 
shall be done only after the vessel has been completely purged of fumes. 
Fresh air shall be supplied workers inside of vessels.
    (23) Turpentine systems and storage tanks. Nonsparking tools and 
ground hose shall be used when pumping out the tank. The tank shall be 
surrounded by a berm or moat.
    (h) Bleaching--(1) Bleaching engines. Bleaching engines, except the 
Bellmer type, shall be completely covered on the top, with the exception 
of one small opening large enough to allow filling but too small to 
admit a man. Platforms leading from one engine to another shall have 
standard guardrails, in accordance with American National Standard 
A12.1--1967.
    (2) Bleach mixing rooms. (i) The room in which the bleach powder is 
mixed shall be provided with adequate exhaust ventilation, located at 
the floor level, in accordance with American National Standard Z9.1--
1951.
    (ii) Chlorine gas shall be carried away from the work place and 
breathing area by an exhaust system. The gas shall be rendered neutral 
or harmless before being discharged into the atmosphere. The 
requirements of American National Standard Z9.2--1960 shall apply to 
this subdivision.
    (iii) For emergency and rescue operations, the employer must provide 
employees with self-contained breathing apparatuses or supplied-air 
respirators, and ensure that employees use these

[[Page 694]]

respirators, in accordance with the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.134.
    (3) Liquid chlorine. (i) Tanks of liquid chlorine shall be stored in 
an adequately ventilated unoccupied room, where their possible leakage 
cannot affect workers.
    (ii) Gas masks capable of absorbing chlorine shall be supplied, 
conveniently placed, and regularly inspected, and workers who may be 
exposed to chlorine gas shall be instructed in their use.
    (iii) For emergency and rescue work, independent self-contained 
oxygen-type masks or supplied air equipment shall be provided.
    (iv) At least two exits, remote from each other, shall be provided 
for all rooms in which chlorine is stored.
    (v) Spur tracks upon which tank cars containing chlorine and caustic 
are spotted and connected to pipelines shall be protected by means of a 
derail in front of the cars.
    (vi) All chlorine, caustic, and acid lines shall be marked for 
positive identification, in accordance with American National Standard 
A13.1--1967.
    (4) Bagged or drummed chemicals. Bagged or drummed chemicals require 
efficient handling to prevent damage and spillage. Certain oxidizing 
chemicals used in bleaching pulp and also in some sanitizing work 
require added precautions for safety in storage and handling. In 
storage, these chemicals must be isolated from combustible materials and 
other chemicals with which they will react such as acids. They must also 
be kept dry, clean and uncontaminated.
    (i) Mechanical pulp process--(1) Pulp grinders. (i) Water wheels 
directly connected to pulp grinders shall be provided with speed 
governors limiting the peripheral speed of the grinder to that 
recommended by the manufacturer.
    (ii) Doors of pocket grinders shall be arranged so as to keep them 
from closing accidentally.
    (2) Butting saws. Hood guards shall be provided on butting saws, in 
accordance with American National Standard O1.1--1954 (reaffirmed 1961).
    (3) Floors and platforms. The requirements of paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section shall apply.
    (4) Personal protection. Persons exposed to falling material shall 
wear eye, head, foot, and shin protection equipment, in accordance with 
American National Standards Z87.1--1968, Z88.2--1969, Z89.1--1969, and 
Z41.1--1967.
    (j) Stock preparation--(1) Pulp shredders. (i) Cutting heads shall 
be completely enclosed except for an opening at the feed side sufficient 
to permit only entry of stock. The enclosure shall be bolted or locked 
in place. The enclosure shall be of solid material or with mesh or other 
openings not exceeding one-half inch.
    (ii) Either a slanting feed table with its outer edge not less than 
36 inches from the cutting head or an automatic feeding device shall be 
provided.
    (iii) Repairs for cleaning of blockage shall be done only when the 
shredder is shutdown and control devices locked.
    (2) Pulp conveyors. Pulp conveyors and conveyor drive belts and 
pulleys shall be fully enclosed, or if open and within 7 feet of the 
floor, shall be constructed and guarded in accordance with American 
National Standard B20.1--1957.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Beaters. (i) Beater rolls shall be provided with covers.
    (ii) When cleaning, inspecting, or other work requires that persons 
enter the beaters, all control devices shall be locked or tagged out, in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (iii) When beaters are fed from floor above, the chute opening, if 
less than 42 inches from the floor, shall be provided with a complete 
rail or other enclosure. Openings for manual feeding shall be sufficient 
only for entry of stock and shall be provided with at least two 
permanently secured crossrails, in accordance American National Standard 
A12.1--1967.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Floors around beaters shall be provided with sufficient drainage 
to remove wastes.
    (5) Pulpers. (i) All pulpers having the top or any other opening of 
vessel less than 42 inches from the floor or work platform shall have 
such openings guarded by railed or other enclosures. For manual 
charging, openings shall be sufficient only to permit the entry of stock 
and shall be provided with at

[[Page 695]]

least two permanently secured crossrails, in accordance with American 
National Standard A12.1--1967.
    (ii) When cleaning, inspecting, or other work requires that persons 
enter the pulpers, they shall be equipped with safety belt and lifeline, 
and one person shall be stationed outside at a position to observe and 
assist in case of emergency.
    (iii) When cleaning, inspecting, or other work requires that persons 
enter pulpers, all steam, water, or other control devices shall be 
locked or tagged out. Blank flanging and tagging of pipe lines is 
acceptable in place of closed and locked or tagged valves. Blank 
flanging of steam and water lines shall be acceptable in place of valve 
locks.
    (6) Stock chests. (i) All control devices shall be locked or tagged 
out when persons enter stock chests, in accordance with paragraph (b)(4) 
of this section.
    (ii) When cleaning, inspecting, or other work requires that persons 
enter stock chests, they shall be provided with a low-voltage extension 
light.
    (k) Machine room--(1) Emergency stops. Paper machines shall be 
equipped with devices that will stop the machine quickly in an 
emergency. The devices shall consist of push buttons for electric motive 
power (or electrically operated engine stops), pull cords connected 
directly to the prime mover, control clutches, or other devices, 
interlocked with adequate braking action. The devices shall be tested 
periodically by making use of them when stopping the machine and shall 
be so located that any person working on the machine can quickly 
disconnect the machine from the source of power in case of emergency.
    (2) Drives. (i) All drives shall be provided with lockout devices at 
the power switch which interrupts the flow of current to the unit.
    (ii) All ends of rotating shafts including dryer drum shafts shall 
be completely guarded.
    (iii) All accessible disengaged doctor blades should be covered.
    (iv) All exposed shafts shall be guarded. Crossovers shall be 
provided.
    (v) Oil cups and grease fittings shall be placed in a safe area 
remote from nip and heat hazards.
    (3) Protective equipment. Face shields, aprons, and rubber gloves 
shall be provided for workmen handling acids in accordance with 
paragraphs (b)(2) and (d)(1) of this section.
    (4)-(5) [Reserved]
    (6) Steps. Steps of uniform rise and tread with nonslip surfaces 
shall be provided at each press in accordance with American National 
Standard A12.1--1967.
    (7) Plank walkways. A removable plank shall be provided along each 
press, with standard guardrails installed. The planks shall have nonslip 
surfaces in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (8) Dryer lubrication. If a gear bearing must be oiled while the 
machine is in operation, an automatic oiling device to protect the oiler 
shall be provided, or oil cups and grease fittings shall be placed along 
the walkways out of reach of hot pipes and dryer gears.
    (9) Levers. All levers carrying weights shall be constructed so that 
weights will not slip or fall off.
    (10) First dryer. Either a permanent guardrail or apron guard or 
both shall be installed in front of the first dryer in each section in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (11) Steam and hot-water pipes. All exposed steam and hot-water 
pipes within 7 feet of the floor or working platform or within 15 inches 
measured horizontally from stairways, ramps, or fixed ladders shall be 
covered with an insulating material, or guarded in such manner as to 
prevent contact.
    (12) Dryer gears. Dryer gears shall be guarded excepting where the 
oilers' walkway is removed out of reach of the gears' nips and spokes 
and hot pipes in accordance with American National Standard B15.1--1953 
(reaffirmed 1958).
    (13) Broke hole. (i) A guardrail shall be provided at broke holes in 
accordance with American National Standard A12.1--1967.
    (ii) Where pulpers are located directly below the broke hole on a 
paper machine and where the broke hole opening is large enough to permit 
a worker to fall through, any employee pushing broke down the hole shall 
wear a safety belt attached to a safety belt

[[Page 696]]

line. The safety belt line shall be fastened in such a manner that it is 
impossible for the person to fall into the pulper.
    (iii) An alarm bell or a flashing light shall be actuated before 
dropping material through the broke hole.
    (14) Feeder belt. A feeder belt or other effective device shall be 
provided for starting paper through the calender stack.
    (15) Steps. Steps or ladders of uniform rise and tread with nonslip 
surfaces shall be provided at each calender stack. Handrails and hand 
grips shall be provided at each calender stack in accordance with 
American National Standard A12.1--1967.
    (16) [Reserved]
    (17) Sole plates. All exposed sole plates between dryers, calenders, 
reels, and rewinders shall have a nonskid surface.
    (18) Nip points. The hazard of the nip points on all calender rolls 
shall be eliminated or minimized by means of an effective barrier 
device, or by feeding the paper into the rolls by means of a rope 
carrier, air jets, or hand feeding devices.
    (19) Platforms. [Reserved]
    (20) Scrapers. Alloy steel scrapers with pullthrough blades 
approximately 3 by 5 inches in size shall be used to remove ``scabs'' 
from calender rolls.
    (21) Illumination. Permanent lighting shall be installed in all 
areas where employees are required to make machine adjustments and sheet 
transfers in accordance with the American National Standard A11.1--1965 
(R 1970).
    (22) Control panels. All control panel handles and buttons shall be 
protected from accidental contact.
    (23) [Reserved]
    (24) Lifting reels. (i) The reels shall stop rotating before being 
lifted from bearings.
    (ii) All lifting equipment (clamps, cables, and slings) shall be 
maintained in a safe condition and inspected regularly.
    (iii) Reel shafts with square block ends shall be guarded.
    (25) Feeder belts. Feeder belts, carrier ropes, air carriage, or 
other equally effective means shall be provided for starting paper into 
the nip or drum-type reels.
    (26) Inrunning nip. (i) Where the nipping points of all drum winders 
and rewinders is on the operator's side, it shall be guarded by barrier 
guards interlocked with the drive mechanism.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (27) Core collars. Set screws for securing core collars to winding 
and unwinding shafts shall not protrude above the face of the collar. 
All edges of the collar with which an operator's hand comes in contact 
shall be beveled to remove all sharp corners.
    (28) Slitter knives. Slitter knives shall be guarded so as to 
prevent accidental contact. Carriers shall be provided and used for 
transportation of slitter knives.
    (29) Winder shaft. The winder shall have a guide rail to align the 
shaft for easy entrance into the opened rewind shaft bearing housings.
    (30) Core shaft. When the core shaft weighs in excess of the safe 
standard, a mechanical device such as a dolly shall be provided for 
carrying all or part of the weight when it is being removed from the set 
of paper and placed in the dressing brackets on the winder.
    (31) Winder area. A nonskid surface shall be provided in the front 
vicinity of the winder to prevent accidental slipping.
    (32) Radiation. Special standards regarding the use of radiation 
equipment shall be posted and followed as required by Sec. 1910.96.
    (l) Finishing room--(1) Cleaning rolls. Rolls shall be cleaned only 
on the outrunning side.
    (2) Emergency stops. Electrically or manually operated quick power 
disconnecting devices, interlocked with braking action, shall be 
provided on all operating sides of the machine within easy reach of all 
employees. These devices shall be tested by making use of them when 
stopping the machine.
    (3) Core collars. The requirements of paragraph (k)(27) of this 
section and the American National Standard B15.1--1953 (reaffirmed 1958) 
shall apply.
    (4) Elevators. These shall be in accordance with American National 
Standard A17.1--1965.
    (5) Control panels. The requirements of paragraph (k)(22) of this 
section shall apply.

[[Page 697]]

    (6) Guillotine-type cutters. (i) Each guillotine-type cutter shall 
be equipped with a control which requires the operator and his helper, 
if any, to use both hands to engage the clutch.
    (ii) Each guillotine-type cutter shall be equipped with a nonrepeat 
device.
    (iii) Carriers shall be provided and used for transportation of 
guillotine-type cutter knives.
    (7) Rotary cutter. (i) On single-knife machines a guard shall be 
provided at a point of contact to the knife.
    (ii) On duplex cutters the protection required for single-knife 
machines shall be provided for the first knife, and a hood shall be 
provided for the second knife.
    (iii) Safe access shall be provided to the knives of a rotary cutter 
by means of catwalks with nonslip surfaces, railings, and toeboards in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (iv) A guard shall be provided for the spreader or squeeze roll at 
the nip side on sheet cutters.
    (v) Electrically or manually operated quick power disconnecting 
devices with adequate braking action shall be provided on all operating 
sides of the machine within easy reach of all operators.
    (vi) The outside slitters shall be guarded.
    (8) Platers. (i) A guard shall be arranged across the face of the 
rolls to serve as a warning that the operator's hand is approaching the 
danger zone.
    (ii) A quick power disconnecting device shall be installed on each 
machine within easy reach of the operator.
    (9) Finishing room rewinders. (i) The nipping points of all drum 
winders and rewinders located on the operator's side shall be guarded by 
either automatic or manually operated barrier guards of sufficient 
height to protect fully anyone working around them. The barrier guard 
shall be interlocked with the drive mechanism to prevent operating above 
jog speed without the guard in place.

A zero speed switch should be installed to prevent the guard from being 
raised while the roll is turning.
    (ii) A nonskid surface shall be provided in front of the rewinder to 
prevent an employee from slipping in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section.
    (iii) Mechanical lifting devices shall be provided for placing and 
removing rolls from the machine.
    (10) Control panels. The requirements of paragraph (k)(22) of this 
section shall apply.
    (11) Roll-type embosser. The nipping point located on the operator's 
side shall be guarded by either automatic or manually operated barrier 
guards interlocked with the drive.
    (12) Sorting and counting tables. (i) Tables shall be smooth and 
free from splinters, with edges and corners rounded.
    (ii) Paddles shall be smooth and free from splinters.
    (13) Roll splitters. The nip point and cutter knife shall be guarded 
by either automatic or manually operated barrier guards.
    (m) Materials handling--(1) Hand trucks. No person shall be 
permitted to ride on a powered hand truck unless it is so designed by 
the manufacturer. A limit switch shall be on operating handle--30 
degrees each way from a 45-degree angle up and down.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Cartons. The carton-stitching machine shall be guarded to 
prevent the operator from coming in contact with the stitching head.
    (4) [Reserved]
    (5) Unloading cars. Flag signals, derails, or other protective 
devices shall be used to protect men during switching operations. The 
blue flag policy shall be invoked according to paragraph (c)(9)(i) of 
this section.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 23073, May 28, 1975; 43 
FR 49751, Oct. 24, 1978; 49 FR 5323, Feb. 10, 1984; 55 FR 32015, Aug. 6, 
1990; 61 FR 9241, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 FR 1285, Jan. 8, 1998; 63 FR 33467, 
June 18, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.261 
was amended, in paragraph (a), by removing paragraphs (a)(3) (ii), (iv) 
through (vi), (ix), (xi) through (xiii), (xv), (xvii) through (xx), 
(xxii), and (xxiv) through (xxvii) and by redesignating paragraphs 
(a)(3) (iii), (vii), (viii), (x), (xiv), (xvi), (xxi), and (xxiii) as 
paragraphs (a)(3) (ii) through (ix), respectively; in paragraph (b), by 
removing paragraphs (b) (1), (2), (3), (5), and (6) and by redesignating 
paragraph (b)(4) as (b)(1) and paragraph (b)(7) as (b)(2); in paragraph 
(c), by removing paragraphs (c)(2)(vi),

[[Page 698]]

(c)(2)(vii), (c)(3)(i), (c)(6)(ii), (c)(7)(ii), (c)(8)(i), and (c)(11) 
and by redesignating paragraph (c)(2)(viii) as (c)(2)(vi), paragraph 
(c)(6)(i) as (c)(6), and paragraph (c)(7)(i) as (c)(7); in paragraph 
(d), by removing paragraph (d)(1)(ii) and redesignating paragraph 
(d)(1)(i) as (d)(1); in paragraph (e), by removing paragraphs (e)(3), 
(e)(7), and (e)(9); in paragraph (g), by removing paragraphs (g)(1)(iv), 
(g)(2)(i), (g)(15)(iv), and (g)(15)(vi) and by redesignating paragraph 
(g)(1)(v) as (g)(1)(iv), paragraphs (g)(2)(ii) and (g)(2)(iii) as 
(g)(2)(i) and (g)(2)(ii), and paragraph (g)(15)(v) as (g)(15)(iv); in 
paragraph (h), by removing paragraph (h)(2)(iii) and redesignating 
paragraph (h)(2)(iv) as (h)(2)(iii); in paragraph (j), by removing 
paragraphs (j)(1)(iv), (j)(3), (j)(4)(ii), (j)(5)(iv), and (j)(6)(ii) 
and by redesignating paragraphs (j)(4)(iii) through (j)(4)(vi) as 
paragraphs (j)(4)(ii) through (j)(4)(v) and paragraph (j)(6)(iii) as 
(j)(6)(ii); in paragraph (k), by removing paragraphs (k)(2)(i), (k)(4), 
and (k)(16) and by redesignating paragraphs (k)(2)(ii) through 
(k)(2)(vi) as paragraphs (k)(2)(i) through (k)(2)(v); and in paragraph 
(m), by removing paragraphs (m)(2), (m)(4), (m)(5)(i), and (m)(5)(ii) 
and by redesignating paragraph (m)(5)(iii) as (m)(5) and revising its 
heading, effective Aug. 17, 1998. For the convenience of the user, the 
superseded text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 1910.261  Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills.

    (a) * * *
    (3) * * *
    (ii) Safety Requirements for Floor and Wall Openings, Railings, and 
Toe Boards, A12.1--1967.

                                * * * * *

    (iv) Safety Code for Portable Wood Ladders, A14.1--1968.
    (v) Safety Code for Portable Metal Ladders A14.2--1956.
    (vi) Safety Code for Fixed Ladders, A14.3--1956.

                                * * * * *

    (ix) Safety Code for Mechanical Power-Transmission Apparatus, 
B15.1--1953 (Reaffirmed 1958).

                                * * * * *

    (xi) Safety Code for Cranes, Derricks, and Hoists, B30.2--1943 
(Reaffirmed 1952 and partially revised by B30.2.0--1967 and B30.5--
1968).
    (xii) Overhead and Gantry Cranes, B30.2.0--1967 (Partial Revision of 
B30.2--1943).
    (xiii) Crawler, Locomotive, and Truck Cranes, B30.5--1968 (Partial 
Revision of B30.2--1943).

                                * * * * *

    (xv) Safety Code for Powered Industrial Trucks, B56.1--1969.

                                * * * * *

    (xvii) Safety Code for Woodworking Machinery, O1.1--1954 (Reaffirmed 
1961).
    (xviii) Requirements for Sanitation in Places of Employment, Z4.1--
1968.
    (xix) Safety Code for Ventilation and Operation of Open-Surface 
Tanks, Z9.1--1951.
    (xx) Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation of Local 
Exhaust Systems, Z9.2--1960.

                                * * * * *

    (xxii) Method of Measurement of Real-Ear Attenuation of Ear 
Protectors at Threshold, Z24.22--1957.

                                * * * * *

    (xxiv) Specifications for Accident Prevention Signs, Z35.1--1968.
    (xxv) Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye and Face 
Protection, Z87.1--1968 (Partial Revision of Z2.1--1959).
    (xxvi) Practices for Respiratory Protection, Z88.2--1969.
    (xxvii) Safety Requirements for Industrial Head Protection, Z89.1--
1969.

                                * * * * *

    (b) * * * (1) Guards. All driving mechanisms, power-transmission 
apparatus, and prime movers shall be constructed, guarded, and used in 
conformity with American National Standard B15.1--1963 (Reaffirmed 
1958).
    (2) Personal protective clothing and equipment. Foot protection, 
shin guards, hard hats, noise-attenuation devices, and other personal 
protective clothing and equipment must be worn when the extent of the 
hazard warrants their use. Such equipment must be worn when specifically 
required by other paragraphs of this section, and must be maintained in 
accordance with applicable American National Standards Institute 
standards. Respirators, goggles, protective masks, rubber gloves, rubber 
boots, and other such equipment must be cleaned and disinfected before 
being used by another employee. Required eye, head, and ear protection 
must conform to American National Standards Institute standards Z24.22-
1957, Z87.1-1968, and Z89.1-1969. Respiratory protection must conform to 
the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.134.

[[Page 699]]

    (3) Floors and platforms. Floors, platforms, and work surfaces shall 
be maintained in accordance with American National Standard A12.1--1967.

                                * * * * *

    (5) Vessel entering. Lifelines and safety harness shall be worn by 
anyone entering closed vessels, tanks, chip bins, and similar equipment, 
and a person shall be stationed outside in a position to handle the line 
and to summon assistance in case of emergency. The air in the vessels 
shall be tested for oxygen deficiency and the presence of both toxic and 
explosive gases and vapors, before entry into closed vessels, tanks, 
etc., is permitted. Self-contained air- or oxygen-supply masks shall be 
readily available in case of emergency. Work shall not be done on 
equipment under conditions where an injury would result if a valve were 
unexpectedly opened or closed unless the valve has been locked in a safe 
position.
    (6) Industrial power trucks. All industrial power truck operations 
shall conform to American National Standard B56.1--1969. All forklift 
trucks shall be provided with overhead guards. All guards shall be 
designed in compliance with American National Standard B56.1--1969. 
Design requirements shall provide protection for the liquid petroleum 
tank.

                                * * * * *

    (c) * * *
    (2) * * *
    (vi) Equipment and practices shall conform to American National 
Standards B30.2--1943 (reaffirmed 1952) and B30.2.0--1967.
    (vii) Personal protective equipment for such uses as foot, head, and 
eye protection shall be required for workers on a job basis.

                                * * * * *

    (3) * * *(i) Ladders and gangplanks with railings to boat docks 
shall meet the requirements of American National Standards A12.1--1967, 
A14.1--1968, A14.2--1956, and A14.3--1956, and shall be securely 
fastened in place.

                                * * * * *

    (6) * * *
    (ii) Personal protective equipment for such uses as foot, head, and 
eye protection shall be provided, and employees shall wear the equipment 
when working in the woodyard. Ear protection shall be provided when the 
noise level may be harmful.
    (7) * * *
    (ii) Personal protective equipment shall be in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(6)(ii) of this section.
    (8) * * *(i) Crane boom and load capacities as specified by the 
manufacturer shall be posted in the cab of the crane in accordance with 
American National Standards B30.2--1943 (reaffirmed 1968) and B30.2.0--
1967.

                                * * * * *

    (11) Bridge or dock plates. The construction and use of bridge or 
dock plates shall conform to requirements of American National Standard 
B56.1--1969.

                                * * * * *

    (d) * * *
    (1) * * *
    (ii) When handling liquid acid or alkali, workmen shall be provided 
with approved eye and face protection and protective clothing, in 
accordance with American National Standard Z87.1--1968.

                                * * * * *

    (e) * * *
    (3) Slasher drive belts, pulleys, and shafts. All belts, pulleys, 
and shafts shall be guarded in accordance with American National 
Standard B15.1--1955 (reaffirmed 1958).

                                * * * * *

    (7) Circular saws (not slasher saws). Saws shall be provided with 
standard guards, in accordance with American National Standard 01.1--
1954 (reaffirmed 1961).

                                * * * * *

    (9) Guards. A guard shall be installed around barkers to confine 
flying particles, in accordance with American National Standard B15.1--
1953 (Reaffirmed 1958).

                                * * * * *

    (g) * * *
    (1) * * *
    (iv) Electric equipment shall be of the explosion-proof type, in 
accordance with the requirements of subpart S of this part.

                                * * * * *

    (2) * * * (i) Gas masks, fitted with canisters containing absorbents 
for the particular acids, gases, or mists involved, shall be provided 
for employees of the acid department.

                                * * * * *

    (15) * * *

[[Page 700]]

    (iv) The concentration of lead dust in the air shall not exceed the 
limits specified in Sec. 1910.1000.

                                * * * * *

    (vi) Sanitary facilities shall be provided as specified in American 
National Standard Z4.1--1968.

                                * * * * *

    (h) * * *
    (2) * * *
    (iii) Gas masks must be provided for emergency use in accordance 
with 29 CFR 1910.134.

                                * * * * *

    (j) * * *
    (1) * * *
    (iv) All power-driven mechanisms shall be guarded in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section.

                                * * * * *

    (3) Floors, steps, and platforms. The requirements of paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section shall apply.
    (4) * * *
    (ii) Guard rails 42 inches high shall be provided around beaters 
where tub tops are less than 42 inches from the floor, in accordance 
with paragraph (b)(3) of this section and American National Standard 
A12.1--1967.

                                * * * * *

    (5) * * *
    (iv) All power mechanisms shall be guarded in accordance with 
American National Standard B15.1--1953 (reaffirmed 1958).
    (6) * * *
    (ii) All power mechanisms shall be guarded in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section.

                                * * * * *

    (k) * * *
    (2) * * * (i) All drives, pulleys, couplings, and shafts on 
equipment requiring service while operating shall have standard guards 
in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section.

                                * * * * *

    (4) Walkways. Steps and footwalks along the fourdrinier and press 
section shall have nonslip surfacing and be complete with standard 
handrails, when practical, in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section.

                                * * * * *

    (16) Grounding. All calender stacks and spreader bars shall be 
grounded in accordance with subpart S of this part as protection against 
shock induced by static electricity.

                                * * * * *

    (m) * * *
    (2) Power trucks. Power trucks shall comply with American National 
Standard B56.1--1969. Adequate ventilation shall be provided and the 
trucks properly maintained, so that dangerous concentrations of carbon 
monoxide cannot be generated, especially in warehouses or other isolated 
areas of a plant.

                                * * * * *

    (4) Banding of skids, cartons, cases, etc. Banders and helpers shall 
wear eye protection equipment in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section.

                                * * * * *

    (5) Unloading cars and trucks. (i) Where steel bands or wires are 
used in boxcars or trucks, all loaders and helpers shall wear eye 
protection in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (ii) The construction and use of bridge or dock plates shall conform 
to the requirements of American National Standard B56.1--1969.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 1910.262  Textiles.

    (a) Application requirements--(1) Application. The requirements of 
this subpart for textile safety apply to the design, installation, 
processes, operation, and maintenance of textile machinery, equipment, 
and other plant facilities in all plants engaged in the manufacture and 
processing of textiles, except those processes used exclusively in the 
manufacture of synthetic fibers.
    (2) Standards incorporated by reference. Standards covering issues 
of occupational safety and health which are of general application 
without regard to any specific industry are incorporated by reference in 
paragraphs of this section and made applicable to textiles. All such 
standards shall be construed

[[Page 701]]

according to the rules of construction set out in Sec. 1910.5.
    (b) Definitions applicable to this section--(1) Belt shifter. A belt 
shifter is a device for mechanically shifting a belt from one pulley to 
another.
    (2) Belt shifter lock. A belt shifter lock is a device for 
positively locking the belt shifter in position while the machine is 
stopped and the belt is idling on the loose pulleys.
    (3) Calender. A calender in essence consists of a set of heavy 
rollers mounted on vertical side frames and arranged to pass cloth 
between them. Calenders may have two to ten rollers, or bowls, some of 
which can be heated.
    (4) Embossing calender. An embossing calender is a calender with two 
or more rolls, one of which is engraved for producing figured effects of 
various kinds on a fabric.
    (5) Cans (drying). Drying cans are hollow cylindrical drums mounted 
in a frame so they can rotate. They are heated with steam and are used 
to dry fabrics or yarn as it passes around the perimeter of the can.
    (6) Carbonizing. Carbonizing means the removing of vegetable matter 
such as burns, straws, etc., from wool by treatment with acid, followed 
by heat. The undesired matter is reduced to a carbon-like form which may 
be removed by dusting or shaking.
    (7) Card. A card machine consists of cylinders of various sizes--and 
in certain cases flats--covered with card clothing and set in relation 
to each other so that fibers in staple form may be separated into 
individual relationship. The speed of the cylinders and their direction 
of rotation varies. The finished product is delivered as a sliver. Cards 
of different types are: The revolving flat card, the roller-and-clearer 
card, etc.
    (8) Card clothing. Card clothing is the material with which many of 
the surfaces of a card are covered; e.g., the cylinder, doffer, etc. It 
consists of a thick foundation material, usually made of textile 
fabrics, through which are pressed many fine, closely spaced, specially 
bent wires.
    (9) Comber. A comber is a machine for combing fibers of cotton, 
wool, etc. The essential parts are a device for feeding forward a fringe 
of fibers at regular intervals and an arrangement of combs or pins 
which, at the right time, pass through the fringe. All tangled fibers, 
short fibers, and neps are removed and the long fibers are laid 
parallel.
    (10) Combing machinery. Combing machinery is a general 
classification, including combers, sliver lap machines, ribbon lap 
machines, and gill boxes, but excluding cards.
    (11) Cutter (rotary staple). A rotary staple cutter is a machine 
consisting of one or more rotary blades used for the purpose of cutting 
textile fibers into staple lengths.
    (12) Exposed to contact. Exposed to contact shall mean that the 
location of an object, material, nip point, or point of operation is 
such that a person is liable to come in contact with it in his normal 
course of employment.
    (13) Garnett machine. A Garnett machine means any of a number of 
types of machines for opening hard twisted waste of wool, cotton, silk, 
etc. Essentially, such machines consist of a lickerin; one or more 
cylinders, each having a complement worker and stripper rolls; and a 
fancy roll and doffer. The action of such machines is somewhat like that 
of a wool card, but it is much more severe in that the various rolls are 
covered with garnett wire instead of card clothing.
    (14) Gill box. A gill box is a machine used in the worsted system of 
manufacturing yarns. Its function is to arrange the fibers in parallel 
order. Essentially, it consists of a pair of feed rolls and a series of 
followers where the followers move at a faster surface speed and perform 
a combing action.
    (15) Interlock. An interlock is a device that operates to prevent 
the operation of machine while the cover or door of the machine is open 
or unlocked, and which will also hold the cover or door closed and 
locked while the machine is in motion.
    (16) Jig (dye). A dye jig is a machine for dyeing piece goods. The 
cloth, at full width, passes from a roller through the dye liquor in an 
open vat and is then wound on another roller. The operation is repeated 
until the desired shade is obtained.
    (17) Kier. A kier is a large metal vat, usually a pressure type, in 
which fabrics may be boiled out, bleached, etc.

[[Page 702]]

    (18) Lapper (ribbon). A ribbon lapper is a machine used to prepare 
laps for feeding a cotton comb; its purpose is to provide a uniform lap 
in which the fibers have been straightened as much as possible.
    (19) Lapper (sliver). A sliver lapper is a machine in which a number 
of parallel card slivers are drafted slightly, laid side by side in a 
compact sheet, and wound into a cylindrical package.
    (20) Loom. A loom is a machine for effecting the interlacing of two 
series of yarns crossing one another at right angles. The warp yarns are 
wound on a warp beam and pass through heddles and reed. The filling is 
shot across in a shuttle and settled in place by reed and lay, and the 
fabric is wound on a cloth beam.
    (21) Mangle (starch). A starch mangle is a mangle that is used 
specifically for starching cotton goods. It commonly consists of two 
large rolls and a shallow open vat with several immersion rolls. The vat 
contains the starch solution.
    (22) Mangle (water). A water mangle is a calender having two or more 
rolls used for squeezing water from fabrics before drying. Water mangles 
also may be used in other ways during the finishing of various fabrics.
    (23) Mule. A mule is a type of spinning frame having a head stock 
and a carriage as its two main sections. The head stock is stationary. 
The carriage is movable and it carries the spindles which draft and spin 
the roving into the yarn. The carriage extends over the whole width of 
the machine and moves slowly toward and away from the head stock during 
the spinning operation.
    (24) Nip. Nip shall mean the point of contact between two in-running 
rolls.
    (25) Openers and pickers. Openers and pickers means a general 
classification which includes breaker pickers, intermediate pickers, 
finisher pickers, single process pickers, multiple process pickers, 
willow machines, card and picker waste cleaners, thread extractors, 
shredding machines, roving waste openers, shoddy pickers, bale breakers, 
feeders, vertical openers, lattice cleaners, horizontal cleaners, and 
any similar machinery equipped with either cylinders, screen section, 
calender section, rolls, or beaters used for the preparation of stock 
for further processing.
    (26) Paddler. A paddler consists of a trough for a solution and two 
or more squeeze rolls between which cloth passes after being passed 
through a mordant or dye bath.
    (27) Point of operation. Point of operation shall mean that part of 
the machine where the work of cutting, shearing, squeezing, drawing, or 
manipulating the stock in any other way is done.
    (28) Printing machine (roller type). A roller printing machine is a 
machine consisting of a large central cylinder, or pressure bowl, around 
the lower part of the perimeter of which is placed a series of engraved 
color rollers (each having a color trough), a furnisher roller, doctor 
blades, etc. The machine is used for printing fabrics.
    (29) Ranges (bleaching continuous). Continuous bleaching ranges are 
of several types and may be made for cloth in rope or open-width form. 
The goods, after wetting out, pass through a squeeze roll into a 
saturator containing a solution of caustic soda and then to an enclosed 
J-box. A V-shaped arrangement is attached to the front part of the J-box 
for uniform and rapid saturation of the cloth with steam before it is 
packed down in the J-box. The cloth, in a single strand rope form, 
passes over a guide roll down the first arm of the ``V'' and up the 
second. Steam is injected into the ``V'' at the upper end of the second 
arm so that the cloth is rapidly saturated with steam at this point. The 
J-box capacity is such that cloth will remain hot for a sufficient time 
to complete the scouring action. It then passes a series of washers with 
a squeeze roll in between. The cloth then passes through a second set of 
saturator, J-box, and washer, where it is treated with the peroxide 
solution. By slight modification of the form of the unit, the same 
process can be applied to open-width cloth.
    (30) Range (mercerizing). A mercerizing range consists generally of 
a 3-bowl mangle, a tenter frame, and a number of boxes for washing and 
scouring. The whole setup is in a straight line and all parts operate 
continuously. The combination is used to saturate the cloth with sodium 
hydroxide, stretch it while

[[Page 703]]

saturated, and washing out most of the caustic before releasing tension.
    (31) Sanforizing machine. A sanforizing machine is a machine 
consisting of a large steam-heated cylinder, an endless, thick, woolen 
felt blanket which is in close contact with the cylinder for most of its 
perimeter, and an electrically heated shoe which presses the cloth 
against the blanket while the latter is in a stretched condition as it 
curves around feed-in roll.
    (32) Shearing machine. A shearing machine is a machine used in 
shearing cloth. Cutting action is provided by a number of steel blades 
spirally mounted on a roller. The roller rotates in close contact with a 
fixed ledger blade. There may be from one to six such rollers on a 
machine.
    (33) Singeing machine. A singeing machine is a machine used 
particularly with cotton; it comprises of a heated roller, plate, or an 
open gas flame. The material is rapidly passed over the roller or the 
plate or through the open gas flame to remove, fuzz or hairiness on yarn 
or cloth by burning.
    (34) Slasher. A slasher is a machine used for applying a size 
mixture to warp yarns. Essentially, it consists of a stand for holding 
section beams, a size box, one or more cylindrical dryers or an enclosed 
hot air dryer, and a beaming end for finding the yarn on the loom beams.
    (35) Solvent (industrial organic). Industrial organic solvent means 
any organic volatile liquid or compound, or any combination of these 
substances which are used to dissolve or suspend a nonvolatile or 
slightly volatile substance for industrial utilization. It shall also 
apply to such substances when used as detergents or cleansing agents. It 
shall not apply to petroleum products when such products are used as 
fuel.
    (36) Tenter frame. A tenter frame is a machine for drying cloth 
under tension. It essentially consists of a pair of endless traveling 
chains fitted with clips of fine pins and carried on tracks. The cloth 
is firmly held at the selvages by the two chains which diverge as they 
move forward so that the cloth is brought to the desired width.
    (37) Warper. A warper is any machine for preparing and arranging the 
yarns intended for the warp of a fabric, specifically, a beam warper.
    (c) General safety requirements--(1) Means of stopping machines. 
Every textile machine shall be provided with individual mechanical or 
electrical means for stopping such machines. On machines driven by belts 
and shafting, a locking-type shifter or an equivalent positive device 
shall be used. On operations where injury to the operator might result 
if motors were to restart after power failures, provision shall be made 
to prevent machines from automatically restarting upon restoration of 
power.
    (2) Handles. Stopping and starting handles shall be designed to the 
proper length to prevent the worker's hand or fingers from striking 
against any revolving part, gear guard, or any other part of the 
machine.
    (3)-(4) [Reserved]
    (5) Inspection and maintenance. All guards and other safety devices, 
including starting and stopping devices, shall be properly maintained.
    (6) Lighting. Lighting shall conform to American National Standard 
A11.1--1965, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (7) Identification of piping systems. Identification of piping 
systems shall conform to American National Standard A13.1--1956, which 
is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (8) Identification of physical hazards. Identification of physical 
hazards shall be in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 1910.144.
    (9) Steam pipes. All pipes carrying steam or hot water for process 
or servicing machinery, when exposed to contact and located within seven 
feet of the floor or working platform shall be covered with a heat-
insulating material, or otherwise properly guarded.
    (d) Openers and pickers--(1) Beater guards. When any opening or 
picker machinery is equipped with a beater, such beater shall be 
provided with metal covers which will prevent contact with the beater. 
Such covers shall be provided with an interlock which will prevent the 
cover from being raised while the machine is in motion and prevent the 
operation of the machine while the cover is open.

[[Page 704]]

    (2) Cleanout holes. Cleanout holes within reaching distance of the 
fan or picker beater shall have their covers securely fastened and they 
shall not be opened while the machine is in motion.
    (3) Feed rolls. The feed rolls on all opening and picking machinery 
shall be covered with a guard designed to prevent the operator from 
reaching the nip while the machinery is in operation.
    (4) Removal of foreign ferrous material. All textile opener lines 
shall be equipped with magnetic separators, tramp iron separators, or 
other means for the removal of foreign ferrous material.
    (e) Cotton cards--(1) Enclosures. Cylinder and lickerins shall be 
completely protected and the doffers should be enclosed.
    (2) Enclosure fastenings. The enclosures or covers shall be kept in 
place while the machine is in operation, except when stripping or 
grinding.
    (3) Stripping rolls. On operations calling for flat strippings which 
are allowed to fall on the doffer cover, where such strippings are 
removed by hand, the doffer cover shall be kept closed and securely 
fastened to prevent the opening of the cover while the machine is in 
operation. When it becomes necessary to clean the cards while they are 
in motion, a long-handled brush or dust mop shall be used.
    (f) Garnett machines--(1) Lickerin. Garnett lickerins shall be 
enclosed.
    (2) Fancy rolls. Garnett fancy rolls shall be enclosed by covers. 
These shall be installed in a way that keeps worker rolls reasonably 
accessible for removal or adjustment.
    (3) Underside of machine. The underside of the garnett shall be 
guarded by a screen mesh or other form of enclosure to prevent access.
    (g) Spinning mules--A substantial fender of metal or hardwood shall 
be installed in front of the carriage wheels, the fender to extend to 
within one-fourth inch of the rail.
    (h) Slashers--(1) Cylinder dryers--(i) Reducing valves, safety 
valves, and pressure gages. Reducing valves, safety valves, and pressure 
gages shall conform to the ASME Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, 
Unfired Pressure Vessels, 1968, which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) Vacuum relief valves. Vacuum relief valves shall conform to the 
ASME Code for Pressure Vessels, Section VIII, Unfired Pressure Vessels, 
1968.
    (iii) Lever control. When slashers are operated by control levers, 
these levers shall be connected to a horizontal bar or treadle located 
not more than 69 inches above the floor to control the operation from 
any point.
    (iv) Pushbutton control. Slashers operated by pushbutton control 
shall have stop and start buttons located at each end of the machine, 
and additional buttons located on both sides of the machine, at the size 
box and the delivery end. If calender rolls are used, additional buttons 
shall be provided at both sides of the machine at points near the nips, 
except when slashers are equipped with an enclosed dryer.
    (v) Nip guards. All nip guards shall comply with the requirements of 
paragraph (h)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (vi) Cylinder enclosure. When enclosures or hoods are used over 
cylinder drying rolls, such enclosures or hoods shall be provided with 
an exhaust system which will effectively prevent wet air and steam from 
escaping into the workroom.
    (vii) Expansion chambers. Slasher kettles and cookers shall be 
provided with expansion chambers in the covers, or drains, to prevent 
surging over. Steam-control valves shall be so located that they can be 
operated without exposing the worker to moving parts, hot surfaces, or 
steam.
    (2) Enclosed hot air dryer--(i) Lever control. When slashers are 
operated by control levers, these levers shall be connected to a 
horizontal bar or treadle located not more than 69 inches above the 
floor to control the operation from any point.
    (ii) Push-button control. Slashers operated by push-button control 
shall have one start button at each end of the machine and stop buttons 
shall be located on both sides of the machines at intervals spaced not 
more than 6 feet on centers. Inching buttons should be installed.
    (iii) Dryer enclosure. The dryer enclosure shall be provided with an 
exhaust system which will effectively prevent

[[Page 705]]

wet air and steam from escaping into the workroom.
    (iv) Nip guards. All nip guards shall comply with Table R-1.

                       Table R-1.--Guard Openings
  [Openings in the guard or between the guard and working surface shall
                   not be greater than the following]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Maximum
             Distance of opening from nip point                width of
                                                                opening
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0 to 1\1/2\.................................................       \1/4\
1\1/2\ to 2\1/2\............................................       \3/8\
2\1/2\ to 3\1/2\............................................       \1/2\
3\1/2\ to 5\1/2\............................................       \5/8\
5\1/2\ to 6\1/2\............................................       \3/4\
6\1/2\ to 7\1/2\............................................       \7/8\
7\1/2\ to 8\1/2\............................................      1\1/4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The measurements in Table R-1 are all in inches.

    (v) Expansion chambers. Slasher kettles and cookers shall be 
provided with expansion chambers in the covers, or drains, to prevent 
surging over. Steam control valves shall be so located that they can be 
operated without exposing the worker to moving parts, hot surfaces, or 
steam.
    (i) Warpers--(1) Swiveled double-bar gates. Swiveled double-bar 
gates shall be installed on all warpers operating in excess of 450 yards 
per minute. These gates shall be so interlocked that the machine cannot 
be operated until the gate is in the ``closed position,'' except for the 
purpose of inching or jogging.
    (2) Closed position. Closed position shall mean that the top bar of 
the gate shall be at least 42 inches from the floor or working platform; 
and the lower bar shall be at least 21 inches from the floor or working 
platform; and the gate shall be located 15 inches from the vertical 
tangent to the beam head.
    (j) Drawing frames, slubbers, roving parts, cotton combers, ring 
spinning frames, twisters. Gear housing covers on all installations of 
drawing frames, slubbers, roving frames, cotton combers, ring spinning 
frames, and twisters shall be equipped with interlocks.
    (k) Gill boxes--(1) Pin guard. A guard shall be placed ahead of the 
feed end and shall be so designed that it will prevent the worker's 
fingers from being caught in the pins of the intersecting fallers.
    (2) Nip guards. All nip guards shall comply with the requirements of 
paragraph (h)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (l) Heavy draw boxes, finishers, and speeders used in worsted 
drawing--(1) Band pulley covers. Covers for band pulleys shall be closed 
when the machine is in motion.
    (2) Benches or working platforms. Branches or working platforms 
approximately 10 inches in height and 8 inches in width should be 
installed along the entire running length of the machine for the worker 
to stand on while creeling the machine. Such benches or platforms shall 
be covered with an abrasive or nonslip material.
    (m) Sliver and ribbon lappers (cotton). Cover guard. An interlocking 
cover guard shall be installed over the large calender drums and the lap 
spool, designed to prevent the operator from coming in contact with the 
nip.
    (n) Looms--(1) Shuttle guard. Each loom shall be equipped with a 
guard designed to minimize the danger of the shuttle flying out of the 
shed.
    (2) Protection for loom fixer. Provisions shall be made so that 
every loom fixer can prevent the loom from being started while he is at 
work on the loom. This may be accomplished by means of a lock, the key 
to which is retained in the possession of the loom fixer, or by some 
other effective means to prevent starting the loom.
    (o) Shearing machines. All revolving blades on shearing machines 
shall be guarded so that the opening between the cloth surface and the 
bottom of the guard will not exceed three-eighths inch.
    (p) Continuous bleach range (cotton and rayon)--(1) J-box 
protection. Each valve controlling the flow of steam, injurious gases, 
or liquids into a J-box shall be equipped with a chain, lock, and key, 
so that any worker who enters the J-box can lock the valve and retain 
the key in his possession. Any other method which will prevent steam, 
injurious gases, or liquids from entering the J-box while the worker is 
in it will be acceptable.
    (2) Open-width bleaching. The nip of all in-running rolls on open-
width bleaching machine rolls shall be protected with a guard to prevent 
the worker from being caught at the nip. The guard shall extend across 
the entire length of the nip.

[[Page 706]]

    (q) Kiers--(1) Reducing valves, safety valves, and pressure gages. 
Reducing valves, safety valves, and pressure gages shall conform to the 
ASME Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels, Section VIII, Unfired/Pressure 
Vessels, 1968.
    (2) Kier valve protection. Each valve controlling the flow of steam, 
injurious gases, or liquids into a kier shall be equipped with a chain, 
lock, and key, so that any worker who enters the kier can lock the valve 
and retain the key in his possession. Any other method which will 
prevent steam, injurious gases, or liquids from entering the kier while 
the worker is in it will be acceptable.
    (r) Gray and white bins. On new installations guard rails conforming 
to Sec. 1910.23 shall be provided where workers are required to plait by 
hand from the top of the bin so as to protect the worker from falling to 
a lower level.
    (s) Mercerizing range (piece goods)--(1) Stopping devices. A 
stopping device shall be provided at each end of the machine.
    (2) Frame ends. A guard shall be installed at each end of the frame 
between the in-running chain and the clip opener, to prevent the 
worker's fingers from being caught.
    (3) Mangle and washers. The nip at the in-running rolls shall 
conform to Sec. 1910.264.
    (t) Tenter frames--(1) Stopping devices. A stopping device shall be 
provided at each end of the machine.
    (2) Frame ends. A guard shall be installed at each end of the frame 
at the in-running chain and clip opener.
    (3) Oil cups. Oil cups shall be safely located to permit easy 
access.
    (u) Dyeing jigs--(1) Stopping devices. Each dye jig shall be 
equipped with individual mechanical or electrical means for stopping the 
machine.
    (2) Roll arms. Roll arms on jigs shall be built to allow for extra 
large batches, and to prevent the center bar from being forced off, 
causing the batch to fall.
    (v) Padders--Nip guards. All nip guards shall comply with the 
requirements of paragraph (h)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (w) Drying cans--(1) Pressure reducing valves and pressure gages. 
Pressure reducing valves and pressure gages shall conform to the ASME 
Code for Pressure Vessels, Section VIII, 1968, Unfired Pressure Vessels.
    (2) Vacuum collapse. If cans are not designed to prevent vacuum 
collapse, each can shall be equipped with one or more vacuum relief 
valves with openings of sufficient size to prevent the collapse of the 
can if vacuum occurs.
    (x) Flat-work ironer--(1) Feed rolls. The feed rolls shall be 
guarded to conform to Sec. 1910.264.
    (2) Pressure rolls. Pressure rolls shall be covered or guarded to 
conform to Sec. 1910.264.
    (y) Extractors--(1) Centrifugal extractor--(i) Cover. Each extractor 
shall be equipped with a metal cover.
    (ii) Interlocking device. Each extractor shall be equipped with an 
interlocking device that will prevent the cover from being opened while 
the basket is in motion, and also prevent the power operation of the 
basket while the cover is open.
    (iii) Brakes. Each extractor shall be equipped with a mechanically 
or electrically operated brake to quickly stop the basket when the power 
driving the basket is shut off.
    (iv) Maximum allowable speed. Each centrifugal extractor shall be 
effectively secured in position on the floor or foundation so as to 
eliminate unnecessary vibration, and should not be operated at a speed 
greater than the manufacturer's rating, which shall be stamped where 
easily visible in letters not less than one-quarter inch in height. The 
maximum allowable speed shall be given in revolutions per minute (rpm).
    (2) Engine drum extractor--Over-speed governor. Each engine 
individually driving an extractor shall be provided with an approved 
engine stop and speed limit governor.
    (3) Squeezer or wringer extractor--Nip guards. All nip guards shall 
comply with the requirements of paragraph (h)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (z) Nip guards. All nip guards for water mangle, starch mangle, 
back-washer (worsted yarn) crabbing machines, decating machines, shall 
comply with the requirements of paragraph (h)(2)(iv).
    (aa) Sanforizing and palmer machine. A safety trip rod, cable, or 
wire center

[[Page 707]]

cord shall be provided across the front and back of all palmer cylinders 
extending the length of the face of the cylinder. It shall operate 
readily whether pushed or pulled. This safety trip shall be not more 
than 72 inches above the level on which the operator stands and shall be 
readily accessible.
    (bb) Rope washers--(1) Splash guard. Splash guards shall be 
installed on all rope washers unless the machine is so designed as to 
prevent the water or liquid from splashing the operator, the floor, or 
working surface.
    (2) Safety stop bar. A safety trip rod, cable or wire center cord 
shall be provided across the front and back of all rope washers 
extending the length of the face of the washer. It shall operate readily 
whether pushed or pulled. This safety trip shall be not more than 72 
inches above the level on which the operator stands and shall be readily 
accessible.
    (cc) Laundry washer tumbler or shaker--(1) Interlocking device. Each 
drying tumbler, each double cylinder shaker or clothes tumbler, and each 
washing machine shall be equipped with an interlock device which will 
prevent the power operation of the inside cylinder when the outer door 
on the case or shell is open, and which will also prevent the outer door 
on the case or shell from being opened without shutting off the power.
    (2) Means of holding covers or doors in open position. Each enclosed 
barrel shall also be equipped with adequate means for holding open the 
doors or covers of the inner and outer cylinders or shells while it is 
being loaded or unloaded.
    (dd) Printing machine (roller type)--(1) Nip guards. All nip guards 
shall comply with the requirements of paragraph (h)(2)(iv) of this 
section.
    (2) Crown wheel and roller gear nip protection. The engraved roller 
gears and the large crown wheel shall be provided with a protective disc 
which will enclose the nips of the in-running gears. Individual discs 
for each nip will be acceptable.
    (ee) Calenders. The nip at the in-running side of the rolls shall be 
provided with a guard extending across the entire length of the nip and 
arranged to prevent the fingers of the workers from being pulled in 
between the rolls or between the guard and the rolls, and constructed so 
that the cloth can be fed into the rolls safely.
    (ff) Rotary staple cutters. A guard shall be installed completely 
enclosing the cutters to prevent the hands of the operator from reaching 
the cutting zone.
    (gg) [Reserved]
    (hh) Hand bailing machine. An angle-iron-handle stop guard shall be 
installed at the right angle to the frame of the machine. The stop guard 
shall be so designed and so located that it will prevent the handle from 
traveling beyond the vertical position should the handle slip from the 
operator's hand when the pawl has been released from the teeth of the 
takeup gear.
    (ii) Roll bench. Cleats shall be installed on the ends of roll 
benches.
    (jj) Cuttle or swing folder (overhead type). The bottom of the 
overhead folders shall be located not less than 7 feet from the floor or 
working surface.
    (kk) Color-mixing room. Floors in color-mixing rooms shall be 
constructed to drain easily.
    (ll) Open tanks and vats for mixing and storage of hot or corrosive 
liquids--Shutoff valves. Boiling tanks, caustic tanks, and hot liquid 
containers, so located that the operator cannot see the contents from 
the floor or working area, shall have emergency shutoff valves 
controlled from a point not subject to danger of splash. Valves shall 
conform to the ASME Pressure Vessel Code, section VIII, Unfired Pressure 
Vessels, 1968.
    (mm) Dye kettles and vats--Pipes or drains of sufficient capacity to 
carry the contents safely away from the working area shall be installed 
where there are dye kettles and vats which may at any time contain hot 
or corrosive liquids. These shall not empty directly onto the floor.
    (nn) Acid carboys. Carboys shall be provided with inclinators, or 
the acid shall be withdrawn from the carboys by means of pumping without 
pressure in the carboy, or by means of hand operated siphons.
    (oo) Handling caustic soda and caustic potash. Means shall be 
provided for handling and emptying caustic soda and caustic potash 
containers to prevent workers from coming in contact

[[Page 708]]

with the caustic (see paragraph (qq) of this section).
    (pp) First aid. Wherever acids or caustics are used, provision shall 
be made for a copious and flowing supply of fresh, clean water.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 23073, May 28, 1975; 49 
FR 5324, Feb. 10, 1984; 61 FR 9241, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 FR 33467, June 18, 
1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.262 
was amended by removing paragraphs (c)(3), (c)(4), (gg), (ll)(1), (qq), 
and (rr) and by redesignating paragraph (ll)(2) as (ll), effective Aug. 
17, 1998. For the convenience of the user, the superseded text is set 
forth as follows:

Sec. 1910.262  Textiles.

                                * * * * *

    (c) * * *
    (3) Machine guarding. Mechanical power-transmission equipment shall 
be guarded in conformity with Sec. 1910.219.
    (4) Housekeeping. Aisles and working spaces shall be kept in good 
order, clean and free of obstructions in accordance with requirements of 
Sec. 1910.141.

                                * * * * *

    (gg) Clothing folding machine. The crank arm and blade guide rods on 
both sides of the cloth-folding machines shall be protected from contact 
by barrier guards constructed to conform to the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.219.

                                * * * * *

    (ll) * * * (1) Protection against falls. Open tanks and vats 
containing hot or corrosive liquids shall be protected to conform to the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.23.

                                * * * * *

    (qq) Personal protective equipment--(1) Personal protective 
equipment. Workers engaged in handling acids or caustics in bulk, 
repairing pipe lines containing acids or caustics, etc., shall be 
provided with protective occupational (safety) equipment to conform to 
the requirements of Sec. 1910.132, Sec. 1910.133, and Sec. 1910.134.
    (2) Respirators, gas masks, and such appliances, for emergency use 
only, shall be of a type required by Sec. 1910.134.
    (rr) Workroom ventilation. In all workrooms in which potentially 
toxic substances are used, the maximum allowable concentrations listed 
in Sec. 1910.1000 shall be maintained. Open surface tanks shall conform 
to the requirements of Sec. 1910.94(d).


<R05>
Sec. 1910.263  Bakery equipment.

    (a) General requirements--(1) Application. The requirements of this 
section shall apply to the design, installation, operation and 
maintenance of machinery and equipment used within a bakery.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) General machine guarding.
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) Gears. All gears shall be completely enclosed regardless of 
location.
    (3) Sprockets and V-belt drives. Sprockets and V-belt drives located 
within reach from platforms or pasageways or located within 8 feet 6 
inches from the floor shall be completely enclosed.
    (4) [Reserved]
    (5) Lubrication. Where machinery must be lubricated while in motion, 
stationary lubrication fittings inside a machine shall be provided with 
extension piping to a point of safety so that the employee will not have 
to reach into any dangerous part of the machine when lubricating.
    (6)-(7) [Reserved]
    (8) Hot pipes. Exposed hot water and steam pipes shall be covered 
with insulating material wherever necessary to protect employee from 
contact.
    (d) Flour-handling equipment--(1) General requirements for flour 
handling. (i) Wherever any of the various pieces of apparatus comprising 
a flour-handling system are run in electrical unity with one another the 
following safeguards shall apply:
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Wherever a flour-handling system is of such size that the 
beginning of its operation is far remote from its final delivery end, 
all electric motors operating each apparatus comprising this system 
shall be controlled at each of two points, one located at each remote 
end, either of which will stop all motors.
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) Control circuits for magnetic controllers shall be so arranged 
that the opening of any one of several limit switches, which may be on 
an individual unit, will serve to de-energize all of the motors of that 
unit.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (2) Bag chutes and bag lifts (bag-arm elevators). (i) Bag chutes 
(gravity

[[Page 709]]

chutes for handling flour bags) shall be so designed so as to keep to a 
minimum the speed of flour bags. If the chute inclines more than 30 deg. 
from the horizontal, there shall be an upturn at the lower end of the 
chute to slow down the bags.
    (ii) Bag-arm elevators with manual takeoff shall be designed to 
operate at a capacity not exceeding seven bags per minute. The arms on 
the conveyor chain shall be so spaced as to obtain the full capacity of 
the elevator with the lowest possible chain speed. There shall be an 
electric limit switch at the unloading end of the bag-arm elevator so 
installed as to automatically stop the conveyor chain if any bag fails 
to clear the conveyor arms.
    (iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) Man lifts shall be prohibited in bakeries. Bag or barrel lifts 
shall not be used as man lifts.
    (3) Dumpbin and blender.
    (i)-(iv) [Reserved]
    (v) All dumpbin and blender hoods shall be of sufficient capacity to 
prevent circulation of flour dust outside the hoods.
    (vi) All dumpbins shall be of a suitable height from floor to enable 
the operator to dump flour from bags, without causing undue strain or 
fatigue. Where the edge of any bin is more than 24 inches above the 
flour, a bag rest step shall be provided.
    (vii) A control device for stopping the dumpbin and blender shall be 
provided close to the normal location of the operator.
    (4)-(5) [Reserved]
    (6) Storage bins.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Storage bins shall be provided with gaskets and locks or 
latches to keep the cover closed, or other equivalent devices in order 
to insure the dust tightness of the cover. Covers at openings where an 
employee may enter the bin shall also be provided with a hasp and a 
lock, so located that the employee may lock the cover in the open 
position whenever it is necessary to enter the bin.
    (iii) Storage bins where the side is more than 5 feet in depth shall 
be provided with standard stationary safety ladders, both inside and 
outside, to reach from floor level to top of bin and from top of bin to 
inside bottom, keeping the ladder end away from the moving screw 
conveyor.
    (iv)-(v) [Reserved]
    (vi) The main entrance cover of large storage bins located at the 
interior exit ladder shall be provided with an electric interlock for 
motors operating both feed and unloading screw, so that these motors 
cannot operate while the cover is open.
    (7) Screw conveyors.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) The covers of all screw conveyors shall be made removable in 
convenient sections, held on with stationary clamps located at proper 
intervals keeping all covers dust-tight. Where drop or hinged bottom 
sections are provided this provision shall not apply.
    (8) Sifters. (i) Enclosures of all types of flour sifters shall be 
so constructed that they are dust-tight but readily accessible for 
interior inspection.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (9) Flour scales.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Traveling or track-type flour scales shall be equipped with 
bar handles for moving same. The bar should be at least 1 inch in 
diameter and well away from trolley track wheels.
    (e) Mixers--(1) Horizontal dough mixers. (i) Mixers with external 
power application shall have all belts, chains, gears, pulleys, 
sprockets, clutches, and other moving parts completely enclosed.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Each mixer shall be equipped with an individual motor and 
control, and with a conveniently located manual switch to prevent the 
mixer from being started in the usual manner while the machine is being 
serviced and cleaned.
    (iv) All electrical control stations shall be so located that the 
operator must be in full view of the bowl in its open position. No 
duplication of such controls other than a stop switch shall be 
permitted.
    (v) All mixers with power and manual dumping arrangements shall be 
equipped with safety devices which shall:
    (a) Engage both hands of the operator, when the agitator is in 
motion under power, and while the bowl is

[[Page 710]]

opened more than one-fifth of its total opening.
    (b) Prevent the agitator from being started, while the bowl is more 
than one-fifth open, without engaging both hands of the operator;
    (vi)-(vii) [Reserved]
    (viii) Every mixer shall be equipped with a full enclosure over the 
bowl which is closed at all times while the agitator is in motion. Only 
minor openings in this enclosure, such as ingredient doors, flour 
inlets, etc., each representing less than 1\1/2\ square feet in area, 
shall be capable of being opened while the mixer is in operation.
    (ix) [Reserved]
    (x) Overhead covers or doors which are subject to accidental closure 
shall be counterbalanced to remain in an open position or provided with 
means to hold them open until positively released by the operator.
    (xi)-(xvii) [Reserved]
    (xviii) Valves and controls to regulate the coolant in mixer jackets 
shall be located so as to permit access by the operator without 
jeopardizing his safety.
    (2) Vertical mixers. (i) Vertical mixers shall comply with 
paragraphs (e)(1) (i), (iii), (ix) and (x), of this section.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Bowl locking devices shall be of a positive type which require 
the attention of the operator for unlocking.
    (iv) Devices shall be made available for moving bowls weighing more 
than 80 pounds, with contents, into and out of the mixing position on 
the machine.
    (f) Dividers.
    (1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) Rear of divider. The back of the divider shall have a complete 
cover to enclose all of the moving parts, or each individual part shall 
be enclosed or guarded to remove the separate hazards. The rear cover 
shall be provided with a limit switch in order that the machine cannot 
operate when this cover is open. The guard on the back shall be hinged 
so that it cannot be completely removed and if a catch or brace is 
provided for holding the cover open, it shall be designed so that it 
will not release due to vibrations or minor bumping whereby the cover 
may drop on an employee.
    (g) Moulders--(1) Hoppers. Mechanical feed moulders shall be 
provided with hoppers so designed and connected to the proofer that an 
employee's hands cannot get into the hopper where they will come in 
contact with the in-running rolls.
    (2) Hand-fed moulders. Hand-fed moulders shall be provided with a 
belt-feed device or the hopper shall be extended high enough so that the 
hands of the operator cannot get into the feed rolls. The top edge of 
such a hopper shall be well rounded to prevent injury when it is struck 
or bumped by the employee's hand.
    (3) Stopping devices. There shall be a stopping device within easy 
reach of the operator who feeds the moulder and another stopping device 
within the reach of the employee taking the dough away from the moulder.
    (h) Manually fed dough brakes--(1) Top-roll protection. The top roll 
shall be protected by a heavy gage metal shield extending over the roll 
to go within 6 inches of the hopper bottom board. The shield may be 
perforated to permit observation of the dough entering the rolls.
    (2) Emergency stop bar--An emergency stop bar shall be provided, and 
so located that the body of the operator will press against the bar if 
the operator slips and falls toward the rolls, or if the operator gets 
his hand caught in the rolls. The bar shall apply the body pressure to 
open positively a circuit that will deenergize the drive motor. In 
addition, a brake which is inherently self-engaging by requiring power 
or force from an external source to cause disengagement shall be 
activated at the same time causing the rolls to stop instantly. The 
emergency stop bar shall be checked for proper operation every 30 days.
    (i) Miscellaneous equipment--(1) Proof boxes. All door locks shall 
be operable both from within and outside the box. Guide rails shall be 
installed to center the rack as it enters, passes through, and leaves 
the proof box.
    (2) Fermentation room. Fermentation room doors shall have 
nonshatterable wire glass or plastic panels for vision through doors.
    (3) Troughs. Troughs shall be mounted on antifriction bearing 
casters thus

[[Page 711]]

making it possible for the operator to move and direct the motion of the 
trough with a minimum of effort.
    (4) Hand trucks. (i) Casters shall be set back from corners to be 
out of the way of toes and heels, but not far enough back to cause the 
truck to be unstable.
    (ii) A lock or other device shall be provided to hold the handle in 
vertical position when the truck is not in use.
    (5) Lift trucks. A lock or other device shall be provided to hold 
the handle in vertical position when the truck is not in use.
    (6) Racks.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Racks shall be equipped with handles so located with reference 
to the frame of the rack that no part of the operator's hands extends 
beyond the outer edge of the frame when holding onto the handles.
    (iii) Antifriction bearing casters shall be used to give the 
operator better control of the rack.
    (7) Conveyors. (i) Wherever a conveyor passes over a main aisleway, 
regularly occupied work area, or passageway, the underside of the 
conveyor shall be completely enclosed to prevent broken chains or other 
material from falling in the passageway.
    (ii) Stop bumpers shall be installed on all delivery ends of 
conveyors, wherever manual removal of the product carried is practiced.
    (iii) Where hazard of getting caught exists a sufficient number of 
stop buttons shall be provided to enable quick stopping of the conveyor.
    (8)-(10) [Reserved]
    (11) Ingredient premixers, emulsifiers, etc. (i) All top openings 
shall be provided with covers attached to the machines. These covers 
should be so arranged and interlocked that power will be shut off 
whenever the cover is opened to a point where the operator's fingers 
might come in contact with the beaters.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (12) Chain tackle. (i) All chain tackle shall be marked prominently, 
permanently, and legibly with maximum load capacity.
    (ii) All chain tackle shall be marked permanently and legibly with 
minimum support specification.
    (iii) Safety hooks shall be used.
    (13) Trough hoists, etc. (i) All hoists shall be marked prominently, 
permanently, and legibly with maximum load capacity.
    (ii) All hoists shall be marked permanently and legibly with minimum 
support specifications.
    (iii) Safety catches shall be provided for the chain so that the 
chain will hold the load in any position.
    (iv) Safety hooks shall be used.
    (14) Air-conditioning units.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) On large units with doors to chambers large enough to be 
entered, all door locks shall be operable from both inside and outside.
    (15) Pan washing tanks.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) The surface of the floor of the working platform shall be 
maintained in nonslip condition.
    (iii)-(iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Power ventilated exhaust hoods shall be provided over the tanks.
    (16)-(19) [Reserved]
    (20) Bread coolers, rack type.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) All door locks shall be operable from both within and outside 
the cooler.
    (21) [Reserved]
    (22) Doughnut machines. Separate flues shall be provided, (i) for 
venting vapors from the frying section, and (ii) for venting products of 
combustion from the combustion chamber used to heat the fat.
    (23) Open fat kettles. (i) The floor around kettles shall be 
maintained in nonslip condition.
    (ii)-(iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) The top of the kettle shall be not less than 36 inches above 
floor or working level.
    (24) Steam kettles. (i) Positive locking devices shall be provided 
to hold kettles in the desired position.
    (ii) Kettles with steam jackets shall be provided with safety valves 
in accordance with the ASME Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Unfired 
Pressure Vessels, 1968, which is incorporated by reference as specified 
in Sec. 1910.6.
    (j) Slicers and wrappers--(1) Slicers.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]

[[Page 712]]

    (iii) The cover over the knife head of reciprocating-blade slicers 
shall be provided with an interlocking arrangement so that the machine 
cannot operate unless the cover is in place.
    (iv) On slicers with endless band knives, each motor shall be 
equipped with a magnet brake which operates whenever the motor is not 
energized. Each door, panel, or other point of access to the cutting 
blades shall be arranged by means of mechanical or electric interlocks 
so that the motor will be deenergized if all such access doors, panels, 
or access points are not closed.
    (v) When it is necessary to sharpen slicer blades on the machine, a 
barrier shall be provided leaving only sufficient opening for the 
sharpening stone to reach the knife blades.
    (vi) [Reserved]
    (vii) Slicer wrapper conditions.
    (a)-(b) [Reserved]
    (c) Mechanical control levers for starting and stopping both slicing 
machine conveyors and wrapping machines shall be extended or so located 
that an operator in one location can control both machines. Such levers 
should be provided wherever necessary, but these should be so arranged 
that there is only one station capable of starting the wrapping machine 
and conveyor assembly, and this starting station should be so arranged 
or guarded as to prevent accidental starting. The electric control 
station for starting and stopping the electric motor driving the 
wrapping machine and conveyor should be located near the clutch starting 
lever.
    (2) Wrappers.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Electrical heaters on wrappers shall be protected by a cover 
plate properly separated or insulated from the heaters in order that 
accidental contact with this cover plate will not cause a burn to the 
operator.
    (k) Biscuit and cracker equipment--(1) Meal, peanut, and fig 
grinders. (i) If the hopper is removable it shall be provided with an 
electric interlock so that the machine cannot be put in operation when 
the hopper is removed.
    (ii) Where grid guards cannot be used, feed conveyors to hoppers, or 
baffle-type hoppers, shall be provided. Hoppers in such cases shall be 
enclosed and provided with hinged covers, and equipped with electric 
interlock to prevent operation of the machine with the cover open.
    (2) Sugar and spice pulverizers. (i) All drive belts used in 
connection with sugar and spice pulverizers shall be grounded by means 
of metal combs or other effective means of removing static electricity. 
All pulverizing of sugar or spice grinding shall be done in accordance 
with NFPA 62--1967 (Standard for Dust Hazards of Sugar and Cocoa) and 
NFPA 656--1959 (Standard for Dust Hazards in Spice Grinding Plants), 
which are incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) Magnetic separators shall be provided to reduce fire and 
explosion hazards.
    (3) Cheese, fruit, and food cutters. These machines shall be 
protected in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (k)(1) of 
this section.
    (4) [Reserved]
    (5) Reversible dough brakes. Reversible brakes shall be provided 
with a guard or tripping mechanism on each side of the rolls. These 
guards shall be so arranged as to stop the machine or reverse the 
direction of the rolls so that they are outrunning if the guard is moved 
by contact of the operator.
    (6) Cross-roll brakes. Cross-roll brakes shall be provided with 
guards that are similar in number and equal in effectiveness to guards 
on hand-fed brakes.
    (7) Box- and roll-type dough sheeters.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Hoppers for sheeters shall have an automatic stop bar or 
automatic stopping device along the back edge of the hopper. If 
construction does not permit location at the back edge, the automatic 
stop bar or automatic stopping device shall be located where it will be 
most effective to accomplish the desired protection.
    (8) [Reserved]
    (9) Rotary, die machines, pretzel rolling, and pretzel-stick 
extruding machines. Dough hoppers shall have the entire opening 
protected with substantial grid-type guards to prevent the employee from 
getting his hands caught in moving parts, or the hopper shall be 
extended high enough so that the operator's hands cannot get into moving 
parts.

[[Page 713]]

    (10)-(11) [Reserved]
    (12) Pan cooling towers. (i) Where pan cooling towers extend to two 
or more floors, a lockout switch shall be provided on each floor in 
order that mechanics working on the tower may positively lock the 
mechanism against starting. Only one start switch shall be used in the 
motor control circuit.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (13) Chocolate melting, refining, and mixing kettles. Each kettle 
shall be provided with a cover to enclose the top of the kettle. The 
bottom outlet of each kettle shall be of such size and shape that the 
operator cannot reach in to touch the revolving paddle or come in 
contact with the shear point between the paddle and the side of the 
kettle.
    (14)-(16) [Reserved]
    (17) Peanut cooling trucks. Mechanically operated peanut cooling 
trucks shall have a grid-type cover over the entire top.
    (l) Ovens--(1) General location.
    (i)-(vi) [Reserved]
    (vii) Ovens shall be located so that possible fire or explosion will 
not expose groups of persons to possible injury. For this reason ovens 
shall not adjoin lockers, lunch or sales rooms, main passageways, or 
exits.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Safeguards of mechanical parts. (i) Emergency stop buttons shall 
be provided on mechanical ovens near the point where operators are 
stationed.
    (ii) All piping at ovens shall be tested to be gastight.
    (iii) Main shutoff valves, operable separately from any automatic 
valve, shall be provided to permit turning off the fuel or steam in case 
of an emergency.
    (a) Main shutoff valves shall be located so that explosions, fires, 
etc. will not prevent access to these valves.
    (b) Main shutoff valves shall be locked in the closed position when 
men must enter the oven or when the oven is not in service.
    (4)-(7) [Reserved]
    (8) Electrical heating equipment.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) A main disconnect switch or circuit breaker shall be provided. 
This switch or circuit breaker shall be so located that it can be 
reached quickly and safely. The main switch or circuit breaker shall 
have provisions for locking it in the open position if any work on the 
electrical equipment or inside the oven must be performed.
    (9) General requirements. (i) Protecting devices shall be properly 
maintained and kept in working order.
    (ii) All safety devices on ovens shall be inspected at intervals of 
not less than twice a month by an especially appointed, properly 
instructed bakery employee, and not less than once a year by 
representatives of the oven manufacturers.
    (iii)(a) Protection of gas pilot lights shall be provided when it is 
impracticable to protect the main flame of the burner and where the 
pilot flame cannot contact the flame electrode without being in the path 
of the main flame of the burner. Failure of any gas pilot shall 
automatically shut off the fuel supply to the burner.
    (b) Ovens with multiple burners shall be equipped with individual 
atmospheric pilot lights where there is sufficient secondary air in the 
baking chamber and where gas is available; or else each burner shall be 
equipped with an electric spark-type ignition device.
    (iv) Burners of a capacity exceeding 150,000 B.t.u. per hour 
equipped with electric ignition shall be protected in addition by quick-
acting combustion safeguards.
    (a) The high-tension current for any electric spark-type ignition 
device shall originate in a power supply line which is interlocked with 
the fuel supply for the oven in such a way that in case of current 
failure both the source of electricity to the high-tension circuits and 
the fuel supply shall be turned off simultaneously.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Combustion safeguards used in connection with electric ignition 
systems on ovens shall be so designed as to prevent an explosive mixture 
from accumulating inside the oven before ignition has taken place.
    (v) When fuel is supplied and used at line pressure, safety shutoff 
valves shall be provided in the fuel line leading to the burner.
    (a) When fuel is supplied in excess of line pressure, safety shutoff 
valves

[[Page 714]]

shall be provided in the fuel line leading to the burners, unless the 
fuel supply lines are equipped with other automatic valves which will 
prevent the flow of fuel when the compressing equipment is stopped.
    (b) The safety shutoff valve shall be positively tight and shall be 
tested at least twice monthly.
    (c)-(d) [Reserved]
    (e) A safety shutoff valve shall require manual operation for 
reopening after it has closed, or the electric circuit shall be so 
arranged that it will require a manual operation for reopening the 
safety shutoff valve.
    (f) Manual reset-type safety shutoff valves shall be so arranged 
that they cannot be locked in an open position by external means.
    (g) Where blowers are used for supplying the air for combustion the 
safety shutoff valve shall be interlocked so that it will close in case 
of air failure.
    (h) Where gas or electric ignition is used, the safety shutoff valve 
shall close in case of ignition failure. On burners equipped with 
combustion safeguards, the valve shall close in case of burner flame 
failure.
    (vi) One main, manually operated, fuel shutoff valve shall be 
provided on each oven, and shall be located ahead of all other valves in 
the system.
    (vii) All individual gas or oil burners with a heating capacity over 
150,000 B.t.u. per hour shall be protected by a safeguard which is 
actuated by the flame and which will react to flame failure in a time 
interval not to exceed 2 seconds. All safeguards, once having shut down 
a gas or oil burner, shall require manual resetting and starting of the 
burner or burners.
    (viii) Any space in an oven (except direct fired ovens) which could 
be filled with an explosive mixture shall be protected by explosion 
vents. Explosion vents shall be made of minimum weight consistent with 
adequate insulation.
    (a) Explosion doors which have a substantial weight shall be 
attached by chains or similar means to prevent flying parts from 
injuring the personnel in case of an explosion.
    (b) Where explosion vents are so located that flying parts or gases 
might endanger the personnel working on or near the oven, internal or 
external protecting means shall be provided in the form of heavily 
constructed shields or deflectors made from noncombustible material.
    (c) Specifically exempted from the provisions of paragraph paragraph 
(l)(8)(viii) of this section are heating systems on ovens in which the 
fuel is admitted only to enclosed spaces which shall have been tested to 
prove that their construction will resist repeated explosions without 
deformation are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (l)(8)(viii) 
(a) and (b) of this section.
    (ix)-(x) [Reserved]
    (xi) Where the gas supply pressure is substantially higher than that 
at which the burners of an oven are designed to operate, a gas pressure 
regulator shall be employed.
    (a)-(c) [Reserved]
    (d) A relief valve shall be placed on the outlet side of gas 
pressure regulators where gas is supplied at high pressure. The 
discharge from this valve shall be piped to the outside of the building.
    (10) Direct-fired ovens. (i) Direct-fired ovens shall be safeguarded 
against failure of fuel, air, or ignition.
    (ii) To prevent the possible accumulation of explosive gases from 
being ignited after a shutdown, all direct-fired ovens with a heating 
capacity over 150,000 B.t.u. per hour shall be ventilated before the 
ignition system, combustion air blower, and the fuel can be turned on. 
The preventilation shall insure at least four complete changes of 
atmosphere in the baking chamber by discharging the oven atmosphere to 
the outside of the building and entraining fresh air into it. The 
preventilation shall be repeated whenever the heating equipment is shut 
down by a safety device.
    (11) Direct recirculating ovens. (i) Each circulating fan in direct 
recirculating ovens shall be interconnected with the burner in such a 
manner that the fuel is shut off by a safety valve when the fan is not 
running.
    (ii) The flame of the burner or burners in direct recirculating 
ovens shall be protected by a quick-acting flame-

[[Page 715]]

sensitive safeguard which will automatically shut off the fuel supply in 
case of burner failure.
    (12)-(14) [Reserved]
    (15) Indirect recirculating ovens.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Duct systems (in ovens) operating under pressure shall be 
tested for tightness in the initial starting of the oven and also at 
intervals not farther apart than 6 months.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49765, Oct. 24, 1978; 
43 FR 51760, Nov. 7, 1978; 61 FR 9241, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.264  Laundry machinery and operations.

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) General requirements. This section applies to moving parts of 
equipment used in laundries and to conditions peculiar to this industry, 
with special reference to the point of operation of laundry machines. 
This section does not apply to dry-cleaning operations.
    (c) Point-of-operation guards--(1) Washroom machines.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Washing machine.
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Each washing machine shall be provided with means for holding 
open the doors or covers of inner and outer cylinders or shells while 
being loaded or unloaded.
    (2) Starching and drying machines.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Drying tumbler.
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Each drying tumbler shall be provided with means for holding 
open the doors or covers of inner and outer cylinders or shells while 
being loaded or unloaded.
    (iv) Shaker (clothes tumbler).
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b)(1) [Reserved]
    (2) Each shaker or clothes tumbler of the double-cylinder type shall 
be provided with means for holding open the doors or covers of inner and 
outer cylinders or shells while being loaded or unloaded.
    (v) Exception. Provisions of paragraph (c)(2) (iii), (iv)(a)(1), and 
(iv)(b) of this section shall not apply to shakeout or conditioning 
tumblers where the clothes are loaded into the open end of the revolving 
cylinder and are automatically discharged out of the opposite end.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Miscellaneous machines and equipment.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Steam pipes. (a) All steam pipes that are within 7 feet of the 
floor or working platform, and with which the worker may come into 
contact, shall be insulated or covered with a heat-resistive material or 
shall be otherwise properly guarded.
    (b) Where pressure-reducing valves are used, one or more relief or 
safety valves shall be provided on the low-pressure side of the reducing 
valve, in case the piping or equipment on the low-pressure side does not 
meet the requirements for full initial pressure. The relief or safety 
valve shall be located adjacent to, or as close as possible to, the 
reducing valve. Proper protection shall be provided to prevent injury or 
damage caused by fluid escaping from relief or safety valves if vented 
to the atmosphere. The vents shall be of ample size and as short and 
direct as possible. The combined discharge capacity of the relief valves 
shall be such that the pressure rating of the lower-pressure piping and 
equipment will not be exceeded if the reducing valve sticks or fails to 
open.
    (d) Operating rules--(1) General.
    (i)-(ii) [Reserved]
    (iii) Markers. Markers and others handling soiled clothes shall be 
warned against touching the eyes, mouth, or any part of the body on 
which the skin has been broken by a scratch or abrasion; and they shall 
be cautioned not to touch or eat food until their hands have been 
thoroughly washed.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Instruction of employees. Employees shall be properly instructed 
as to the hazards of their work and be instructed in safe practices, by 
bulletins, printed rules, and verbal instructions.
    (2) Mechanical--(i) Safety guards. (a) No safeguard, safety 
appliance, or device attached to, or forming an integral part of any 
machinery shall be removed or made ineffective except for the purpose of 
making immediate repairs or adjustments. Any such safeguard, safety 
appliance, or device removed or made ineffective during the

[[Page 716]]

repair or adjustment of such machinery shall be replaced immediately 
upon the completion of such repairs or adjustments.
    (b) [Reserved]
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 43 FR 49767, Oct. 24, 1978; 
43 FR 51760, Nov. 7, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.265  Sawmills.

    (a) General requirements--Application. This section includes safety 
requirements for sawmill operations including, but not limited to, log 
and lumber handling, sawing, trimming, and planing; waste disposal; 
operation of dry kilns; finishing; shipping; storage; yard and yard 
equipment; and for power tools and affiliated equipment used in 
connection with such operations, but excluding the manufacture of 
plywood, cooperage, and veneer.
    (b) Definitions applicable to this section--(1) A-frame. The term A-
frame means a structure made of two independent columns fastened 
together at the top and separated at the bottom for stability.
    (2) Annealing. The term annealing means heating then cooling to 
soften and render less brittle.
    (3) Binder. The term binder means a chain, cable, rope, or other 
approved material used for binding loads.
    (4) Boom. The term boom means logs or timbers fastened together end 
to end and used to contain floating logs. The term includes enclosed 
logs.
    (5) Brow log. The term brow log means a log placed parallel to a 
roadway at a landing or dump to protect vehicles while loading or 
unloading.
    (6) Bunk. The term bunk means a cross support for a load.
    (7) Cant. The term cant means a log slabbed on one or more sides.
    (8) Carriage (log carriage). The term carriage means a framework 
mounted on wheels which runs on tracks or in grooves in a direction 
parallel to the face of the saw, and which contains apparatus to hold a 
log securely and advance it towards the saw.
    (9) Carrier. The term carrier means an industrial truck so designed 
and constructed that it straddles the load to be transported with 
mechanisms to pick up the load and support it during transportation.
    (10) Chipper. The term chipper means a machine which cuts material 
into chips.
    (11) Chock (bunk block) (cheese block). The terms chock, bunk block, 
and cheese block mean a wedge that prevents logs or loads from moving.
    (12) Cold deck. The term cold deck means a pile of logs stored for 
future removal.
    (13) Crotch lines. The term crotch lines means two short lines 
attached to a hoisting line by a ring or shackle, the lower ends being 
attached to loading hooks.
    (14) Dog (carriage dog). The term dog means a steel tooth, one or 
more of which are attached to each carriage knee to hold log firmly in 
place on carriage.
    (15) Drag saw. The term drag saw means a power-driven, reciprocating 
crosscut saw mounted on suitable frame and used for bucking logs.
    (16) Head block. The term head block means that part of a carriage 
which holds the log and upon which it rests. It generally consists of 
base, knee, taper set, and mechanism.
    (17) Head rig. The term head rig means a combination of head saw and 
log carriage used for the initial breakdown of logs into timbers, cants, 
and boards.
    (18) Hog. The term hog means a machine for cutting or grinding slabs 
and other coarse residue from the mill.
    (19) Husk. The term husk means a head saw framework on a circular 
mill.
    (20) Industrial truck. The term industrial truck means a mobile 
powerdriven truck or tractor.
    (21) Kiln tender. The term kiln tender means the operator of a kiln.
    (22) Lift truck. The term lift truck means an industrial truck used 
for lateral transportation and equipped with a power-operated lifting 
device, usually in the form of forks, for piling or unpiling lumber 
units or packages.
    (23) Live rolls. The term live rolls means cylinders of wood or 
metal mounted on horizontal axes and rotated by power, which are used to 
convey slabs, lumber, and other wood products.
    (24) Loading boom. The term loading boom means any structure 
projecting

[[Page 717]]

from a pivot point to guide a log when lifted.
    (25) Log deck. The term Log deck means a platform in the sawmill on 
which the logs remain until needed for sawing.
    (26) Lumber hauling truck. The term lumber hauling truck means an 
industrial truck, other than a lift truck or a carrier, used for the 
transport of lumber.
    (27) Log haul. The term log haul means a conveyor for transferring 
logs to mill.
    (28) Package. The term package means a unit of lumber.
    (29) Peavy. The term peavy means a stout wooden handle fitted with a 
spike and hook and used for rolling logs.
    (30) Pike pole. The term pike pole means a long pole whose end is 
shod with a sharp pointed spike.
    (31) Pitman rod. The term pitman rod means connecting rod.
    (32) Resaw. The term resaw means band, circular, or sash gang saws 
used to break down slabs, cants, or flitches into lumber.
    (33) Running line. The term running line means any moving rope as 
distinguished from a stationary rope such as a guyline.
    (34) Safety factor. The term safety factor means a calculated 
reduction factor which may be applied to laboratory test values to 
obtain safe working stresses for wooden beams and other mechanical 
members; ratio of breaking load to safe load.
    (35) Saw guide. The term saw guide means a device for steadying a 
circular or bandsaw.
    (36) Setwork. The term setwork means a mechanism on a sawmill 
carriage which enables an operator to move the log into position for 
another cut.
    (37) Sorting gaps. The term sorting gaps means the areas on a log 
pond enclosed by boom sticks into which logs are sorted.
    (38) Spreader wheel. The term spreader wheel means a metal wheel 
that separates the board from the log in back of circular saws to 
prevent binding.
    (39) Splitter. The term splitter means a knife-type, nonrotating 
spreader.
    (40) Sticker. The term sticker means a strip of wood or other 
material used to separate layers of lumber.
    (41) Stiff boom. The term stiff boom means the anchored, stationary 
boom sticks which are tied together and on which boom men work.
    (42) Swifter. The term swifter is a means of tying boom sticks 
together to prevent them from spreading while being towed.
    (43) Telltale. The term telltale means a device used to serve as a 
warning for overhead objects.
    (44) Top saw. The term top saw means the upper of two circular saws 
on a head rig, both being on the same husk.
    (45) Tramway. The term tramway means a way for trams, usually 
consisting of parallel tracks laid on wooden beams.
    (46) Trestle. The term trestle means a braced framework of timbers, 
piles or steelwork for carrying a road or railroad over a depression.
    (c) Building facilities, and isolated equipment--(1) Safety factor. 
All buildings, docks, tramways, walkways, log dumps, and other 
structures shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to 
support the imposed load in accordance with a safety factor.
    (2) Work areas. Work areas under mills shall be as evenly surfaced 
as local conditions permit. They shall be free from unnecessary 
obstructions and provided with lighting facilities in accordance with 
American National Standard for Industrial Lighting A11.1--1965, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (3) Floors. Flooring in buildings and on ramps and walkways shall be 
constructed and installed in accordance with established principles of 
mechanics and sound engineering practices. They shall be of adequate 
strength to support the estimated or actual dead and live loads acting 
on them with the resultant stress not exceeding the allowable stress for 
the material being used.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Areas beneath floor openings. Areas under floor openings shall, 
where practical, be fenced off. When this is not practical, they shall 
be plainly marked and telltales shall be installed to hang over these 
areas.
    (iii) Floor maintenance. The flooring of buildings, docks, and 
passageways shall be kept in good repair. When a

[[Page 718]]

hazardous condition develops that cannot be immediately repaired, the 
area shall be guarded until adequate repairs are made.
    (iv) Nonslip floors. Floors, footwalks, and passageways in the work 
area around machines or other places where a person is required to stand 
or walk shall be provided with effective means to minimize slipping.
    (4) Walkways, docks, and platforms--(i) Width. Walkways, docks, and 
platforms shall be of sufficient width to provide adequate passage and 
working areas.
    (ii) Maintenance. Walkways shall be evenly floored and kept in good 
repair.
    (iii) Docks. Docks and runways used for the operation of lift trucks 
and other vehicles shall have a substantial guard or shear timber except 
where loading and unloading are being performed.
    (iv) Elevated walks. All elevated walks, runways, or platforms, if 4 
feet or more from the floor level, shall be provided with a standard 
railing except on loading or unloading sides of platforms. If height 
exceeds 6 feet, a standard toe board also shall be provided to prevent 
material from rolling or falling off.
    (v) Elevated platforms. Where elevated platforms are used routinely 
on a daily basis they shall be equipped with stairways or fixed ladders 
in accordance with Sec. 1910.27.
    (vi) Hazardous locations. Where required, walkways and stairways 
with standard handrails shall be provided in elevated and hazardous 
locations. Where such passageways are over walkways or work areas, 
standard toe boards shall be provided.
    (5) Stairways--(i) Construction. Stairways shall be constructed in 
accordance with Sec. 1910.24.
    (ii) Handrails. Stairways shall be provided with a standard handrail 
on at least one side or on any open side. Where stairs are more than 
four feet wide there shall be a standard handrail at each side, and 
where more than eight feet wide, a third standard handrail shall be 
erected in the center of the stairway.
    (iii) Lighting. All stairways shall be adequately lighted as 
prescribed in paragraph (c)(9) of this section.
    (6) Emergency exits including doors and fire escapes--(i) Opening. 
Doors shall not open directly on or block a flight of stairs, and shall 
swing in the direction of exit travel.
    (ii) Identification. Exits shall be located and identified in a 
manner that affords ready exit from all work areas.
    (iii) Swinging doors. All swinging doors shall be provided with 
windows; with one window for each section of double swinging doors. Such 
windows shall be of shatterproof or safety glass unless otherwise 
protected against breakage.
    (iv) Sliding doors. Where sliding doors are used as exits, an inner 
door shall be cut inside each of the main doors and arranged to open 
outward.
    (v) Barriers and warning signs. Where a doorway opens upon a 
railroad track or upon a tramway or dock over which vehicles travel, a 
barrier or other warning device shall be placed to prevent workmen from 
stepping into moving traffic.
    (7) Air requirements. Ventilation shall be provided to supply 
adequate fresh healthful air to rooms, buildings, and work areas.
    (8) Vats and tanks. All open vats and tanks into which workmen could 
fall shall be guarded.
    (9) Lighting--(i) Adequacy. Illumination shall be provided and 
designed to supply adequate general and local lighting to rooms, 
buildings, and work areas during the time of use.
    (ii) Effectiveness. Factors upon which the adequacy and 
effectiveness of illumination will be judged, include the following:
    (a) The quantity of light in foot-candle intensity shall be 
sufficient for the work being done.
    (b) The quality of the light shall be such that it is free from 
glare, and has correct direction, diffusion, and distribution.
    (c) Shadows and extreme contrasts shall be avoided or kept to a 
minimum.
    (10) [Reserved]
    (11) Hazard marking. Physical hazard marking shall be as specified 
in Sec. 1910.144 of this part.
    (12) [Reserved]
    (13) Hydraulic systems. Means shall be provided to block, chain, or 
otherwise secure equipment normally supported

[[Page 719]]

by hydraulic pressure so as to provide for safe maintenance.
    (14) [Reserved]
    (15) Gas piping and appliances. All gas piping and appliances shall 
be installed in accordance with the American National Standard 
Requirements for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping 
Z21.30--1964, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (16)-(17) [Reserved]
    (18) Conveyors--(i) Standards. Construction, operation, and 
maintenance of conveyors shall be in accordance with American National 
Standard B20.1--1957, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) Guarding. Spiked live rolls shall be guarded.
    (19) Stationary tramways and trestles--(i) Foundations and walkways. 
Tramways and trestles shall have substantial mud sills or foundations 
which shall be frequently inspected and kept in repair. When vehicles 
are operated on tramways and trestles which are used for foot passage, 
traffic shall be controlled or a walkway with standard handrails at the 
outer edge and shear timber on the inner edge shall be provided. This 
walkway shall be wide enough to allow adequate clearance to vehicles. 
When walkways cross over other thoroughfares, they shall be solidly 
fenced at the outer edge to a height of 42 inches over such 
thoroughfares.
    (ii) Clearance. Stationary tramways and trestles shall have a 
vertical clearance of 22 feet over railroad rails. When constructed over 
carrier docks or roads, they shall have a clearance of 6 feet above the 
driver's foot rest on the carrier, and in no event shall this clearance 
be less than 12 feet from the roadway. In existing operations where it 
is impractical to obtain such clearance, telltales, electric signals, 
signs or other precautionary measures shall be installed.
    (20) Blower, collecting, and exhaust systems--(i) Design, 
construction, and maintenance. Blower collecting, and exhaust systems 
should be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with 
American National Standards Z33.1--1961 (For the Installation of Blower 
and Exhaust Systems for Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal or Conveying) and 
Z12.2--1962 (R1969) (Code for the Prevention of Dust Explosion in 
Woodworking and Wood Flour Manufacturing Plants), which are incorporated 
by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (ii) Collecting systems. All mills containing one or more machines 
that create dust, shavings, chips, or slivers during a period of time 
equal to or greater than one-fourth of the working day, shall be 
equipped with a collecting system. It may be either continuous or 
automatic, and shall be of sufficient strength and capacity to enable it 
to remove such refuse from points of operation and immediate vicinities 
of machines and work areas.
    (iii) Exhaust or conveyor systems. Each woodworking machine that 
creates dust, shavings, chips, or slivers shall be equipped with an 
exhaust or conveyor system located and adjusted to remove the maximum 
amount of refuse from the point of operation and immediate vicinity.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (v) Dust chambers. Exhaust pipes shall not discharge into an 
unconfined outside pile if uncontrolled fire or explosion hazards are 
created. They may empty into settling or dust chambers, designed to 
prevent the dust or refuse from entering any work area. Such chambers 
shall be constructed and operated to minimize the danger of fire or dust 
explosion.
    (vi) Hand removal of refuse. Provision for the daily removal of 
refuse shall be made in all operations not required to have an exhaust 
system or having refuse too heavy, bulky, or otherwise unsuitable to be 
handled by the exhaust system.
    (21) Chippers--(i) Whole-log chippers. The feed system to the 
chipper shall be arranged so the operator does not stand in direct line 
with the chipper spout (hopper). The chipper spout shall be enclosed to 
a height of not less than 36 inches from the floor or the operator's 
platform. A safety belt and lifeline shall be worn by workmen when 
working at or near the spout unless the spout is guarded. The lifeline 
shall be short enough to prevent workers from falling into the chipper.

[[Page 720]]

    (ii) Hogs. (a) Hog mills shall be so designed and arranged that from 
no position on the rim of the chute shall the distance to the cutter 
knives be less than 40 inches.
    (b) Hog feed chutes shall be provided with suitable and approved 
baffles, which shall minimize material from being thrown from the mill.
    (c) Employees feeding hog mills shall be provided with safety belts 
and lines unless guarded.
    (22) [Reserved]
    (23) Bins, bunkers, hoppers, and fuel houses--(i) Guarding. Open 
bins, bunkers, and hoppers whose upper edges extend less than 3 feet 
above working level shall be equipped with standard handrails and toe 
boards, or have their tops covered by a substantial grill or grating 
with openings small enough to prevent a man from falling through.
    (ii) Use of wheeled equipment to load bins. Where automotive or 
other wheeled equipment is used to move materials into bins, bunkers, 
and hoppers, adequate guard rails shall be installed along each side of 
the runway, and a substantial bumper stop provided when necessary.
    (iii) Exits, lighting, and safety devices. Fuel houses and bins 
shall have adequate exits and lighting, and all necessary safety devices 
shall be provided and shall be used by persons entering these 
structures.
    (iv) Walkways. Where needed, fuel houses and bins shall have a 
standard railed platform or walkway near the top.
    (24) Ropes, cables, slings, and chains--(i) Safe usage. Ropes, 
cables, slings, and chains shall be used in accordance with safe use 
practices recommended by the manufacturer or within safe limits 
recommended by the equipment manufacturer when used in conjunction with 
it.
    (ii) Hooks. No open hook shall be used in rigging to lift any load 
where there is hazard from relieving the tension on the hook from the 
load or hook catching or fouling.
    (iii) Work by qualified persons. Installation, inspection, 
maintenance, repair, and testing of ropes, cables, slings, and chains 
shall be done only by persons qualified to do such work.
    (iv) Slings. Proper storage shall be provided for slings while not 
in use.
    (v) Ropes or cables. (a) Wire rope or cable shall be inspected when 
installed and once each week thereafter, when in use. It shall be 
removed from hoisting or load-carrying service when kinked or when one 
of the following conditions exists:
    (1) When three broken wires are found in one lay of 6 by 6 wire 
rope.
    (2) When six broken wires are found in one lay of 6 by 19 wire rope.
    (3) When nine broken wires are found in one lay of 6 by 37 wire 
rope.
    (4) When eight broken wires are found in one lay of 8 by 19 wire 
rope.
    (5) When marked corrosion appears.
    (6) Wire rope of a type not described herein shall be removed from 
service when 4 percent of the total number of wires composing such rope 
are found to be broken in one lay.
    (b) Wire rope removed from service due to defects shall be plainly 
marked or identified as being unfit for further use on cranes, hoists, 
and other load-carrying devices.
    (c) The ratio between the rope diameter and the drum, block, sheave, 
or pulley tread diameter shall be such that the rope will adjust itself 
to the bend without excessive wear, deformation, or injury. In no case 
shall the safe value of drums, blocks, sheaves, or pulleys be reduced 
when replacing such items unless compensating changes are made for rope 
used and for safe loading limits.
    (vi) Drums, sheaves, and pulleys. Drums, sheaves, and pulleys shall 
be smooth and free from surface defects liable to injure rope. Drums, 
sheaves, or pulleys having eccentric bores or cracked hubs, spokes, or 
flanges shall be removed from service.
    (vii) Connections. Connections, fittings, fastenings, and other 
parts used in connection with ropes and cables shall be of good quality 
and of proper size and strength, and shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations.
    (viii) Socketing, splicing, and seizing. (a) Socketing, splicing, 
and seizing of cables shall be performed only by qualified persons.
    (b) All eye splices shall be made in an approved manner and wire 
rope thimbles of proper size shall be fitted in the

[[Page 721]]

eye, except that in slings the use of thimbles shall be optional.
    (c) Wire rope clips attached with U-bolts shall have these bolts on 
the dead or short end of the rope. The U-bolt nuts shall be retightened 
immediately after initial load carrying use and at frequent intervals 
thereafter.
    (d) When a wedge socket-type fastening is used, the dead or short 
end of the cable shall be clipped with a U-bolt or otherwise made secure 
against loosening.
    (e) Fittings. Hooks, shackles, rings, pad eyes, and other fittings 
that show excessive wear or that have been bent, twisted, or otherwise 
damaged shall be removed from service.
    (f) Running lines. Running lines of hoisting equipment located 
within 6 feet 6 inches of the ground or working level shall be boxed off 
or otherwise guarded, or the operating area shall be restricted.
    (g) Number of wraps on drum. There shall be not less than two full 
wraps of hoisting cable on the drum of cranes and hoists at all times of 
operation.
    (h) Drum flanges. Drums shall have a flange at each end to prevent 
the cable from slipping off.
    (i) Sheave guards. Bottom sheaves shall be protected by close 
fitting guards to prevent cable from jumping the sheave.
    (j) Preventing abrasion. The reeving of a rope shall be so arranged 
as to minimize chafing or abrading while in use.
    (ix) Chains. (a) Chains used in load carrying service shall be 
inspected before initial use and weekly thereafter.
    (b) Chain shall be normalized or annealed periodically as 
recommended by the manufacturer.
    (c) If at any time any 3-foot length of chain is found to have 
stretched one-third the length of a link it shall be discarded.
    (d) Bolts or nails shall not be placed between two links to shorten 
or join chains.
    (e) Broken chains shall not be spliced by inserting a bolt between 
two links with the head of the bolt and nut sustaining the load, or by 
passing one link through another and inserting a bolt or nail to hold 
it.
    (x) Fiber rope. (a) Frozen fiber rope shall not be used in load 
carrying service.
    (b) Fiber rope that has been subjected to acid or excessive heat 
shall not be used for load carrying purposes.
    (c) Fiber rope shall be protected from abrasion by padding where it 
is fastened or drawn over square corners or sharp or rough surfaces.
    (25) [Reserved]
    (26) Mechanical stackers and unstackers.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) Lumber lifting devices. Lumber lifting devices on all stackers 
shall be designed and arranged so as to minimize the possibility of 
lumber falling from such devices.
    (iii) Blocking hoisting platform. Means shall be provided to 
positively block the hoisting platform when employees must go beneath 
the stacker or unstacker hoist.
    (iv) Identifying controls. Every manually operated control switch 
shall be properly identified and so located as to be readily accessible 
to the operator.
    (v) Locking main control switches. Main control switches shall be so 
designed that they can be locked in the open position.
    (vi) Guarding side openings. The hoistway side openings at the top 
level of the stacker and unstacker shall be protected by enclosures of 
standard railings.
    (vii) Guarding hoistway openings. When the hoist platform or top of 
the load is below the working platform, the hoistway openings shall be 
guarded.
    (viii) Guarding lower landing area. The lower landing area of 
stackers and unstackers shall be guarded by enclosures that prevent 
entrance to the area or pit below the hoist platform. Entrances should 
be protected by electrically interlocked gates which, when open, will 
disconnect the power and set the hoist brakes. When the interlock is not 
installed, other positive means of protecting the entrance shall be 
provided.
    (ix) Inspection. Every stacker and unstacker shall be inspected at 
frequent intervals and all defective parts shall be immediately repaired 
or replaced.

[[Page 722]]

    (x) Cleaning pits. Safe means of entrance and exit shall be provided 
to permit cleaning of pits.
    (xi) Preventing entry to hazardous area. Where the return of trucks 
from unstacker to stacker is by mechanical power or gravity, adequate 
signs, warning devices, or barriers shall be erected to prevent entry 
into the hazardous area.
    (27) Lumber piling and storage--(i) Pile foundations. In stacking 
units of lumber, pile foundations shall be designed and arranged to 
support maximum loads without sinking, sagging, or permitting the piles 
to topple. In unit package piles, substantial bolsters or unit 
separators shall be placed between each package directly over the 
stickers.
    (ii) Stacking dissimilar unit packages. Long units of lumber shall 
not be stacked upon shorter packages except where a stable pile can be 
made with the use of package separators.
    (iii) Unstable piles. Piles of lumber which have become unstable 
shall be immediately made safe, or the area into which they might fall 
shall be fenced or barricaded and employees prohibited from entering it.
    (iv) Stickers. Unit packages of lumber shall be provided with 
stickers as necessary to insure stability under ordinary operating 
conditions.
    (v) Sticker alignment. Stickers shall extend the full width of the 
package, shall be uniformly spaced, and shall be aligned one above the 
other. Stickers may be lapped with a minimum overlapping of 12 inches. 
Stickers shall not protrude more than 2 inches beyond the sides of the 
package.
    (vi) Pile height. The height of unit package piles shall be 
dependent on the dimensions of the packages and shall be such as to 
provide stability under normal operating conditions. Adjacent lumber 
piles may be tied together with separators to increase stability.
    (28) Lumber loading. Loads shall be built and secured to insure 
stability in transit.
    (29) Burners--(i) Guying. If the burner stack is not self-
supporting, it shall be guyed or otherwise supported.
    (ii) Runway. The conveyor runway to the burner shall be equipped 
with a standard handrail. If the runway crosses a roadway or 
thoroughfare, standard toe boards shall be provided in addition.
    (30) Vehicles--(i) Scope. Vehicles shall include all mobile 
equipment normally used in sawmill, planing mill, storage, shipping, and 
yard operations.
    (ii) Warning signals and spark arrestors. All vehicles shall be 
equipped with audible warning signals and where practicable shall have 
spark arrestors.
    (iii) Lights. All vehicles operated in the dark or in poorly lighted 
areas shall be equipped with head and tail lights.
    (iv) Overhead guard. All vehicles operated in areas where overhead 
hazards exist shall be equipped with an approved overhead guard. See 
American National Standard Safety Code for Powered Industrial Trucks, 
B56.1--1969, which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (v) Platform guard. Where the operator is exposed to hazard from 
backing the vehicle into objects, an approved platform guard shall be 
provided and so arranged as to not impede exit of driver from vehicle.
    (vi) [Reserved]
    (vii) Operation in buildings. Vehicles powered by internal 
combustion engines shall not operate in buildings unless the buildings 
are adequately ventilated.
    (viii) Load limits. No vehicle shall be operated with loads 
exceeding its safe load capacity.
    (ix) Brakes. All vehicles shall be equipped with brakes capable of 
holding and controlling the vehicle and capacity load upon any incline 
or grade over which they may be operated.
    (x) [Reserved]
    (xi) Carriers. (a) Carriers shall be so designed and constructed 
that the operator's field of vision shall not be unnecessarily 
restricted.
    (b) Carriers shall be provided with an access ladder or equivalent.
    (xii) Lumber hauling trucks. (a) On trucks where movement of load on 
stopping would endanger the operator, a substantial bulkhead shall be 
installed behind the operator's seat. This shall extend to the top of 
the operator's compartment.
    (b) Stakes, stake pockets, racks, tighteners, and binders shall 
provide

[[Page 723]]

adequate means to secure the load against any movement during transit.
    (c) Where rollers are used, at least two shall be equipped with 
locks which shall be locked when supporting loads during transit.
    (31) Traffic control and flow--(i) Hazardous crossings. Railroad 
tracks and other hazardous crossings shall be plainly posted and 
appropriate traffic control devices (American National Standard D8.1--
1967 for Railroad-Highway Grade Crossing Protection, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6) should be 
utilized.
    (ii) Restricted overhead clearance. All areas of restricted side or 
overhead clearance shall be plainly marked.
    (iii) Pickup and unloading points. Pickup and unloading points and 
paths for lumber packages on conveyors and transfers and other areas 
where accurate spotting is required, shall be plainly marked and wheel 
stops provided where necessary.
    (iv) Aisles, passageways, and roadways. Aisles, passageways, and 
roadways shall be sufficiently wide to provide safe side clearance. One-
way aisles may be used for two-way traffic if suitable turnouts are 
provided.
    (d) Log handling, sorting, and storage--(1) Log unloading methods, 
equipment, and facilities--(i) Unloading methods. (a) Stakes and chocks 
which trip shall be constructed in such manner that the tripping 
mechanism that releases the stake or chocks is activated at the opposite 
side of the load being tripped.
    (b) Binders on logs shall not be released prior to securing with 
unloading lines or other unloading device.
    (c) Binders shall be released only from the side on which the 
unloader operates, except when released by remote control devices or 
except when person making release is protected by racks or stanchions or 
other equivalent means.
    (d) Loads on which a binder is fouled by the unloading machine shall 
have an extra binder or metal band of equal strength placed around the 
load, or the load shall be otherwise secured so the fouled binder can be 
safely removed.
    (ii) Unloading equipment and facilities. (a) Machines used for 
hoisting, unloading, or lowering logs shall be equipped with brakes 
capable of controlling or holding the maximum load in midair.
    (b) The lifting cylinders of all hydraulically operated log handling 
machines shall be equipped with a positive device for preventing the 
uncontrolled lowering of the load or forks in case of a failure in the 
hydraulic system.
    (c) A limit switch shall be installed on powered log handling 
machines to prevent the lift arms from traveling too far in the event 
the control switch is not released in time.
    (d) When forklift-type machines are used to load trailers, a means 
of securing the loading attachment to the fork shall be installed and 
used.
    (e) A-frames and similar log unloading devices shall have adequate 
height to provide safe clearance for swinging loads and to provide for 
adequate crotch lines and spreader bar devices.
    (f) Log handling machines used to stack logs or lift loads above 
operator's head shall be equipped with adequate overhead protection.
    (g) All mobile log handling machines shall be equipped with 
headlights and backup lights.
    (h) Unloading devices shall be equipped with a horn or other plainly 
audible signaling device.
    (i) Movement of unloading equipment shall be coordinated by audible 
or hand signals when operator's vision is impaired or operating in the 
vicinity of other employees.
    (j) Wood pike poles shall be made of straight-grained, select 
material. Metal or conductive pike poles shall not be used around 
exposed energized electrical conductors. Defective, blunt, or dull pike 
poles shall not be used.
    (2) Log unloading and storage areas--(i) General. (a) Log dumps, 
booms, ponds, or storage areas used at night shall be illuminated in 
accordance with the requirements of American National Standard A11.1-
1965 (R-1970) Standard Practice for Industrial Lighting, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (b) Log unloading areas shall be arranged and maintained to provide 
a safe working area.
    (c) Where skids are used, space adequate to clear a man's body shall 
be maintained between the top of the skids and the ground.

[[Page 724]]

    (d) Signs prohibiting unauthorized foot or vehicle traffic in log 
unloading and storage areas shall be posted.
    (ii) Water log dumps. (a) Ungrounded electrically powered hoists 
using handheld remote control in grounded locations, such as log dumps 
or mill log lifts, shall be actuated by circuits operating at less than 
50 volts to ground.
    (b) Roadbeds at log dumps shall be of sufficient width and evenness 
to insure safe operation of equipment.
    (c) An adequate brow log or skid timbers or the equivalent shall be 
provided where necessary. Railroad-type dumps, when located where logs 
are dumped directly into water or where entire loads are lifted from 
vehicle, may be exempted providing such practice does not create a 
hazardous exposure of personnel or equipment.
    (d) Unloading lines shall be arranged so that it is not necessary 
for the employees to attach them from the pond or dump side of the load 
except when entire loads are lifted from the log-transporting vehicle.
    (e) Unloading lines, crotch lines, or equally effective means shall 
be arranged and used in a manner to minimize the possibility of any log 
from swinging or rolling back.
    (f) When logs are unloaded with peavys or similar manual methods, 
means shall be provided and used that will minimize the danger from 
rolling or swinging logs.
    (g) Guardrails, walkways, and standard handrails shall be installed
    (h) Approved life rings (see: 46 CFR 160.099 and 46 CFR 160.050) 
with line attached and maintained to retain buoyancy shall be provided.
    (iii) Log booms and ponds. (a) Walkways and floats shall be 
installed and securely anchored to provide adequate passageway for 
employees.
    (b) All regular boom sticks and foot logs shall be reasonably 
straight, with no protruding knots and bark, and shall be capable of 
supporting, above the water line at either end, the weight of an 
employee and equipment.
    (c) Permanent cable swifters shall be so arranged that it will not 
be necessary to roll boom sticks in order to attach or detach them.
    (d) Periodic inspection of cable or dogging lines shall be made to 
determine when repair or removal from service is necessary.
    (e) The banks of the log pond in the vicinity of the log haul shall 
be reinforced to prevent caving in.
    (f) Artificial log ponds shall be drained, cleaned, and refilled 
when unhealthy stagnation or pollution occurs.
    (g) Employees whose duties require them to work from boats, floating 
logs, boom sticks, or walkways along or on water shall be provided with 
and shall wear appropriate buoyant devices while performing such duties.
    (h) Stiff booms shall be two float logs wide secured by boom chains 
or other connecting devices, and of a width adequate for the working 
needs. Walking surfaces shall be free of loose material and maintained 
in good repair.
    (i) Boom sticks shall be fastened together with adequate crossties 
or couplings.
    (j) Floating donkeys or other power-driven machinery used on booms 
shall be placed on a raft or float with enough buoyancy to keep the deck 
well above water.
    (k) All sorting gaps shall have a substantial stiff boom on each 
side.
    (iv) Pond boats and rafts. The applicable provisions of the Standard 
for Fire Protection for Motorcraft, NFPA No. 302--1968, which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, shall be complied 
with.
    (a) Decks of pond boats shall be covered with nonslip material.
    (b) Powered pond boats or rafts shall be provided with at least one 
approved fire extinguisher, and one lifering with line attached.
    (c) Boat fuel shall be transported and stored in approved safety 
containers. Refer to Sec. 1910.155(c)(3) for definition of approved.
    (d) Inspection, maintenance, and ventilation of the bilge area shall 
be provided to prevent accumulation of highly combustible materials.
    (e) Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the cabin area on 
enclosed cabin-type boats to prevent accumulation of harmful gases or 
vapors.
    (v) Dry deck storage. (a) Dry deck storage areas shall be kept 
orderly and shall be maintained in a condition

[[Page 725]]

which is conducive to safe operation of mobile equipment.
    (b) Logs shall be stored in a safe and orderly manner, and roadways 
and traffic lanes shall be maintained at a width adequate for safe 
travel of log handling equipment.
    (c) Logs shall be arranged to minimize the chance of accidentally 
rolling from the deck.
    (vi) Log hauls and slips. (a) Walkways along log hauls shall have a 
standard handrail on the outer edge, and cleats or other means to assure 
adequate footing and enable employees to walk clear of the log chute.
    (b) Log haul bull chains or cable shall be designed, installed, and 
maintained to provide adequate safety for the work need.
    (c) Log haul gear and bull chain drive mechanism shall be guarded.
    (d) Substantial troughs for the return strand of log haul chains 
shall be provided over passageways.
    (e) Log haul controls shall be located and identified to operate 
from a position where the operator will, at all times, be in the clear 
of logs, machinery, lines, and rigging. In operations where control is 
by lever exposed to incoming logs, the lever shall be arranged to 
operate the log haul only when moved toward the log slip or toward the 
log pond.
    (f) A positive stop shall be installed on all log hauls to prevent 
logs from traveling too far ahead in the mill.
    (g) Overhead protection shall be provided for employees working 
below logs being moved to the log deck.
    (h) Log wells shall be provided with safeguards to minimize the 
possibility of logs rolling back into well from log deck.
    (3) Log decks--(i) Access. Safe access to the head rig shall be 
provided.
    (ii) Stops. Log decks shall be provided with adequate stops, chains, 
or other safeguards to prevent logs from rolling down the deck onto the 
carriage or its runway.
    (iii) Barricade. A barricade or other positive stop of sufficient 
strength to stop any log shall be erected between the sawyer's stand and 
the log deck.
    (iv) Loose chains. Loose chains from overhead canting devices or 
other equipment shall not be allowed to hang over the log deck in such 
manner as to strike employees.
    (v) Swing saws. Swing saws on log decks shall be equipped with a 
barricade and stops for protection of employees who may be on the 
opposite side of the log haul chute.
    (vi) Drag saws. Where reciprocating log cutoff saws (drag saws) are 
provided, they shall not project into walkway or aisle.
    (vii) Circular cutoff saws. Circular log bucking or cutoff saws 
shall be so located and guarded as to allow safe entrance to and exit 
from the building.
    (viii) Entrance doorway. Where the cutoff saw partially blocks the 
entrance from the log haul runway, the entrance shall be guarded.
    (4) Mechanical barkers--(i) Rotary barkers. Rotary barking devices 
shall be so guarded as to protect employees from flying chips, bark, or 
other extraneous material.
    (ii) Elevating ramp. If an elevating ramp or gate is used, it shall 
be provided with a safety chain, hook, or other means of suspension 
while employees are underneath.
    (iii) Area around barkers. The hazardous area around ring barkers 
and their conveyors shall be fenced off or posted as a prohibited area 
for unauthorized persons.
    (iv) Enclosing hydraulic barkers. Hydraulic barkers shall be 
enclosed with strong baffles at the inlet and outlet. The operator shall 
be protected by adequate safety glass or equivalent.
    (v) Holddown rolls. Holddown rolls shall be installed at the infeed 
and outfeed sections of mechanical ring barkers to control the movement 
of logs.
    (e) Log breakdown and related machinery and facilities--(1) Log 
carriages and carriage runways--(i) Bumpers. A substantial stop or 
bumper with adequate shock-absorptive qualities shall be installed at 
each end of the carriage runway.
    (ii) Footing. Rider-type carriages shall be floored to provide 
secure footing and a firm working platform for the block setter.
    (iii) Sheave housing. Sheaves on rope-driven carriages shall be 
guarded at floor line with substantial housings.

[[Page 726]]

    (iv) Carriage control. A positive means shall be provided to prevent 
unintended movement of the carriage. This may involve a control locking 
device, a carriage tie-down, or both.
    (v) Barriers and warning signs. A barrier shall be provided to 
prevent employees from entering the space necessary for travel of the 
carriage, with headblocks fully receded, for the full length and extreme 
ends of carriage runways. Warning signs shall be posted at possible 
entry points to this area.
    (vi) Overhead clearance. For a rider-type carriage adequate overhead 
clear space above the carriage deck shall be provided for the full 
carriage runway length.
    (vii) Sweeping devices. Carriage track sweeping devices shall be 
used to keep track rails clear of debris.
    (viii) Dogs. Dogging devices shall be adequate to secure logs, 
cants, or boards, during sawing operations.
    (2) Head saws--(i) Band head saws. (a) Band head saws shall not be 
operated at speeds in excess of those recommended by the manufacturer
    (b) Band head saws shall be thoroughly inspected for cracks, splits, 
broken teeth, and other defects. A bandsaw with a crack greater than 
one-tenth the width of the saw shall not be placed in service until 
width of saw is reduced to eliminate crack, until cracked section is 
removed, or crack development is stopped.
    (c) Provisions shall be made for alerting and warning employees 
before starting band head saws, and measures shall be taken to insure 
that all persons are in the clear.
    (ii) Bandsaw wheels. (a) No bandsaw wheel shall be run at a 
peripheral speed in excess of that recommended by the manufacturer. The 
manufacturer's recommended maximum speed shall be stamped in plainly 
legible figures on some portion of the wheel.
    (b) Band head saw wheels shall be subjected to monthly inspections. 
Hubs, spokes, rims, bolts, and rivets shall be thoroughly examined in 
the course of such inspections. A loose or damaged hub, a rim crack, or 
loose spokes shall make the wheel unfit for service.
    (c) Band wheels shall be completely encased or guarded, except for a 
portion of the upper wheel immediately around the point where the blade 
leaves the wheel, to permit operator to observe movement of equipment. 
Necessary ventilating and observation ports may be permitted. 
Substantial doors or gates are allowed for repair, lubrication, and saw 
changes; such doors or gates shall be closed securely during operation. 
Band head rigs shall be equipped with a saw catcher or guard of 
substantial construction.
    (iii) Single circular head saws. (a) Circular head saws shall not be 
operated at speeds in excess of those specified by the manufacturer. 
Maximum speed shall be etched on the saw.
    (b) Circular head saws shall be equipped with safety guides which 
can be readily adjusted without use of hand tools.
    (c) The upper saw of a double circular mill shall be provided with a 
substantial hood or guard. A screen or other suitable device shall be 
placed so as to protect the sawyer from flying particles.
    (d) All circular sawmills where live rolls are not used behind the 
head saw shall be equipped with a spreader wheel or splitter.
    (iv) Twin circular head saws. Twin circular head saw rigs such as 
scrag saws shall meet the specifications for single circular head saws 
in paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this section where applicable.
    (v) Whole-log sash gang saws (Swedish gangs). (a) Cranks, pitman 
rods, and other moving parts shall be adequately guarded.
    (b) Feed rolls shall be enclosed by a cover over the top, front, and 
open ends except where guarded by location. Drive mechanism to feed 
rolls shall be enclosed.
    (c) Carriage cradles of whole-log sash gang saws (Swedish gangs), 
shall be of adequate height to prevent logs from kicking out while being 
loaded.
    (3) Resaws--(i) Band resaws. Band resaws shall meet the 
specifications for band head saws as required by paragraph (e)(2)(i) of 
this section.
    (ii) Circular gang resaws. (a) Banks of circular gang resaws shall 
be guarded by a hood.

[[Page 727]]

    (b) Circular gang resaws shall be provided with safety fingers or 
other antikickback devices.
    (c) Circular gang resaws shall not be operated at speeds exceeding 
those recommended by the manufacturer.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Feed rolls shall be guarded.
    (f) Each circular gang resaw, except self-feed saws with a live roll 
or wheel at back of saw, shall be provided with spreaders.
    (iii) Sash gang resaws. Sash gang resaws shall meet the safety 
specifications of whole-log sash gang saws in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(2)(v) of this section.
    (4) Trimmer saws--(i) Maximum speed. Trimmer saws shall not be run 
at peripheral speeds in excess of those recommended by the manufacturer.
    (ii) Guards. (a) Trimmer saws shall be guarded in front by adequate 
baffles to protect against flying debris and they shall be securely 
bolted to a substantial frame. These guards for a series of saws shall 
be set as close to the top of the trimmer table as is practical.
    (b) The end saws on trimmer shall be guarded.
    (c) The rear of trimmer saws shall have a guard the full width of 
the saws and as much wider as practical.
    (iii) Safety stops. Automatic trimmer saws shall be provided with 
safety stops or hangers to prevent saws from dropping on table.
    (5) Edgers--(i) Location. (a) Where vertical arbor edger saws are 
located ahead of the main saw, they shall be so guarded that an employee 
cannot contact any part of the edger saw from his normal position.
    (b) Edgers shall not be located in the main roll case behind the 
head saws.
    (ii) Guards. (a) The top and the openings in end and side frames of 
edgers shall be adequately guarded and gears and chains shall be fully 
housed. Guards may be hinged or otherwise arranged to permit oiling and 
the removal of saws.
    (b) All edgers shall be equipped with pressure feed rolls.
    (c) Pressure feed rolls on edgers shall be guarded against 
accidental contact.
    (iii) Antikickback devices. (a) Edgers shall be provided with safety 
fingers or other approved methods of preventing kickbacks or guarding 
against them. A barricade in line with the edger, if properly fenced 
off, may be used if safety fingers are not feasible to install.
    (b) A controlling device shall be installed and located so that the 
operator can stop the feed mechanism without releasing the tension of 
the pressure rolls.
    (iv) Operating speed of live rolls. Live rolls and tailing devices 
in back of edger shall operate at a speed not less than the speed of the 
edger feed rolls.
    (6) Planers--(i) Guards. (a) All cutting heads shall be guarded.
    (b) Side head hoods shall be of sufficient height to safeguard the 
head setscrew.
    (c) Pressure feed rolls and ``pineapples'' shall be guarded.
    (d) Levers or controls shall be so arranged or guarded as to reduce 
the possibility of accidental operation.
    (f) Dry kilns and facilities--(1) Kiln foundations. Dry kilns shall 
be constructed upon solid foundations to prevent tracks from sagging
    (2) Passageways. A passageway shall be provided to give adequate 
clearance on at least one side or in the center of end-piled kilns and 
on two sides of cross-piled kilns.
    (3) Doors--(i) Main kiln doors. (a) Main kiln doors shall be 
provided with a method of holding them open while kiln is being loaded.
    (b) Counterweights on vertical lift doors shall be boxed or 
otherwise guarded.
    (c) Adequate means shall be provided to firmly secure main doors, 
when they are disengaged from carriers and hangers, to prevent toppling.
    (ii) Escape doors. (a) If operating procedures require access to 
kilns, kilns shall be provided with escape doors that operate easily 
from the inside, swing in the direction of exit, and are located in or 
near the main door at the end of the passageway.
    (b) Escape doors shall be of adequate height and width to 
accommodate an average size man.
    (4) Pits. Pits shall be well ventilated, drained, and lighted, and 
shall be large enough to safely accommodate the kiln operator together 
with operating devices such as valves, dampers, damper rods, and traps.

[[Page 728]]

    (5) Steam mains. All high-pressure steam mains located in or 
adjacent to an operating pit shall be covered with heat-insulating 
material.
    (6) Ladders. A fixed ladder, in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.27 or other adequate means shall be provided to permit access 
to the roof. Where controls and machinery are mounted on the roof, a 
permanent stairway with standard handrail shall be installed in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 1910.24.
    (7) Chocks. A means shall be provided for chocking or blocking cars.
    (8) Kiln tender room. A warm room shall be provided for kiln 
employees to stay in during cold weather after leaving a hot kiln.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 23073, May 28, 1975; 43 
FR 49751, Oct. 24, 1978; 43 FR 51760, Nov. 7, 1978; 53 FR 12123, Apr. 
12, 1988; 55 FR 32015, Aug. 6, 1990; 61 FR 9241, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 FR 
33467, June 18, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.265 
was amended by removing paragraphs (a)(2), (c)(3)(i), (c)(10), (c)(14), 
(c)(16), (c)(17), (c)(22), (c)(24)(iv)(a), (c)(24)(iv)(c), (c)(26)(i), 
(c)(30)(vi), (c)(30)(x), (e)(3)(ii)(d), (f)(9), (g), (h), and (i) and by 
redesignating paragraph (a)(1) as (a) and paragraph (c)(24)(iv)(b) as 
(c)(24)(iv), effective Aug. 17, 1998. For the convenience of the user, 
the superseded text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 1910.265  Sawmills.

    (a) * * *
    (2) Incorporation of standards by reference. Certain of the 
paragraphs of this section incorporate and apply occupational safety and 
health standards of general application without regard to any specific 
industry. Such standards shall apply to sawmill operations in accordance 
with the rules of construction set forth in Sec. 1910.5.

                                * * * * *

    (c) * * *
    (3) * * *
    (i) Floor and wall openings. All floor and wall openings shall be 
protected as prescribed in Sec. 1910.23.

                                * * * * *

    (10) Ladders. Ladders shall be installed and maintained as specified 
in Secs. 1910.25, 1910.26, and 1910.27.

                                * * * * *

    (14) Liquefied petroleum gas storage and handling. Storage and 
handling of liquefied petroleum gas shall be in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.110.

                                * * * * *

    (16) Flammable liquids. Flammable liquids shall be stored and 
handled in accordance with Sec. 1910.106.
    (17) Storage, handling, and use of chemicals--(i) Threshold limits. 
Employees shall not be exposed to airborne concentration of toxic dusts, 
fumes, vapors, mists or gases that exceed the threshold limit values set 
forth by Sec. 1910.1000.
    (ii) Protective equipment. The use of chemicals shall be controlled 
so as to protect employees from harmful exposure to toxic materials. 
Where necessary, employees shall be provided with and required to wear 
such protective equipment as will afford adequate protection against 
harmful exposure as required by Subpart I of this part.
    (iii) Open surface tank operations. Open surface tank operations 
shall conform to the requirements of Sec. 1910.94(d).

                                * * * * *

    (22) Mechanical power-transmission apparatus. The construction, 
operation, and maintenance of all mechanical power-transmission 
apparatus shall be in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 1910.219.

                                * * * * *

    (24) * * *
    (iv) * * * (a) Slings and their fittings and fastenings, when in 
use, shall be inspected daily for evidence of overloading, excessive 
wear, or damage. Slings found to be defective shall be removed from 
service.

                                * * * * *

    (c) Suitable protection shall be provided between the sling and 
sharp unyielding surfaces of the load to be lifted.

                                * * * * *

    (26) * * * (i) Power-transmission apparatus. Stackers and 
unstackers, shall have all gears, sprockets, chains, belt drives, and 
other power transmission apparatus guarded as specified in 
Sec. 1910.219.

                                * * * * *

    (30) * * *
    (vi) Exposed parts. Vehicle flywheels, gears, sprockets, chains, 
shear points, and other exposed parts constituting a hazard to the 
operator or other persons shall be guarded in

[[Page 729]]

accordance with the requirements of Sec. 1910.219.

                                * * * * *

    (x) Lift trucks. Lift trucks shall be designed, constructed, 
maintained, and operated in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.178.

                                * * * * *

    (e) * * *
    (3) * * *
    (ii) * * *
    (d) Feed belts and drive pulleys shall be guarded in accordance with 
the requirements of Sec. 1910.219.

                                * * * * *

    (f) * * *
    (9) Mechanical equipment. All belts, pulleys, blowers, and other 
exposed moving equipment used in or about kilns shall be guarded in 
accordance with the requirements of Sec. 1910.219.
    (g) Personal protective equipment. The requirements for personal 
protective equipment specified in subpart I shall be complied with.
    (h) Sanitation requirements. The requirements of Sec. 1910.141 shall 
govern sanitation practices.
    (i) Fire protection. The requirements of subpart L of this part 
shall be complied with in providing the necessary fire protection for 
sawmills.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.266  Logging operations.

    (a) Table of contents.
    This paragraph contains the list of paragraphs and appendices 
contained in this section.

a. Table of contents
b. Scope and application
c. Definitions
d. General requirements
    1. Personal protective equipment
    2. First-aid kits
    3. Seat belts
    4. Fire extinguishers
    5. Environmental conditions
    6. Work areas
    7. Signaling and signal equipment
    8. Overhead electric lines
    9. Flammable and combustible liquids
    10. Explosives and blasting agents
e. Hand and portable powered tools
    1. General requirements
    2. Chain saws
f. Machines
    1. General requirements
    2. Machine operation
    3. Protective structures
    4. Overhead guards
    5. Machine access
    6. Exhaust systems
    7. Brakes
    8. Guarding
g. Vehicles
h. Tree harvesting
    1. General requirements
    2. Manual felling
    3. Bucking and limbing
    4. Chipping
    5. Yarding
    6. Loading and unloading
    7. Transport
    8. Storage
i. Training
j. Effective date
k. Appendices
Appendix A--Minimum First-aid Supplies
Appendix B--Minimum First-aid Training
Appendix C--Corresponding ISO Agreements
    (b) Scope and application.
    (1) This standard establishes safety practices, means, methods and 
operations for all types of logging, regardless of the end use of the 
wood. These types of logging include, but are not limited to, pulpwood 
and timber harvesting and the logging of sawlogs, veneer bolts, poles, 
pilings and other forest products. This standard does not cover the 
construction or use of cable yarding systems.
    (2) This standard applies to all logging operations as defined by 
this section.
    (3) Hazards and working conditions not specifically addressed by 
this section are covered by other applicable sections of part 1910.
    (c) Definitions applicable to this section.
    Arch. An open-framed trailer or built-up framework used to suspend 
the leading ends of trees or logs when they are skidded.
    Backcut (felling cut). The final cut in a felling operation.
    Ballistic nylon. A nylon fabric of high tensile properties designed 
to provide protection from lacerations.
    Buck. To cut a felled tree into logs.
    Butt. The bottom of the felled part of a tree.
    Cable yarding. The movement of felled trees or logs from the area 
where they are felled to the landing on a system composed of a cable 
suspended from spars and/or towers. The trees or logs may be either 
dragged across the

[[Page 730]]

ground on the cable or carried while suspended from the cable.
    Chock. A block, often wedge shaped, which is used to prevent 
movement; e.g., a log from rolling, a wheel from turning.
    Choker. A sling used to encircle the end of a log for yarding. One 
end is passed around the load, then through a loop eye, end fitting or 
other device at the other end of the sling. The end that passed through 
the end fitting or other device is then hooked to the lifting or pulling 
machine.
    Danger tree. A standing tree that presents a hazard to employees due 
to conditions such as, but not limited to, deterioration or physical 
damage to the root system, trunk, stem or limbs, and the direction and 
lean of the tree.
    Debark. To remove bark from trees or logs.
    Deck. A stack of trees or logs.
    Designated person. An employee who has the requisite knowledge, 
training and experience to perform specific duties.
    Domino felling. The partial cutting of multiple trees which are left 
standing and then pushed over with a pusher tree.
    Fell (fall). To cut down trees.
    Feller (faller). An employee who fells trees.
    Grounded. The placement of a component of a machine on the ground or 
on a device where it is firmly supported.
    Guarded. Covered, shielded, fenced, enclosed, or otherwise protected 
by means of suitable enclosures, covers, casings, shields, troughs, 
railings, screens, mats, or platforms, or by location, to prevent 
injury.
    Health care provider. A health care practitioner operating with the 
scope of his/her license, certificate, registration or legally 
authorized practice.
    Landing. Any place where logs are laid after being yarded, and 
before transport from the work site.
    Limbing. To cut branches off felled trees.
    Lodged tree (hung tree). A tree leaning against another tree or 
object which prevents it from falling to the ground.
    Log. A segment sawed or split from a felled tree, such as, but not 
limited to, a section, bolt, or tree length.
    Logging operations. Operations associated with felling and moving 
trees and logs from the stump to the point of delivery, such as, but not 
limited to, marking danger trees and trees/logs to be cut to length, 
felling, limbing, bucking, debarking, chipping, yarding, loading, 
unloading, storing, and transporting machines, equipment and personnel 
to, from and between logging sites.
    Machine. A piece of stationary or mobile equipment having a self-
contained powerplant, that is operated off-road and used for the 
movement of material. Machines include, but are not limited to, 
tractors, skidders, front-end loaders, scrapers, graders, bulldozers, 
swing yarders, log stackers, log loaders, and mechanical felling 
devices, such as tree shears and feller-bunchers. Machines do not 
include airplanes or aircraft (e.g., helicopters).
    Rated capacity. The maximum load a system, vehicle, machine or piece 
of equipment was designed by the manufacturer to handle.
    Root wad. The ball of a tree root and dirt that is pulled from the 
ground when a tree is uprooted.
    Serviceable condition. A state or ability of a tool, machine, 
vehicle or other device to operate as it was intended by the 
manufacturer to operate.
    Skidding. The yarding of trees or logs by pulling or towing them 
across the ground.
    Slope (grade). The increase or decrease in altitude over a 
horizontal distance expressed as a percentage. For example, a change of 
altitude of 20 feet (6 m) over a horizontal distance of 100 feet (30 m) 
is expressed as a 20 percent slope.
    Snag. Any standing dead tree or portion thereof.
    Spring pole. A tree, segment of a tree, limb, or sapling which is 
under stress or tension due to the pressure or weight of another object.
    Tie down. Chain, cable, steel strips or fiber webbing and binders 
attached to a truck, trailer or other conveyance as a means to secure 
loads and to prevent them from shifting or moving when they are being 
transported.
    Undercut. A notch cut in a tree to guide the direction of the tree 
fall and to prevent splitting or kickback.

[[Page 731]]

    Vehicle. A car, bus, truck, trailer or semi-trailer owned, leased or 
rented by the employer that is used for transportation of employees or 
movement of material.
    Winching. The winding of cable or rope onto a spool or drum.
    Yarding. The movement of logs from the place they are felled to a 
landing.
    (d) General requirements--(1) Personal protective equipment. (i) The 
employer shall assure that personal protective equipment, including any 
personal protective equipment provided by an employee, is maintained in 
a serviceable condition.
    (ii) The employer shall assure that personal protective equipment, 
including any personal protective equipment provided by an employee, is 
inspected before initial use during each workshift. Defects or damage 
shall be repaired or the unserviceable personal protective equipment 
shall be replaced before work is commenced.
    (iii) The employer shall provide, at no cost to the employee, and 
assure that each employee handling wire rope wears, hand protection 
which provides adequate protection from puncture wounds, cuts and 
lacerations.
    (iv) The employer shall provide, at no cost to the employee, and 
assure that each employee who operates a chain saw wears leg protection 
constructed with cut-resistant material, such as ballistic nylon. The 
leg protection shall cover the full length of the thigh to the top of 
the boot on each leg to protect against contact with a moving chain saw. 
Exception: This requirement does not apply when an employee is working 
as a climber if the employer demonstrates that a greater hazard is posed 
by wearing leg protection in the particular situation, or when an 
employee is working from a vehicular mounted elevating and rotating work 
platform meeting the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.68.
    (v) The employer shall assure that each employee wears foot 
protection, such as heavy-duty logging boots that are waterproof or 
water repellant, cover and provide support to the ankle. The employer 
shall assure that each employee who operates a chain saw wears foot 
protection that is constructed with cut-resistant material which will 
protect the employee against contact with a running chain saw. Sharp, 
calk-soled boots or other slip-resistant type boots may be worn where 
the employer demonstrates that they are necessary for the employee's 
job, the terrain, the timber type, and the weather conditions, provided 
that foot protection otherwise required by this paragraph is met.
    (vi) The employer shall provide, at no cost to the employee, and 
assure that each employee who works in an area where there is potential 
for head injury from falling or flying objects wears head protection 
meeting the requirements of subpart I of part 1910.
    (vii) The employer shall provide, at no cost to the employee, and 
assure that each employee wears the following:
    (A) Eye protection meeting the requirements of subpart I of part 
1910 where there is potential for eye injury due to falling or flying 
objects; and
    (B) Face protection meeting the requirements of subpart I of part 
1910 where there is potential for facial injury such as, but not limited 
to, operating a chipper. Logger-type mesh screens may be worn by 
employees performing chain-saw operations and yarding.

    Note to paragraph (d)(1)(vii): The employee does not have to wear a 
separate eye protection device where face protection covering both the 
eyes and face is worn.

    (2) First-aid kits. (i) The employer shall provide first-aid kits at 
each work site where trees are being cut (e.g., felling, bucking, 
limbing), at each active landing, and on each employee transport 
vehicle. The number of first-aid kits and the content of each kit shall 
reflect the degree of isolation, the number of employees, and the 
hazards reasonably anticipated at the work site.
    (ii) At a minimum, each first-aid kit shall contain the items listed 
in appendix A at all times.
    (iii) The employer also may have the number and content of first-aid 
kits reviewed and approved annually by a health care provider.
    (iv) The employer shall maintain the contents of each first-aid kit 
in a serviceable condition.

[[Page 732]]

    (3) Seat belts. For each vehicle or machine (equipped with ROPS/FOPS 
or overhead guards), including any vehicle or machine provided by an 
employee, the employer shall assure:
    (i) That a seat belt is provided for each vehicle or machine 
operator;
    (ii) That each employee uses the available seat belt while the 
vehicle or machine is being operated;
    (iii) That each employee securely and tightly fastens the seat belt 
to restrain the employee within the vehicle or machine cab;
    (iv) That each machine seat belt meets the requirements of the 
Society of Automotive Engineers Standard SAE J386, June 1985, ``Operator 
Restraint Systems for Off-Road Work Machines'', which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (v) That seat belts are not removed from any vehicle or machine. The 
employer shall replace each seat belt which has been removed from any 
vehicle or machine that was equipped with seat belts at the time of 
manufacture; and
    (vi) That each seat belt is maintained in a serviceable condition.
    (4) Fire extinguishers. The employer shall provide and maintain 
portable fire extinguishers on each machine and vehicle in accordance 
with the requirements of subpart L of part 1910.
    (5) Environmental conditions. All work shall terminate and each 
employee shall move to a place of safety when environmental conditions, 
such as but not limited to, electrical storms, strong winds which may 
affect the fall of a tree, heavy rain or snow, extreme cold, dense fog, 
fires, mudslides, and darkness, create a hazard for the employee in the 
performance of the job.
    (6) Work areas. (i) Employees shall be spaced and the duties of each 
employee shall be organized so the actions of one employee will not 
create a hazard for any other employee.
    (ii) Work areas shall be assigned so that trees cannot fall into an 
adjacent occupied work area. The distance between adjacent occupied work 
areas shall be at least two tree lengths of the trees being felled. The 
distance between adjacent occupied work areas shall reflect the degree 
of slope, the density of the growth, the height of the trees, the soil 
structure and other hazards reasonably anticipated at that work site. A 
distance of greater than two tree lengths shall be maintained between 
adjacent occupied work areas on any slope where rolling or sliding of 
trees or logs is reasonably foreseeable.
    (iii) Each employee performing a logging operation at a logging work 
site shall work in a position or location that is within visual or 
audible contact with another employee.
    (iv) The employer shall account for each employee at the end of each 
workshift.
    (7) Signaling and signal equipment. (i) Hand signals or audible 
contact, such as but not limited to, whistles, horns, or radios, shall 
be utilized whenever noise, distance, restricted visibility, or other 
factors prevent clear understanding of normal voice communications 
between employees.
    (ii) Engine noise, such as from a chain saw, is not an acceptable 
means of signaling. Other locally and regionally recognized signals may 
be used.
    (iii) Only a designated person shall give signals, except in an 
emergency.
    (8) Overhead electric lines. (i) Logging operations near overhead 
electric lines shall be done in accordance with the requirements of 29 
CFR 1910.333(c)(3).
    (ii) The employer shall notify the power company immediately if a 
felled tree makes contact with any power line. Each employee shall 
remain clear of the area until the power company advises that there are 
no electrical hazards.
    (9) Flammable and combustible liquids. (i) Flammable and combustible 
liquids shall be stored, handled, transported, and used in accordance 
with the requirements of subpart H of part 1910.
    (ii) Flammable and combustible liquids shall not be transported in 
the driver compartment or in any passenger-occupied area of a machine or 
vehicle.
    (iii) Each machine, vehicle, and portable powered tool shall be shut 
off during fueling. Diesel-powered machines and vehicles may be fueled 
while they are at idle, provided that continued operation is intended 
and that the employer follows safe fueling and operating procedures.

[[Page 733]]

    (iv) Flammable and combustible liquids, including chain-saw and 
diesel fuel, may be used to start a fire, provided the employer assures 
that in the particular situation its use does not create a hazard for an 
employee.
    (10) Explosives and blasting agents. (i) Explosives and blasting 
agents shall be stored, handled, transported, and used in accordance 
with the requirements of subpart H of part 1910.
    (ii) Only a designated person shall handle or use explosives and 
blasting agents.
    (iii) Explosives and blasting agents shall not be transported in the 
driver compartment or in any passenger-occupied area of a machine or 
vehicle.
    (e) Hand and portable powered tools--(1) General requirements. (i) 
The employer shall assure that each hand and portable powered tool, 
including any tool provided by an employee, is maintained in serviceable 
condition.
    (ii) The employer shall assure that each tool, including any tool 
provided by an employee, is inspected before initial use during each 
workshift. At a minimum, the inspection shall include the following:
    (A) Handles and guards, to assure that they are sound, tight-
fitting, properly shaped, free of splinters and sharp edges, and in 
place;
    (B) Controls, to assure proper function;
    (C) Chain-saw chains, to assure proper adjustment;
    (D) Chain-saw mufflers, to assure that they are operational and in 
place;
    (E) Chain brakes and nose shielding devices, to assure that they are 
in place and function properly;
    (F) Heads of shock, impact-driven and driving tools, to assure that 
there is no mushrooming;
    (G) Cutting edges, to assure that they are sharp and properly 
shaped; and
    (H) All other safety devices, to assure that they are in place and 
function properly.
    (iii) The employer shall assure that each tool is used only for 
purposes for which it has been designed.
    (iv) When the head of any shock, impact-driven or driving tool 
begins to chip, it shall be repaired or removed from service.
    (v) The cutting edge of each tool shall be sharpened in accordance 
with manufacturer's specifications whenever it becomes dull during the 
workshift.
    (vi) Each tool shall be stored in the provided location when not 
being used at a work site.
    (vii) Racks, boxes, holsters or other means shall be provided, 
arranged and used for the transportation of tools so that a hazard is 
not created for any vehicle operator or passenger.
    (2) Chain saws. (i) Each chain saw placed into initial service after 
the effective date of this section shall be equipped with a chain brake 
and shall otherwise meet the requirements of the ANSI B175.1-1991 
``Safety Requirements for Gasoline-Powered Chain Saws'', which is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. Each chain saw 
placed into service before the effective date of this section shall be 
equipped with a protective device that minimizes chain-saw kickback. No 
chain-saw kickback device shall be removed or otherwise disabled.
    (ii) Each gasoline-powered chain saw shall be equipped with a 
continuous pressure throttle control system which will stop the chain 
when pressure on the throttle is released.
    (iii) The chain saw shall be operated and adjusted in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions.
    (iv) The chain saw shall be fueled at least 10 feet (3 m) from any 
open flame or other source of ignition.
    (v) The chain saw shall be started at least 10 feet (3 m) from the 
fueling area.
    (vi) The chain saw shall be started on the ground or where otherwise 
firmly supported. Drop starting a chain saw is prohibited.
    (vii) The chain saw shall be started with the chain brake engaged.
    (viii) The chain saw shall be held with the thumbs and fingers of 
both hands encircling the handles during operation unless the employer 
demonstrates that a greater hazard is posed by keeping both hands on the 
chain saw in that particular situation.
    (ix) The chain-saw operator shall be certain of footing before 
starting to cut. The chain saw shall not be used in a position or at a 
distance that could

[[Page 734]]

cause the operator to become off-balance, to have insecure footing, or 
to relinquish a firm grip on the saw.
    (x) Prior to felling any tree, the chain-saw operator shall clear 
away brush or other potential obstacles which might interfere with 
cutting the tree or using the retreat path.
    (xi) The chain saw shall not be used to cut directly overhead.
    (xii) The chain saw shall be carried in a manner that will prevent 
operator contact with the cutting chain and muffler.
    (xiii) The chain saw shall be shut off or the throttle released 
before the feller starts his retreat.
    (xiv) The chain saw shall be shut down or the chain brake shall be 
engaged whenever a saw is carried further than 50 feet (15.2 m). The 
chain saw shall be shut down or the chain brake shall be engaged when a 
saw is carried less than 50 feet if conditions such as, but not limited 
to, the terrain, underbrush and slippery surfaces, may create a hazard 
for an employee.
    (f) Machines--(1) General requirements. (i) The employer shall 
assure that each machine, including any machine provided by an employee, 
is maintained in serviceable condition.
    (ii) The employer shall assure that each machine, including any 
machine provided by an employee, is inspected before initial use during 
each workshift. Defects or damage shall be repaired or the unserviceable 
machine shall be replaced before work is commenced.
    (iii) The employer shall assure that operating and maintenance 
instructions are available on the machine or in the area where the 
machine is being operated. Each machine operator and maintenance 
employee shall comply with the operating and maintenance instructions.
    (2) Machine operation. (i) The machine shall be started and operated 
only by a designated person.
    (ii) Stationary logging machines and their components shall be 
anchored or otherwise stabilized to prevent movement during operation.
    (iii) The rated capacity of any machine shall not be exceeded.
    (iv) To maintain stability, the machine must be operated within the 
limitations imposed by the manufacturer as described in the operating 
and maintenance instructions for that machine.
    (v) Before starting or moving any machine, the operator shall 
determine that no employee is in the path of the machine.
    (vi) The machine shall be operated only from the operator's station 
or as otherwise recommended by the manufacturer.
    (vii) The machine shall be operated at such a distance from 
employees and other machines such that operation will not create a 
hazard for an employee.
    (viii) No employee other than the operator shall ride on any mobile 
machine unless seating, seat belts and other protection equivalent to 
that provided for the operator are provided.
    (ix) No employee shall ride on any load.
    (x) Before the operator leaves the operator's station of a machine, 
it shall be secured as follows:
    (A) The parking brake or brake locks shall be applied;
    (B) The transmission shall be placed in the manufacturer's specified 
park position; and
    (C) Each moving element such as, but not limited to blades, buckets, 
saws and shears, shall be lowered to the ground or otherwise secured.
    (xi) If a hydraulic or pneumatic storage device can move the moving 
elements such as, but not limited to, blades, buckets, saws and shears, 
after the machine is shut down, the pressure or stored energy from the 
element shall be discharged as specified by the manufacturer.
    (xii) The rated capacity of any vehicle transporting a machine shall 
not be exceeded.
    (xiii) The machine shall be loaded, secured and unloaded so that it 
will not create a hazard for any employee.
    (3) Protective structures. (i) Each tractor, skidder, swing yarder, 
log stacker, log loader and mechanical felling device, such as tree 
shears or feller-buncher, placed into initial service after February 9, 
1995, shall be equipped with falling object protective structure (FOPS) 
and/or rollover protective structure (ROPS). The employer shall replace 
FOPS or ROPS

[[Page 735]]

which have been removed from any machine. Exception: This requirement 
does not apply to machines which are capable of 360 degree rotation.
    (ii)(A) ROPS shall be tested, installed, and maintained in 
serviceable condition.
    (B) Each machine manufactured after August 1, 1996, shall have ROPS 
tested, installed, and maintained in accordance with the Society of 
Automotive Engineers SAE J1040, April 1988, ``Performance Criteria for 
Rollover Protective Structures (ROPS) for Construction, Earthmoving, 
Forestry, and Mining Machines'', which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (C) This incorporation by reference was approved by the Director of 
the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 
51. Copies may be obtained from the Society of Automotive Engineers, 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096. Copies may be inspected at the 
Docket Office, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. 
Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., room N2625, 
Washington, DC 20210, or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 
North Capitol Street NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.
    (iii) FOPS shall be installed, tested and maintained in accordance 
with the Society of Automotive Engineers SAE J231, January 1981, 
``Minimum Performance Criteria for Falling Object Protective Structures 
(FOPS)'', which is incorporated by reference as specified in 
Sec. 1910.6.
    (iv) ROPS and FOPS shall meet the requirements of the Society of 
Automotive Engineers SAE J397, April 1988, ``Deflection Limiting Volume-
ROPS/FOPS Laboratory Evaluation'', which is incorporated by reference as 
specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (v) Each protective structure shall be of a size that does not 
impede the operator's normal movements.
    (vi) The overhead covering of each cab shall be of solid material 
and shall extend over the entire canopy.
    (vii) Each machine manufactured after August 1, 1996, shall have a 
cab that is fully enclosed with mesh material with openings no greater 
than 2 inches (5.08 cm) at its least dimension. The cab may be enclosed 
with other material(s) where the employer demonstrates such material(s) 
provides equivalent protection and visibility. Exception: Equivalent 
visibility is not required for the lower portion of the cab where there 
are control panels or similar obstructions in the cab, or where 
visibility is not necessary for safe operation of the machine.
    (viii) Each machine manufactured on or before August 1, 1996 shall 
have a cab which meets the requirements specified in paragraph 
(f)(3)(vii) or a protective canopy for the operator which meets the 
following requirements:
    (A) The protective canopy shall be constructed to protect the 
operator from injury due to falling trees, limbs, saplings or branches 
which might enter the compartment side areas and from snapping winch 
lines or other objects;
    (B) The lower portion of the cab shall be fully enclosed with solid 
material, except at entrances, to prevent the operator from being 
injured from obstacles entering the cab;
    (C) The upper rear portion of the cab shall be fully enclosed with 
open mesh material with openings of such size as to reject the entrance 
of an object larger than 2 inches in diameter. It shall provide maximum 
rearward visibility; and
    (D) Open mesh shall be extended forward as far as possible from the 
rear corners of the cab sides so as to give the maximum protection 
against obstacles, branches, etc., entering the cab area.
    (ix) The enclosure of the upper portion of each cab shall allow 
maximum visibility.
    (x) When transparent material is used to enclose the upper portion 
of the cab, it shall be made of safety glass or other material that the 
employer demonstrates provides equivalent protection and visibility.
    (xi) Transparent material shall be kept clean to assure operator 
visibility.
    (xii) Transparent material that may create a hazard for the 
operator, such as but not limited to, cracked, broken or scratched 
safety glass, shall be replaced.
    (xiii) Deflectors shall be installed in front of each cab to deflect 
whipping

[[Page 736]]

saplings and branches. Deflectors shall be located so as not to impede 
visibility and access to the cab.
    (xiv) The height of each cab entrance shall be at least 52 inches 
(1.3 meters) from the floor of the cab.
    (xv) Each machine operated near cable yarding operations shall be 
equipped with sheds or roofs of sufficient strength to provide 
protection from breaking lines.
    (4) Overhead guards. Each forklift shall be equipped with an 
overhead guard meeting the requirements of the American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, ASME B56.6-1992 (with addenda), ``Safety Standard 
for Rough Terrain Forklift Trucks'', which is incorporated by reference 
as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (5) Machine access. (i) Machine access systems, meeting the 
specifications of the Society of Automotive Engineers, SAE J185, June 
1988, ``Recommended Practice for Access Systems for Off-Road Machines'', 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6, shall be 
provided for each machine where the operator or any other employee must 
climb onto the machine to enter the cab or to perform maintenance.
    (ii) Each machine cab shall have a second means of egress.
    (iii) Walking and working surfaces of each machine and machine work 
station shall have a slip resistant surface to assure safe footing.
    (iv) The walking and working surface of each machine shall be kept 
free of waste, debris and any other material which might result in fire, 
slipping, or falling.
    (6) Exhaust systems. (i) The exhaust pipes on each machine shall be 
located so exhaust gases are directed away from the operator.
    (ii) The exhaust pipes on each machine shall be mounted or guarded 
to protect each employee from accidental contact.
    (iii) The exhaust pipes shall be equipped with spark arresters. 
Engines equipped with turbochargers do not require spark arresters.
    (iv) Each machine muffler provided by the manufacturer, or their 
equivalent, shall be in place at all times the machine is in operation.
    (7) Brakes. (i) Service brakes shall be sufficient to stop and hold 
each machine and its rated load capacity on the slopes over which it is 
being operated.
    (ii) Each machine placed into initial service on or after September 
8, 1995 shall also be equipped with: back-up or secondary brakes that 
are capable of stopping the machine regardless of the direction of 
travel or whether the engine is running; and parking brakes that are 
capable of continuously holding a stopped machine stationary.
    (8) Guarding. (i) Each machine shall be equipped with guarding to 
protect employees from exposed moving elements, such as but not limited 
to, shafts, pulleys, belts on conveyors, and gears, in accordance with 
the requirements of subpart O of part 1910.
    (ii) Each machine used for debarking, limbing and chipping shall be 
equipped with guarding to protect employees from flying wood chunks, 
logs, chips, bark, limbs and other material in accordance with the 
requirements of subpart O of part 1910.
    (iii) The guarding on each machine shall be in place at all times 
the machine is in operation.
    (g) Vehicles. (1) The employer shall assure that each vehicle used 
to perform any logging operation is maintained in serviceable condition.
    (2) The employer shall assure that each vehicle used to perform any 
logging operation is inspected before initial use during each workshift. 
Defects or damage shall be repaired or the unserviceable vehicle shall 
be replaced before work is commenced.
    (3) The employer shall assure that operating and maintenance 
instructions are available in each vehicle. Each vehicle operator and 
maintenance employee shall comply with the operating and maintenance 
instructions.
    (4) The employer shall assure that each vehicle operator has a valid 
operator's license for the class of vehicle being operated.
    (5) Mounting steps and handholds shall be provided for each vehicle 
wherever it is necessary to prevent an employee from being injured when 
entering or leaving the vehicle.
    (6) The seats of each vehicle shall be securely fastened.

[[Page 737]]

    (7) The requirements of paragraphs (f)(2)(iii), (f)(2)(v), 
(f)(2)(vii), (f)(2)(x), (f)(2)(xiii), and (f)(7) of this section shall 
also apply to each vehicle used to transport any employee off public 
roads or to perform any logging operation, including any vehicle 
provided by an employee.
    (h) Tree harvesting--(1) General requirements. (i) Trees shall not 
be felled in a manner that may create a hazard for an employee, such as 
but not limited to, striking a rope, cable, power line, or machine.
    (ii) The immediate supervisor shall be consulted when unfamiliar or 
unusually hazardous conditions necessitate the supervisor's approval 
before cutting is commenced.
    (iii) While manual felling is in progress, no yarding machine shall 
be operated within two tree lengths of trees being manually felled. 
Exception: This provision does not apply to yarding machines performing 
tree pulling operations.
    (iv) No employee shall approach a feller closer than two tree 
lengths of trees being felled until the feller has acknowledged that it 
is safe to do so, unless the employer demonstrates that a team of 
employees is necessary to manually fell a particular tree.
    (v) No employee shall approach a mechanical felling operation closer 
than two tree lengths of the trees being felled until the machine 
operator has acknowledged that it is safe to do so.
    (vi) Each danger tree shall be felled, removed or avoided. Each 
danger tree, including lodged trees and snags, shall be felled or 
removed using mechanical or other techniques that minimize employee 
exposure before work is commenced in the area of the danger tree. If the 
danger tree is not felled or removed, it shall be marked and no work 
shall be conducted within two tree lengths of the danger tree unless the 
employer demonstrates that a shorter distance will not create a hazard 
for an employee.
    (vii) Each danger tree shall be carefully checked for signs of loose 
bark, broken branches and limbs or other damage before they are felled 
or removed. Accessible loose bark and other damage that may create a 
hazard for an employee shall be removed or held in place before felling 
or removing the tree.
    (viii) Felling on any slope where rolling or sliding of trees or 
logs is reasonably foreseeable shall be done uphill from, or on the same 
level as, previously felled trees.
    (ix) Domino felling of trees is prohibited.

    Note to paragraph (h)(1)(ix): The definition of domino felling does 
not include the felling of a single danger tree by felling another 
single tree into it.

    (2) Manual felling. (i) Before felling is started, the feller shall 
plan and clear a retreat path. The retreat path shall extend diagonally 
away from the expected felling line unless the employer demonstrates 
that such a retreat path poses a greater hazard than an alternate path. 
Once the backcut has been made the feller shall immediately move a safe 
distance away from the tree on the retreat path.
    (ii) Before each tree is felled, conditions such as, but not limited 
to, snow and ice accumulation, the wind, the lean of tree, dead limbs, 
and the location of other trees, shall be evaluated by the feller and 
precautions taken so a hazard is not created for an employee.
    (iii) Each tree shall be checked for accumulations of snow and ice. 
Accumulations of snow and ice that may create a hazard for an employee 
shall be removed before felling is commenced in the area or the area 
shall be avoided.
    (iv) When a spring pole or other tree under stress is cut, no 
employee other than the feller shall be closer than two trees lengths 
when the stress is released.
    (v) An undercut shall be made in each tree being felled unless the 
employer demonstrates that felling the particular tree without an 
undercut will not create a hazard for an employee. The undercut shall be 
of a size so the tree will not split and will fall in the intended 
direction.
    (vi) A backcut shall be made in each tree being felled. The backcut 
shall leave sufficient hinge wood to hold the tree to the stump during 
most of its fall so that the hinge is able to guide the tree's fall in 
the intended direction.

[[Page 738]]

    (vii) The backcut shall be above the level of the horizontal facecut 
in order to provide an adequate platform to prevent kickback. Exception: 
The backcut may be at or below the horizontal facecut in tree pulling 
operations.

    Note to paragraph (h)(2)(vii): This requirement does not apply to 
open face felling where two angled facecuts rather than a horizontal 
facecut are used.

    (3) Limbing and bucking. (i) Limbing and bucking on any slope where 
rolling or sliding of trees or logs is reasonably foreseeable shall be 
done on the uphill side of each tree or log.
    (ii) Before bucking or limbing wind-thrown trees, precautions shall 
be taken to prevent the root wad, butt or logs from striking an 
employee. These precautions include, but are not limited to, chocking or 
moving the tree to a stable position.
    (4) Chipping (in-woods locations). (i) Chipper access covers or 
doors shall not be opened until the drum or disc is at a complete stop.
    (ii) Infeed and discharge ports shall be guarded to prevent contact 
with the disc, knives, or blower blades.
    (iii) The chipper shall be shut down and locked out in accordance 
with the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.147 when an employee performs any 
servicing or maintenance.
    (iv) Detached trailer chippers shall be chocked during usage on any 
slope where rolling or sliding of the chipper is reasonably foreseeable.
    (5) Yarding. (i) No log shall be moved until each employee is in the 
clear.
    (ii) Each choker shall be hooked and unhooked from the uphill side 
or end of the log, unless the employer demonstrates that is it not 
feasible in the particular situation to hook or unhook the choker from 
the uphill side. Where the choker is hooked or unhooked from the 
downhill side or end of the log, the log shall be securely chocked to 
prevent rolling, sliding or swinging.
    (iii) Each choker shall be positioned near the end of the log or 
tree length.
    (iv) Each machine shall be positioned during winching so the machine 
and winch are operated within their design limits.
    (v) No yarding line shall be moved unless the yarding machine 
operator has clearly received and understood the signal to do so. When 
in doubt, the yarding machine operator shall repeat the signal and wait 
for a confirming signal before moving any line.
    (vi) No load shall exceed the rated capacity of the pallet, trailer, 
or other carrier.
    (vii) Towed equipment, such as but not limited to, skid pans, 
pallets, arches, and trailers, shall be attached to each machine or 
vehicle in such a manner as to allow a full 90 degree turn; to prevent 
overrunning of the towing machine or vehicle; and to assure that the 
operator is always in control of the towed equipment.
    (viii) The yarding machine or vehicle, including its load, shall be 
operated with safe clearance from all obstructions that may create a 
hazard for an employee.
    (ix) Each yarded tree shall be placed in a location that does not 
create a hazard for an employee and an orderly manner so that the trees 
are stable before bucking or limbing is commenced.
    (6) Loading and unloading. (i) The transport vehicle shall be 
positioned to provide working clearance between the vehicle and the 
deck.
    (ii) Only the loading or unloading machine operator and other 
personnel the employer demonstrates are essential shall be in the 
loading or unloading work area during this operation.
    (iii) No transport vehicle operator shall remain in the cab during 
loading and unloading if the logs are carried or moved over the truck 
cab, unless the employer demonstrates that it is necessary for the 
operator to do so. Where the transport vehicle operator remains in the 
cab, the employer shall provide operator protection, such as but not 
limited to, reinforcement of the cab.
    (iv) Each log shall be placed on a transport vehicle in an orderly 
manner and tightly secured.
    (v) The load shall be positioned to prevent slippage or loss during 
handling and transport.
    (vi) Each stake and chock which is used to trip loads shall be so 
constructed that the tripping mechanism is activated on the side 
opposite the release of the load.
    (vii) Each tie down shall be left in place over the peak log to 
secure all logs until the unloading lines or other

[[Page 739]]

protection the employer demonstrates is equivalent has been put in 
place. A stake of sufficient strength to withstand the forces of 
shifting or moving logs, shall be considered equivalent protection 
provided that the logs are not loaded higher than the stake.
    (viii) Each tie down shall be released only from the side on which 
the unloading machine operates, except as follows:
    (A) When the tie down is released by a remote control device; and
    (B) When the employee making the release is protected by racks, 
stanchions or other protection the employer demonstrates is capable of 
withstanding the force of the logs.
    (7) Transport. The transport vehicle operator shall assure that each 
tie down is tight before transporting the load. While enroute, the 
operator shall check and tighten the tie downs whenever there is reason 
to believe that the tie downs have loosened or the load has shifted.
    (8) Storage. Each deck shall be constructed and located so it is 
stable and provides each employee with enough room to safely move and 
work in the area.
    (i) Training. (1) The employer shall provide training for each 
employee, including supervisors, at no cost to the employee.
    (2) Frequency. Training shall be provided as follows:
    (i) As soon as possible but not later than the effective date of 
this section for initial training for each current and new employee;
    (ii) Prior to initial assignment for each new employee;
    (iii) Whenever the employee is assigned new work tasks, tools, 
equipment, machines or vehicles; and
    (iv) Whenever an employee demonstrates unsafe job performance.
    (3) Content. At a minimum, training shall consist of the following 
elements:
    (i) Safe performance of assigned work tasks;
    (ii) Safe use, operation and maintenance of tools, machines and 
vehicles the employee uses or operates, including emphasis on 
understanding and following the manufacturer's operating and maintenance 
instructions, warnings and precautions;
    (iii) Recognition of safety and health hazards associated with the 
employee's specific work tasks, including the use of measures and work 
practices to prevent or control those hazards;
    (iv) Recognition, prevention and control of other safety and health 
hazards in the logging industry;
    (v) Procedures, practices and requirements of the employer's work 
site; and
    (vi) The requirements of this standard.
    (4) Training of an employee due to unsafe job performance, or 
assignment of new work tasks, tools, equipment, machines, or vehicles; 
may be limited to those elements in paragraph (i)(3) of this section 
which are relevant to the circumstances giving rise to the need for 
training.
    (5) Portability of training. (i) Each current employee who has 
received training in the particular elements specified in paragraph 
(i)(3) of this section shall not be required to be retrained in those 
elements.
    (ii) Each new employee who has received training in the particular 
elements specified in paragraph (i)(3) of this section shall not be 
required to be retrained in those elements prior to initial assignment.
    (iii) The employer shall train each current and new employee in 
those elements for which the employee has not received training.
    (iv) The employer is responsible for ensuring that each current and 
new employee can properly and safely perform the work tasks and operate 
the tools, equipment, machines, and vehicles used in their job.
    (6) Each new employee and each employee who is required to be 
trained as specified in paragraph (i)(2) of this section, shall work 
under the close supervision of a designated person until the employee 
demonstrates to the employer the ability to safely perform their new 
duties independently.
    (7) First-aid training. (i) The employer shall assure that each 
employee, including supervisors, receives or has received first-aid and 
CPR training meeting at least the requirements specified in appendix B.
    (ii) The employer shall assure that each employee's first-aid and 
CPR

[[Page 740]]

training and/or certificate of training remain current.
    (8) All training shall be conducted by a designated person.
    (9) The employer shall assure that all training required by this 
section is presented in a manner that the employee is able to 
understand. The employer shall assure that all training materials used 
are appropriate in content and vocabulary to the educational level, 
literacy, and language skills of the employees being trained.
    (10) Certification of training. (i) The employer shall verify 
compliance with paragraph (i) of this section by preparing a written 
certification record. The written certification record shall contain the 
name or other identity of the employee trained, the date(s) of the 
training, and the signature of the person who conducted the training or 
the signature of the employer. If the employer relies on training 
conducted prior to the employee's hiring or completed prior to the 
effective date of this section, the certification record shall indicate 
the date the employer determined the prior training was adequate.
    (ii) The most recent training certification shall be maintained.
    (11) Safety and health meetings. The employer shall hold safety and 
health meetings as necessary and at least each month for each employee. 
Safety and health meetings may be conducted individually, in crew 
meetings, in larger groups, or as part of other staff meetings.
    (j) Effective date. This section is effective February 9, 1995. All 
requirements under this section commence on the effective date.
    (k) Appendices. Appendices A and B of this section are mandatory. 
The information contained in appendix C of this section is informational 
and is not intended to create any additional obligations not otherwise 
imposed or to detract from existing regulations.

    Note: In the Federal Register of August 9, 1995, OSHA extended the 
stay of the following paragraphs of Sec. 1910.266 until September 8, 
1995. The remaining requirements of Sec. 1910.266, which became 
effective on February 9, 1995, are unaffected by the extension of the 
partial stay:
    1. (d)(1)(v)--insofar as it requires foot protection to be chain-saw 
resistant.
    2. (d)(1)(vii)--insofar as it required face protection.
    3. (d)(2)(iii).
    4. (f)(2)(iv).
    5. (f)(2)(xi).
    6. (f)(3)(ii).
    7. (f)(3)(vii).
    8. (f)(3)(viii).
    9. (f)(7)(ii)--insofar as it requires parking brakes to be able to 
stop a moving machine.
    10. (g)(1) and (g)(2) insofar as they require inspection and 
maintenance of employee-owned vehicles.
    11. (h)(2)(vii)--insofar as it precludes backcuts at the level of 
the horizontal cut of the undercut when the Humboldt cutting method is 
used.

         Appendix A to Sec. 1910.266--First-Aid Kits (Mandatory)

    The following list sets forth the minimally acceptable number and 
type of first-aid supplies for first-aid kits required under paragraph 
(d)(2) of the logging standard. The contents of the first-aid kit listed 
should be adequate for small work sites, consisting of approximately two 
to three employees. When larger operations or multiple operations are 
being conducted at the same location, additional first-aid kits should 
be provided at the work site or additional quantities of supplies should 
be included in the first-aid kits:
    1. Gauze pads (at least 4 x 4 inches).
    2. Two large gauze pads (at least 8 x 10 inches).
    3. Box adhesive bandages (band-aids).
    4. One package gauze roller bandage at least 2 inches wide.
    5. Two triangular bandages.
    6. Wound cleaning agent such as sealed moistened towelettes.
    7. Scissors.
    8. At least one blanket.
    9. Tweezers.
    10. Adhesive tape.
    11. Latex gloves.
    12. Resuscitation equipment such as resuscitation bag, airway, or 
pocket mask.
    13. Two elastic wraps.
    14. Splint.
    15. Directions for requesting emergency assistance.

   Appendix B to Sec. 1910.266--First-aid and CPR Training (Mandatory)

    The following is deemed to be the minimal acceptable first-aid and 
CPR training program for employees engaged in logging activities.
    First-aid and CPR training shall be conducted using the conventional 
methods of training such as lecture, demonstration, practical exercise 
and examination (both

[[Page 741]]

written and practical). The length of training must be sufficient to 
assure that trainees understand the concepts of first aid and can 
demonstrate their ability to perform the various procedures contained in 
the outline below.
    At a minimum, first-aid and CPR training shall consist of the 
following:
    1. The definition of first aid.
    2. Legal issues of applying first aid (Good Samaritan Laws).
    3. Basic anatomy.
    4. Patient assessment and first aid for the following:
    a. Respiratory arrest.
    b. Cardiac arrest.
    c. Hemorrhage.
    d. Lacerations/abrasions.
    e. Amputations.
    f. Musculoskeletal injuries.
    g. Shock.
    h. Eye injuries.
    i. Burns.
    j. Loss of consciousness.
    k. Extreme temperature exposure (hypothermia/hyperthermia)
    l. Paralysis
    m. Poisoning.
    n. Loss of mental functioning (psychosis/hallucinations, etc.). 
Artificial ventilation.
    o. Drug overdose.
    5. CPR.
    6. Application of dressings and slings.
    7. Treatment of strains, sprains, and fractures.
    8. Immobilization of injured persons.
    9. Handling and transporting injured persons.
    10. Treatment of bites, stings, or contact with poisonous plants or 
animals.

  Appendix C to Sec. 1910.266--Comparable ISO Standards (Non-mandatory)

    The following International Labor Organization (ISO) standards are 
comparable to the corresponding Society of Automotive Engineers 
(Standards that are referenced in this standard.)
    Utilization of the ISO standards in lieu of the corresponding SAE 
standards should result in a machine that meets the OSHA standard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
     SAE standard            ISO standard               Subject
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SAE J1040               ISO 3471-1             Performance Criteria for
                                                Rollover Protective
                                                Structures (ROPS) for
                                                Construction,
                                                Earthmoving, Forestry
                                                and Mining Machines.
SAE J397                ISO 3164               Deflection Limiting
                                                Volume--ROPS/FOPS
                                                Laboratory Evaluation.
SAE J231                ISO 3449               Minimum Performance
                                                Criteria for Falling
                                                Object Protective
                                                Structures (FOPS).
SAE J386                ISO 6683               Operator Restraint
                                                Systems for Off-Road
                                                Work Machines.
SAE J185                ISO 2897               Access Systems for Off-
                                                Road Machines.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[59 FR 51741, Oct. 12, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 7449, Feb. 8, 1995; 60 
FR 40458, Aug. 9, 1996; 60 FR 47035-47037, Sept. 8, 1995; 61 FR 9241, 
9242, Mar. 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.267  Agricultural operations.

    These standards have been transferred to Sec. 1928.21 of this 
chapter.
[40 FR 18268, Apr. 25, 1975]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.267 
was removed, effective Aug. 17, 1998.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.268  Telecommunications.

    (a) Application. (1) This section sets forth safety and health 
standards that apply to the work conditions, practices, means, methods, 
operations, installations and processes performed at telecommunications 
centers and at telecommunications field installations, which are located 
outdoors or in building spaces used for such field installations. Center 
work includes the installation, operation, maintenance, rearrangement, 
and removal of communications equipment and other associated equipment 
in telecommunications switching centers. Field work includes the 
installation, operation, maintenance, rearrangement, and removal of 
conductors and other equipment used for signal or communication service, 
and of their supporting or containing structures, overhead or 
underground, on public or private rights of way, including buildings or 
other structures.
    (2) These standards do not apply: (i) To construction work, as 
defined in Sec. 1910.12, nor (ii) to installations under the exclusive 
control of electric utilities used for the purpose of communications or 
metering, or for generation, control, transformation, transmission, and 
distribution of electric energy, which are located in buildings used 
exclusively by the electric utilities for such purposes, or located 
outdoors on property owned or leased by the electric utilities or on 
public highways, streets, roads, etc., or outdoors

[[Page 742]]

by established rights on private property.
    (3) Operations or conditions not specifically covered by this 
section are subject to all the applicable standards contained in this 
part 1910. See Sec. 1910.5(c). Operations which involve construction 
work, as defined in Sec. 1910.12 are subject to all the applicable 
standards contained in part 1926 of this chapter.
    (b) General--(1) Buildings containing telecommunications centers--
(i) Illumination. Lighting in telecommunication centers shall be 
provided in an adequate amount such that continuing work operations, 
routine observations, and the passage of employees can be carried out in 
a safe and healthful manner. Certain specific tasks in centers, such as 
splicing cable and the maintenance and repair of equipment frame 
lineups, may require a higher level of illumination. In such cases, the 
employer shall install permanent lighting or portable supplemental 
lighting to attain a higher level of illumination shall be provided as 
needed to permit safe performance of the required task.
    (ii) Working surfaces. Guard rails and toe boards may be omitted on 
distribution frame mezzanine platforms to permit access to equipment. 
This exemption applies only on the side or sides of the platform facing 
the frames and only on those portions of the platform adjacent to 
equipped frames.
    (iii) Working spaces. Maintenance aisles, or wiring aisles, between 
equipment frame lineups are working spaces and are not a means of egress 
for purposes of Sec. 1910.35(a).
    (iv) Special doors. When blastproof or power actuated doors are 
installed in specially designed hardsite security buildings and spaces, 
they shall be designed and installed so that they can be used as a means 
of egress in emergencies.
    (v) Equipment, machinery and machine guarding. When power plant 
machinery in telecommunications centers is operated with commutators and 
couplings uncovered, the adjacent housing shall be clearly marked to 
alert personnel to the rotating machinery.
    (2) Battery handling. (i) Eye protection devices which provide side 
as well as frontal eye protection for employees shall be provided when 
measuring storage battery specific gravity or handling electrolyte, and 
the employer shall ensure that such devices are used by the employees. 
The employer shall also ensure that acid resistant gloves and aprons 
shall be worn for protection against spattering. Facilities for quick 
drenching or flushing of the eyes and body shall be provided unless the 
storage batteries are of the enclosed type and equipped with explosion 
proof vents, in which case sealed water rinse or neutralizing packs may 
be substituted for the quick drenching or flushing facilities. Employees 
assigned to work with storage batteries shall be instructed in emergency 
procedures such as dealing with accidental acid spills.
    (ii) Electrolyte (acid or base, and distilled water) for battery 
cells shall be mixed in a well ventilated room. Acid or base shall be 
poured gradually, while stirring, into the water. Water shall never be 
poured into concentrated (greater than 75 percent) acid solutions. 
Electrolyte shall never be placed in metal containers nor stirred with 
metal objects.
    (iii) When taking specific gravity readings, the open end of the 
hydrometer shall be covered with an acid resistant material while moving 
it from cell to cell to avoid splashing or throwing the electrolyte.
    (3) Medical and first aid. First aid supplies recommended by a 
consulting physician shall be placed in weatherproof containers (unless 
stored indoors) and shall be easily accessible. Each first aid kit shall 
be inspected at least once a month. Expended items shall be replaced.
    (4) Hazardous materials. Highway mobile vehicles and trailers stored 
in garages in accordance with Sec. 1910.110 may be equipped to carry 
more than one LP-gas container, but the total capacity of LP-gas 
containers per work vehicle stored in garages shall not exceed 100 
pounds of LP-gas. All container valves shall be closed when not in use.
    (5) Compressed gas. When using or transporting nitrogen cylinders in 
a horizontal position, special compartments, racks, or adequate blocking 
shall be provided to prevent cylinder

[[Page 743]]

movement. Regulators shall be removed or guarded before a cylinder is 
transported.
    (6) Support structures. No employee, or any material or equipment, 
may be supported or permitted to be supported on any portion of a pole 
structure, platform, ladder, walkway or other elevated structure or 
aerial device unless the employer ensures that the support structure is 
first inspected by a competent person and it is determined to be 
adequately strong, in good working condition and properly secured in 
place.
    (7) Approach distances to exposed energized overhead power lines and 
parts. The employer shall ensure that no employee approaches or takes 
any conductive object closer to any electrically energized overhead 
power lines and parts than prescribed in Table R-2, unless:
    (i) The employee is insulated or guarded from the energized parts 
(insulating gloves rated for the voltage involved shall be considered 
adequate insulation), or
    (ii) The energized parts are insulated or guarded from the employee 
and any other conductive object at a different potential, or
    (iii) The power conductors and equipment are deenergized and 
grounded.

 Table R-2--Approach Distances to Exposed Energized Overhead Power Lines
                                and Parts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Approach
             Voltage range (phase to phase, RMS)               distance
                                                               (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
300 V and less..............................................       (\1\)
Over 300V, not over 750V....................................          12
Over 750V not over 2 kV.....................................          18
Over 2 kV, not over 15 kV...................................          24
Over 15 kV, not over 37 kV..................................          36
Over 37 kV, not over 87.5 kV................................          42
Over 87.5 kV, not over 121 kV...............................          48
Over 121 kV, not over 140 kV................................          54
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Avoid contact.

    (8) Illumination of field work. Whenever natural light is 
insufficient to adequately illuminate the worksite, artificial 
illumination shall be provided to enable the employee to perform the 
work safely.
    (c) Training. Employers shall provide training in the various 
precautions and safe practices described in this section and shall 
insure that employees do not engage in the activities to which this 
section applies until such employees have received proper training in 
the various precautions and safe practices required by this section. 
However, where the employer can demonstrate that an employee is already 
trained in the precautions and safe practices required by this section 
prior to his employment, training need not be provided to that employee 
in accordance with this section. Where training is required, it shall 
consist of on-the-job training or classroom-type training or a 
combination of both. The employer shall certify that employees have been 
trained by preparing a certification record which includes the identity 
of the person trained, the signature of the employer or the person who 
conducted the training, and the date the training was completed. The 
certification record shall be prepared at the completion of training and 
shall be maintained on file for the duration of the employee's 
employment. The certification record shall be made available upon 
request to the Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health. 
Such training shall, where appropriate, include the following subjects:
    (1) Recognition and avoidance of dangers relating to encounters with 
harmful substances and animal, insect, or plant life;
    (2) Procedures to be followed in emergency situations; and,
    (3) First aid training, including instruction in artificial 
respiration.
    (d) Employee protection in public work areas. (1) Before work is 
begun in the vicinity of vehicular or pedestrian traffic which may 
endanger employees, warning signs and/or flags or other traffic control 
devices shall be placed conspicuously to alert and channel approaching 
traffic. Where further protection is needed, barriers shall be utilized. 
At night, warning lights shall be prominently displayed, and excavated 
areas shall be enclosed with protective barricades.
    (2) If work exposes energized or moving parts that are normally 
protected, danger signs shall be displayed and barricades erected, as 
necessary, to warn other personnel in the area.

[[Page 744]]

    (3) The employer shall insure that an employee finding any crossed 
or fallen wires which create or may create a hazardous situation at the 
work area: (i) Remains on guard or adopts other adequate means to warn 
other employees of the danger and (ii) has the proper authority notified 
at the earliest practical moment.
    (e) Tools and personal protective equipment--Generally. Personal 
protective equipment, protective devices and special tools needed for 
the work of employees shall be provided and the employer shall ensure 
that they are used by employees. Before each day's use the employer 
shall ensure that these personal protective devices, tools, and 
equipment are carefully inspected by a competent person to ascertain 
that they are in good condition.
    (f) Rubber insulating equipment. (1) Rubber insulating equipment 
designed for the voltage levels to be encountered shall be provided and 
the employer shall ensure that they are used by employees as required by 
this section. The requirements of Sec. 1910.137, Electrical Protective 
Equipment, shall be followed except for Table I-6.
    (2) The employer is responsible for the periodic retesting of all 
insulating gloves, blankets, and other rubber insulating equipment. This 
retesting shall be electrical, visual and mechanical. The following 
maximum retesting intervals shall apply:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Natural    Synthetic
Gloves, blankets, and other insulating equipment    rubber      rubber
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          Months
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New.............................................          12          18
Re-issued.......................................           9          15
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Gloves and blankets shall be marked to indicate compliance with 
the retest schedule, and shall be marked with the date the next test is 
due. Gloves found to be defective in the field or by the tests set forth 
in paragraph (f)(5) of this section shall be destroyed by cutting them 
open from the finger to the gauntlet.
    (g) Personal climbing equipment--(1) General. Safety belts and 
straps shall be provided and the employer shall ensure their use when 
work is performed at positions more than 4 feet above ground, on poles, 
and on towers, except as provided in paragraphs (n)(7) and (n)(8) of 
this section. No safety belts, safety straps or lanyards acquired after 
July 1, 1975 may be used unless they meet the tests set forth in 
paragraph (g)(2) of this section. The employer shall ensure that all 
safety belts and straps are inspected by a competent person prior to 
each day's use to determine that they are in safe working condition.
    (2) Telecommunication lineman's body belts, safety straps, and 
lanyards--(i) General requirements. (A) Hardware for lineman's body 
belts, safety straps, and lanyards shall be drop forged or pressed steel 
and shall have a corrosion resistant finish tested to meet the 
requirements of the American Society for Testing and Materials B117-64, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6 (50-hour 
test). Surfaces shall be smooth and free of sharp edges. Production 
samples of lineman's safety straps, body belts and lanyards shall be 
approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, as having been 
tested in accordance with and as meeting the requirements of this 
paragraph.
    (B) All buckles shall withstand a 2,000-pound tensile test with a 
maximum permanent deformation no greater than one sixty-forth inch.
    (C) D rings shall withstand a 5,000-pound tensile test without 
cracking or breaking.
    (D) Snaphooks shall withstand a 5,000-pound tensile test, or shall 
withstand a 3,000-pound tensile test and a 180 deg. bend test. Tensile 
failure is indicated by distortion of the snaphook sufficient to release 
the keeper; bend test failure is indicated by cracking of the snaphook.
    (ii) Specific requirements. (A)(1) All fabric used for safety straps 
shall be capable of withstanding an A.C. dielectric test of not less 
than 25,000 volts per foot ``dry'' for 3 minutes, without visible 
deterioration.
    (2) All fabric and leather used shall be tested for leakage current. 
Fabric or leather may not be used if the leakage current exceeds 1 
milliampere when a potential of 3,000 volts is applied to the electrodes 
positioned 12 inches apart.
    (3) In lieu of alternating current tests, equivalent direct current 
tests may be performed.

[[Page 745]]

    (B) The cushion part of the body belt shall:
    (1) Contain no exposed rivets on the inside. This provision does not 
apply to belts used by craftsmen not engaged in line work.
    (2) Be at least three inches in width;
    (3) Be at least five thirty-seconds (\5/32\) inch thick, if made of 
leather; and
    (C) [Reserved]
    (D) Suitable copper, steel, or equivalent liners shall be used 
around the bars of D rings to prevent wear between these members and the 
leather or fabric enclosing them.
    (E) All stitching shall be done with a minimum 42-pound weight nylon 
or equivalent thread and shall be lock stitched. Stitching parallel to 
an edge may not be less than three-sixteenths (\3/16\) inch from the 
edge of the narrowest member caught by the thread. The use of cross 
stitching on leather is prohibited.
    (F) The keepers of snaphooks shall have a spring tension that will 
not allow the keeper to begin to open when a weight of 2\1/2\ pounds or 
less is applied, but the keepers shall begin to open when a weight of 
four pounds is applied. In making this determination, the weight shall 
be supported on the keeper against the end of the nose.
    (G) Safety straps, lanyards, and body belts shall be tested in 
accordance with the following procedure:
    (1) Attach one end of the safety strap or lanyard to a rigid 
support, and the other end to a 250-pound canvas bag of sand;
    (2) Allow the 250-pound canvas bag of sand to free fall 4 feet when 
testing safety straps and 6 feet when testing lanyards. In each case, 
the strap or lanyard shall stop the fall of the 250-pound bag;
    (3) Failure of the strap or lanyard shall be indicated by any 
breakage or slippage sufficient to permit the bag to fall free from the 
strap or lanyard.
    (4) The entire ``body belt assembly'' shall be tested using on D 
ring. A safety strap or lanyard shall be used that is capable of passing 
the ``impact loading test'' described in paragraph (g)(2)(ii)(G)(2) of 
this section and attached as required in paragraph (g)(2)(ii)(G)(1) of 
this section. The body belt shall be secured to the 250-pound bag of 
sand at a point which simulates the waist of a man and shall be dropped 
as stated in paragraph (g)(2)(ii)(G)(2) of this section. Failure of the 
body belt shall be indicated by any breakage or slippage sufficient to 
permit the bag to fall free from the body belt.
    (3) Pole climbers. (i) Pole climbers may not be used if the gaffs 
are less than 1\1/4\ inches in length as measured on the underside of 
the gaff. The gaffs of pole climbers shall be covered with safety caps 
when not being used for their intended use.
    (ii) The employer shall ensure that pole climbers are inspected by a 
competent person for the following conditions: Fractured or cracked 
gaffs or leg irons, loose or dull gaffs, broken straps or buckles. If 
any of these conditions exist, the defect shall be corrected before the 
climbers are used.
    (iii) Pole climbers shall be inspected as required in this paragraph 
(g)(3) before each day's use and a gaff cut-out test performed at least 
weekly when in use.
    (iv) Pole climbers may not be worn when:
    (A) Working in trees (specifically designed tree climbers shall be 
used for tree climbing),
    (B) Working on ladders,
    (C) Working in an aerial lift,
    (D) Driving a vehicle, nor
    (E) Walking on rocky, hard, frozen, brushy or hilly terrain.
    (h) Ladders. (1) The employer shall ensure that no employee nor any 
material or equipment may be supported or permitted to be supported on 
any portion of a ladder unless it is first determined, by inspections 
and checks conducted by a competent person that such ladder is 
adequately strong, in good condition, and properly secured in place, as 
required in subpart D of this part and as required in this section.
    (2) The spacing between steps or rungs permanently installed on 
poles and towers shall be no more than 18 inches (36 inches on any one 
side). This requirement also applies to fixed ladders on towers, when 
towers are so equipped. Spacing between steps shall be uniform above the 
initial unstepped section, except where working, standing, or access 
steps are required. Fixed ladder rungs and step rungs for poles

[[Page 746]]

and towers shall have a minimum diameter of \5/8\". Fixed ladder rungs 
shall have a minimum clear width of 12 inches. Steps for poles and 
towers shall have a minimum clear width of 4\1/2\ inches. The spacing 
between detachable steps may not exceed 30 inches on any one side, and 
these steps shall be properly secured when in use.
    (3) Portable wood ladders intended for general use may not be 
painted but may be coated with a transclucent nonconductive coating. 
Portable wood ladders may not be longitudinally reinforced with metal.
    (4) Portable wood ladders that are not being carried on vehicles and 
are not in active use shall be stored where they will not be exposed to 
the elements and where there is good ventilation.
    (5) The provisions of Sec. 1910.25(c)(5) shall apply to rolling 
ladders used in telecommunications centers, except that such ladders 
shall have a minimum inside width, between the side rails, of at least 
eight inches.
    (6) Climbing ladders or stairways on scaffolds used for access and 
egress shall be affixed or built into the scaffold by proper design and 
engineering, and shall be so located that their use will not disturb the 
stability of the scaffold. The rungs of the climbing device shall be 
equally spaced, but may not be less than 12 inches nominal nor more than 
16 inches nominal apart. Horizontal end rungs used for platform support 
may also be utilized as a climbing device if such rungs meet the spacing 
requirement of this paragraph (h)(6), and if there is sufficient 
clearance between the rung and the edge of the platform to afford an 
adequate handhold. If a portable ladder is affixed to the scaffold, it 
shall be securely attached and shall have rungs meeting the spacing 
requirements of this paragraph (h)(6). Clearance shall be provided in 
the back of the ladder of not less than 6 inches from center of rung to 
the nearest scaffold structural member.
    (7) When a ladder is supported by an aerial strand, and ladder hooks 
or other supports are not being used, the ladder shall be extended at 
least 2 feet above the strand and shall be secured to it (e.g. lashed or 
held by a safety strap around the strand and ladder side rail). When a 
ladder is supported by a pole, it shall be securely lashed to the pole 
unless the ladder is specifically designed to prevent movement when used 
in this application.
    (8) The following requirements apply to metal manhole ladders. (i) 
Metal manhole ladders shall be free of structural defects and free of 
accident hazards such as sharp edges and burrs. The metal shall be 
protected against corrosion unless inherently corrosion-resistant.
    (ii) These ladders may be designed with parallel side rails, or with 
side rails varying uniformly in separation along the length (tapered), 
or with side rails flaring at the base to increase stability.
    (iii) The spacing of rungs or steps shall be on 12-inch centers.
    (iv) Connections between rungs or steps and siderails shall be 
constructed to insure rigidity as well as strength.
    (v) Rungs and steps shall be corrugated, knurled, dimpled, coated 
with skid-resistant material, or otherwise treated to minimize the 
possibility of slipping.
    (vi) Ladder hardware shall meet the strength requirements of the 
ladder's component parts and shall be of a material that is protected 
against corrosion unless inherently corrosion-resistant. Metals shall be 
so selected as to avoid excessive galvanic action.
    (i) Other tools and personal protective equipment--(1) Head 
protection. Head protection meeting the requirements of ANSI Z89.2-1971, 
``Safety Requirements for Industrial Protective Helmets for Electrical 
Workers, Class B'' shall be provided whenever there is exposure to 
possible high voltage electrical contact, and the employer shall ensure 
that the head protection is used by employees. ANSI Z89.2-1971 is 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (2) Eye protection. Eye protection meeting the requirements of 
Sec. 1910.133 (a)(2) thru (a)(6) shall be provided and the employer 
shall ensure its use by employees where foreign objects may enter the 
eyes due to work operations such as but not limited to:

[[Page 747]]

    (i) Drilling or chipping stone, brick or masonry, breaking concrete 
or pavement, etc. by hand tools (sledgehammer, etc.) or power tools such 
as pneumatic drills or hammers;
    (ii) Working on or around high speed emery or other grinding wheels 
unprotected by guards;
    (iii) Cutting or chipping terra cotta ducts, tile, etc.;
    (iv) Working under motor vehicles requiring hammering;
    (v) Cleaning operations using compressed air, steam, or sand blast;
    (vi) Acetylene welding or similar operations where sparks are thrown 
off;
    (vii) Using powder actuated stud drivers;
    (viii) Tree pruning or cutting underbrush;
    (ix) Handling battery cells and solutions, such as taking battery 
readings with a hydrometer and thermometer;
    (x) Removing or rearranging strand or open wire; and
    (xi) Performing lead sleeve wiping and while soldering.
    (3) Tent heaters. Flame-type heaters may not be used within ground 
tents or on platforms within aerial tents unless:
    (i) The tent covers are constructed of fire resistant materials, and
    (ii) Adequate ventilation is provided to maintain safe oxygen levels 
and avoid harmful buildup of combustion products and combustible gases.
    (4) Torches. Torches may be used on aerial splicing platforms or in 
buckets enclosed by tents provided the tent material is constructed of 
fire resistant material and the torch is turned off when not in actual 
use. Aerial tents shall be adequately ventilated while the torch is in 
operation.
    (5) Portable power equipment. Nominal 120V, or less, portable 
generators used for providing power at work locations do not require 
grounding if the output circuit is completely isolated from the frame of 
the unit.
    (6) Vehicle-mounted utility generators. Vehicle-mounted utility 
generators used for providing nominal 240V AC or less for powering 
portable tools and equipment need not be grounded to earth if all of the 
following conditions are met:
    (i) One side of the voltage source is solidly strapped to the 
metallic structure of the vehicle;
    (ii) Grounding-type outlets are used, with a ``grounding'' conductor 
between the outlet grounding terminal and the side of the voltage source 
that is strapped to the vehicle;
    (iii) All metallic encased tools and equipment that are powered from 
this system are equipped with three-wire cords and grounding-type 
attachment plugs, except as designated in paragraph (i)(7) of this 
section.
    (7) Portable lights, tools, and appliances. Portable lights, tools, 
and appliances having noncurrent-carrying external metal housing may be 
used with power equipment described in paragraph (i)(5) of this section 
without an equipment grounding conductor. When operated from commercial 
power such metal parts of these devices shall be grounded, unless these 
tools or appliances are protected by a system of double insulation, or 
its equivalent. Where such a system is employed, the equipment shall be 
distinctively marked to indicate double insulation.
    (8) Soldering devices. Grounding shall be omitted when using 
soldering irons, guns or wire-wrap tools on telecommunications circuits.
    (9) Lead work. The wiping of lead joints using melted solder, gas 
fueled torches, soldering irons or other appropriate heating devices, 
and the soldering of wires or other electrical connections do not 
constitute the welding, cutting and brazing described in subpart Q of 
this part. When operated from commercial power the metal housing of 
electric solder pots shall be grounded. Electric solder pots may be used 
with the power equipment described in paragraph (i)(5) of this section 
without a grounding conductor. The employer shall ensure that wiping 
gloves or cloths and eye protection are used in lead wiping operations. 
A drip pan to catch hot lead drippings shall also be provided and used.
    (j) Vehicle-mounted material handling devices and other mechanical 
equipment--(1) General. (i) The employer shall ensure that visual 
inspections are made of the equipment by a competent person each day the 
equipment is to be

[[Page 748]]

used to ascertain that it is in good condition.
    (ii) The employer shall ensure that tests shall be made at the 
beginning of each shift by a competent person to insure the vehicle 
brakes and operating systems are in proper working condition.
    (2) Scrapers, loaders, dozers, graders and tractors. (i) All rubber-
tired, self-propelled scrapers, rubber-tired front end loaders, rubber-
tired dozers, agricultural and industrial tractors, crawler tractors, 
crawler-type loaders, and motor graders, with or without attachments, 
that are used in telecommunications work shall have rollover protective 
structures that meet the requirements of subpart W of part 1926 of this 
Title.
    (ii) Eye protection shall be provided and the employer shall ensure 
that it is used by employees when working in areas where flying material 
is generated.
    (3) Vehicle-mounted elevating and rotating work platforms. These 
devices shall not be operated with any conductive part of the equipment 
closer to exposed energized power lines than the clearances set forth in 
Table R-2 of this section.
    (4) Derrick trucks and similar equipment. (i) This equipment shall 
not be operated with any conductive part of the equipment closer to 
exposed energized power lines than the clearances set forth in Table R-2 
of this section.
    (ii) When derricks are used to handle poles near energized power 
conductors, these operations shall comply with the requirements 
contained in paragraphs (b)(7) and (n)(11) of this section.
    (iii) Moving parts of equipment and machinery carried on or mounted 
on telecommunications line trucks shall be guarded. This may be done 
with barricades as specified in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (iv) Derricks and the operation of derricks shall comply with the 
following requirements: (A) Manufacturer's specifications, load ratings 
and instructions for derrick operation shall be strictly observed.
    (B) Rated load capacities and instructions related to derrick 
operation shall be conspicuously posted on a permanent weather-resistant 
plate or decal in a location on the derrick that is plainly visible to 
the derrick operator.
    (C) Prior to derrick operation the parking brake must be set and the 
stabilizers extended if the vehicle is so equipped. When the vehicle is 
situated on a grade, at least two wheels must be chocked on the 
downgrade side.
    (D) Only persons trained in the operation of the derrick shall be 
permitted to operate the derrick.
    (E) Hand signals to derrick operators shall be those prescribed by 
ANSI B30.6-1969, ``Safety Code for Derricks'', which is incorporated by 
reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.
    (F) The employer shall ensure that the derrick and its associated 
equipment are inspected by a competent person at intervals set by the 
manufacturer but in no case less than once per year. Records shall be 
maintained including the dates of inspections, and necessary repairs 
made, if corrective action was required.
    (G) Modifications or additions to the derrick and its associated 
equipment that alter its capacity or affect its safe operation shall be 
made only with written certification from the manufacturer, or other 
equivalent entity, such as a nationally recognized testing laboratory, 
that the modification results in the equipment being safe for its 
intended use. Such changes shall require the changing and posting of 
revised capacity and instruction decals or plates. These new ratings or 
limitations shall be as provided by the manufacturer or other equivalent 
entity.
    (H) Wire rope used with derricks shall be of improved plow steel or 
equivalent. Wire rope safety factors shall be in accordance with 
American National Standards Institute B30.6-1969.
    (I) Wire rope shall be taken out of service, or the defective 
portion removed, when any of the following conditions exist: (1) The 
rope strength has been significantly reduced due to corrosion, pitting, 
or excessive heat, or
    (2) The thickness of the outer wires of the rope has been reduced to 
two-thirds or less of the original thickness, or
    (3) There are more than six broken wires in any one rope lay, or

[[Page 749]]

    (4) There is excessive permanent distortion caused by kinking, 
crushing, or severe twisting of the rope.
    (k) Materials handling and storage-- (1) Poles. When working with 
poles in piles or stacks, work shall be performed from the ends of the 
poles as much as possible, and precautions shall be taken for the safety 
of employees at the other end of the pole. During pole hauling 
operations, all loads shall be secured to prevent displacement. Lights, 
reflectors and/or flags shall be displayed on the end and sides of the 
load as necessary. The requirements for installation, removal, or other 
handling of poles in pole lines are prescribed in paragraph (n) of this 
section which pertains to overhead lines. In the case of hoisting 
machinery equipped with a positive stop loadholding device, it shall be 
permissible for the operator to leave his position at the controls 
(while a load is suspended) for the sole purpose of assisting in 
positioning the load prior to landing it. Prior to unloading steel, 
poles, crossarms, and similar material, the load shall be thoroughly 
examined to ascertain that the load has not shifted, that binders or 
stakes have not broken, and that the load is not otherwise hazardous to 
employees.
    (2) Cable reels. Cable reels in storage shall be checked or 
otherwise restrained when there is a possibility that they might 
accidentally roll from position.
    (l) Cable fault locating and testing. (1) Employees involved in 
using high voltages to locate trouble or test cables shall be instructed 
in the precautions necessary for their own safety and the safety of 
other employees.
    (2) Before the voltage is applied, cable conductors shall be 
isolated to the extent practicable. Employees shall be warned, by such 
techniques as briefing and tagging at all affected locations, to stay 
clear while the voltage is applied.
    (m) Grounding for employee protection--pole lines--(1) Power 
conductors. Electric power conductors and equipment shall be considered 
as energized unless the employee can visually determine that they are 
bonded to one of the grounds listed in paragraph (m)(4) of this section.
    (2) Nonworking open wire. Nonworking open wire communications lines 
shall be bonded to one of the grounds listed in paragraph (m)(4) of this 
section.
    (3) Vertical power conduit, power ground wires and street light 
fixtures. (i) Metal power conduit on joint use poles, exposed vertical 
power ground wires, and street light fixtures which are below 
communications attachments or less than 20 inches above these 
attachments, shall be considered energized and shall be tested for 
voltage unless the employee can visually determine that they are bonded 
to the communications suspension strand or cable sheath.
    (ii) If no hazardous voltage is shown by the voltage test, a 
temporary bond shall be placed between such street light fixture, 
exposed vertical power grounding conductor, or metallic power conduit 
and the communications cable strand. Temporary bonds used for this 
purpose shall have sufficient conductivity to carry at least 500 amperes 
for a period of one second without fusing.
    (4) Suitable protective grounding. Acceptable grounds for protective 
grounding are as follows:
    (i) A vertical ground wire which has been tested, found safe, and is 
connected to a power system multigrounded neutral or the grounded 
neutral of a power secondary system where there are at least three 
services connected;
    (ii) Communications cable sheath or shield and its supporting strand 
where the sheath or shield is:
    (A) Bonded to an underground or buried cable which is connected to a 
central office ground, or
    (B) Bonded to an underground metallic piping system, or
    (C) Bonded to a power system multigrounded neutral or grounded 
neutral of a power secondary system which has at least three services 
connected;
    (iii) Guys which are bonded to the grounds specified in paragraphs 
(m)(4) (i) and (ii) of this section and which have continuity 
uninterrupted by an insulator; and
    (iv) If all of the preceding grounds are not available, arrays of 
driven ground rods where the resultant resistance to ground will be low 
enough to

[[Page 750]]

eliminate danger to personnel or permit prompt operation of protective 
devices.
    (5) Attaching and removing temporary bonds. When attaching grounds 
(bonds), the first attachment shall be made to the protective ground. 
When removing bonds, the connection to the line or equipment shall be 
removed first. Insulating gloves shall be worn during these operations.
    (6) Temporary grounding of suspension strand. (i) The suspension 
strand shall be grounded to the existing grounds listed in paragraph 
(m)(4) of this section when being placed on jointly used poles or during 
thunderstorm activity.
    (ii) Where power crossings are encountered on nonjoint lines, the 
strand shall be bonded to an existing ground listed in paragraph (m)(4) 
of this section as close as possible to the crossing. This bonding is 
not required where crossings are made on a common crossing pole unless 
there is an upward change in grade at the pole.
    (iii) Where roller-type bonds are used, they shall be restrained so 
as to avoid stressing the electrical connections.
    (iv) Bonds between the suspension strand and the existing ground 
shall be at least No. 6AWG copper.
    (v) Temporary bonds shall be left in place until the strand has been 
tensioned, dead-ended, and permanently grounded.
    (vi) The requirements of paragraphs (m)(6)(i) through (m)(6)(v) of 
this section do not apply to the installation of insulated strand.
    (7) Antenna work-radio transmitting stations 3-30 MHZ. (i) Prior to 
grounding a radio transmitting station antenna, the employer shall 
insure that the rigger in charge:
    (A) Prepares a danger tag signed with his signature,
    (B) Requests the transmitting technician to shutdown the transmitter 
and to ground the antenna with its grounding switch,
    (C) Is notified by the transmitting technician that the transmitter 
has been shutdown, and
    (D) Tags the antenna ground switch personally in the presence of the 
transmitting technician after the antenna has been grounded by the 
transmitting technician.
    (ii) Power shall not be applied to the antenna, nor shall the 
grounding switch be opened under any circumstances while the tag is 
affixed.
    (iii)(A) Where no grounding switches are provided, grounding sticks 
shall be used, one on each side of line, and tags shall be placed on the 
grounding sticks, antenna switch, or plate power switch in a conspicuous 
place.
    (B) When necessary to further reduce excessive radio frequency 
pickup, ground sticks or short circuits shall be placed directly on the 
transmission lines near the transmitter in addition to the regular 
grounding switches.
    (C) In other cases, the antenna lines may be disconnected from 
ground and the transmitter to reduce pickup at the point in the field.
    (iv) All radio frequency line wires shall be tested for pickup with 
an insulated probe before they are handled either with bare hands or 
with metal tools.
    (v) The employer shall insure that the transmitting technician warn 
the riggers about adjacent lines which are, or may become energized.
    (vi) The employer shall insure that when antenna work has been 
completed, the rigger in charge of the job returns to the transmitter, 
notifies the transmitting technician in charge that work has been 
completed, and personally removes the tag from the antenna ground 
switch.
    (n) Overhead lines--(1) Handling suspension strand. (i) The employer 
shall insure that when handling cable suspension strand which is being 
installed on poles carrying exposed energized power conductors, 
employees shall wear insulating gloves and shall avoid body contact with 
the strand until after it has been tensioned, dead-ended and permanently 
grounded.
    (ii) The strand shall be restrained against upward movement during 
installation:
    (A) On joint-use poles, where there is an upward change in grade at 
the pole, and
    (B) On non-joint-use poles, where the line croses under energized 
power conductors.

[[Page 751]]

    (2) Need for testing wood poles. Unless temporary guys or braces are 
attached, the following poles shall be tested in accordance with 
paragraph (n)(3) of this section and determined to be safe before 
employees are permitted to climb them:
    (i) Dead-end poles, except properly braced or guyed ``Y'' or ``T'' 
cable junction poles,
    (ii) Straight line poles which are not storm guyed and where 
adjacent span lengths exceed 165 feet,
    (iii) Poles at which there is a downward change in grade and which 
are not guyed or braced corner poles or cable junction poles,
    (iv) Poles which support only telephone drop wire, and
    (v) Poles which carry less than ten communication line wires. On 
joint use poles, one power line wire shall be considered as two 
communication wires for purposes of this paragraph (n)(2)(v).
    (3) Methods for testing wood poles. One of the following methods or 
an equivalent method shall be used for testing wood poles:
    (i) Rap the pole sharply with a hammer weighing about 3 pounds, 
starting near the ground line and continuing upwards circumferentially 
around the pole to a height of approximately 6 feet. The hammer will 
produce a clear sound and rebound sharply when striking sound wood. 
Decay pockets will be indicated by a dull sound and/or a less pronounced 
hammer rebound. When decay pockets are indicated, the pole shall be 
considered unsafe. Also, prod the pole as near the ground line as 
possible using a pole prod or a screwdriver with a blade at least 5 
inches long. If substantial decay is encountered, the pole shall be 
considered unsafe.
    (ii) Apply a horizontal force to the pole and attempt to rock it 
back and forth in a direction perpendicular to the line. Caution shall 
be exercised to avoid causing power wires to swing together. The force 
may be applied either by pushing with a pike pole or pulling with a 
rope. If the pole cracks during the test, it shall be considered unsafe.
    (4) Unsafe poles or structures. Poles or structures determined to be 
unsafe by test or observation may not be climbed until made safe by 
guying, bracing or other adequate means. Poles determined to be unsafe 
to climb shall, until they are made safe, be tagged in a conspicuous 
place to alert and warn all employees of the unsafe condition.
    (5) Test requirements for cable suspension strand. (i) Before 
attaching a splicing platform to a cable suspension strand, the strand 
shall be tested and determined to have strength sufficient to support 
the weight of the platform and the employee. Where the strand crosses 
above power wires or railroad tracks it may not be tested but shall be 
inspected in accordance with paragraph (n)(6) of this section.
    (ii) The following method or an equivalent method shall be used for 
testing the strength of the strand: A rope, at least three-eighths inch 
in diameter, shall be thrown over the strand. On joint lines, the rope 
shall be passed over the strand using tree pruner handles or a wire 
raising tool. If two employees are present, both shall grip the double 
rope and slowly transfer their entire weight to the rope and attempt to 
raise themselves off the ground. If only one employee is present, one 
end of the rope which has been passed over the strand shall be tied to 
the bumper of the truck, or other equally secure anchorage. The employee 
then shall grasp the other end of the rope and attempt to raise himself 
off the ground.
    (6) Inspection of strand. Where strand passes over electric power 
wires or railroad tracks, it shall be inspected from an elevated working 
position at each pole supporting the span in question. The strand may 
not be used to support any splicing platform, scaffold or cable car, if 
any of the following conditions exist:
    (i) Corrosion so that no galvanizing can be detected,
    (ii) One or more wires of the strand are broken,
    (iii) Worn spots, or
    (iv) Burn marks such as those caused by contact with electric power 
wires.
    (7) Outside work platforms. Unless adequate railings are provided, 
safety straps and body belts shall be used while working on elevated 
work platforms such as aerial splicing platforms, pole platforms, ladder 
platforms and terminal balconies.

[[Page 752]]

    (8) Other elevated locations. Safety straps and body belts shall be 
worn when working at elevated positions on poles, towers or similar 
structures, which do not have adequately guarded work areas.
    (9) Installing and removing wire and cable. Before installing or 
removing wire or cable, the pole or structure shall be guyed, braced, or 
otherwise supported, as necessary, to prevent failure of the pole or 
structure.
    (10) Avoiding contact with energized power conductors or equipment. 
When cranes, derricks, or other mechanized equipment are used for 
setting, moving, or removing poles, all necessary precautions shall be 
taken to avoid contact with energized power conductors or equipment.
    (11) Handling poles near energized power conductors. (i) Joint use 
poles may not be set, moved, or removed where the nominal voltage of 
open electrical power conductors exceeds 34.5kV phase to phase (20kV to 
ground).
    (ii) Poles that are to be placed, moved or removed during heavy 
rains, sleet or wet snow in joint lines carrying more than 8.7kV phase 
to phase voltage (5kV to ground) shall be guarded or otherwise prevented 
from direct contact with overhead energized power conductors.
    (iii)(A) In joint lines where the power voltage is greater than 750 
volts but less than 34.5kV phase to phase (20 kV to ground), wet poles 
being placed, moved or removed shall be insulated with either a rubber 
insulating blanket, a fiberglass box guide, or equivalent protective 
equipment.
    (B) In joint lines where the power voltage is greater than 8.7 kV 
phase to phase (5kV to ground) but less than 34.5kV phase to phase (20 
kV to ground), dry poles being placed, moved, or removed shall be 
insulated with either a rubber insulating blanket, a fiberglass box 
guide, or equivalent protective equipment.
    (C) Where wet or dry poles are being removed, insulation of the pole 
is not required if the pole is cut off 2 feet or more below the lowest 
power wire and also cut off near the ground line.
    (iv) Insulating gloves shall be worn when handling the pole with 
either hands or tools, when there exists a possibility that the pole may 
contact a power conductor. Where the voltage to ground of the power 
conductor exceeds 15kV to ground, Class II gloves (as defined in ANSI 
J6.6-1971) shall be used. For voltages not exceeding 15kV to ground, 
insulating gloves shall have a breakdown voltage of at least 17kV.
    (v) The guard or insulating material used to protect the pole shall 
meet the appropriate 3 minute proof test voltage requirements contained 
in the ANSI J6.4-1971.
    (vi) When there exists a possibility of contact between the pole or 
the vehicle-mounted equipment used to handle the pole, and an energized 
power conductor, the following precautions shall be observed:
    (A) When on the vehicle which carries the derrick, avoid all contact 
with the ground, with persons standing on the ground, and with all 
grounded objects such as guys, tree limbs, or metal sign posts. To the 
extent feasible, remain on the vehicle as long as the possibility of 
contact exists.
    (B) When it is necessary to leave the vehicle, step onto an 
insulating blanket and break all contact with the vehicle before 
stepping off the blanket and onto the ground. As a last resort, if a 
blanket is not available, the employee may jump cleanly from the 
vehicle.
    (C) When it is necessary to enter the vehicle, first step onto an 
insulating blanket and break all contact with the ground, grounded 
objects and other persons before touching the truck or derrick.
    (12) Working position on poles. Climbing and working are prohibited 
above the level of the lowest electric power conducter on the pole 
(exclusive of vertical runs and street light wiring), except:
    (i) Where communications facilities are attached above the electric 
power conductors, and a rigid fixed barrier is installed between the 
electric power facility and the communications facility, or
    (ii) Where the electric power conductors are cabled secondary 
service drops carrying less than 300 volts to ground and are attached 40 
inches or more below the communications conductors or cables.

[[Page 753]]

    (13) Metal tapes and ropes. (i) Metal measuring tapes, metal 
measuring ropes, or tapes containing conductive strands may not be used 
when working near exposed energized parts.
    (ii) Where it is necessary to measure clearances from energized 
parts, only nonconductive devices shall be used.
    (o) Underground lines. The provisions of this paragraph apply to the 
guarding of manholes and street openings, and to the ventilation and 
testing for gas in manholes and unvented vaults, where 
telecommunications field work is performed on or with underground lines.
    (1) Guarding manholes and street openings. (i) When covers of 
manholes or vaults are removed, the opening shall be promptly guarded by 
a railing, temporary cover, or other suitable temporary barrier which is 
appropriate to prevent an accidental fall through the opening and to 
protect employees working in the manhole from foreign objects entering 
the manhole.
    (ii) While work is being performed in the manhole, a person with 
basic first aid training shall be immediately available to render 
assistance if there is cause for believing that a safety hazard exists, 
and if the requirements contained in paragraphs (d)(1) and (o)(1)(i) of 
this section do not adequately protect the employee(s). Examples of 
manhole worksite hazards which shall be considered to constitute a 
safety hazard include, but are not limited to:
    (A) Manhole worksites where safety hazards are created by traffic 
patterns that cannot be corrected by provisions of paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section.
    (B) Manhole worksites that are subject to unusual water hazards that 
cannot be abated by conventional means.
    (C) Manhole worksites that are occupied jointly with power utilities 
as described in paragraph (o)(3) of this section.
    (2) Requirements prior to entering manholes and unvented vaults. (i) 
Before an employee enters a manhole, the following steps shall be taken:
    (A) The internal atmosphere shall be tested for combustible gas and, 
except when continuous forced ventilation is provided, the atmosphere 
shall also be tested for oxygen deficiency.
    (B) When unsafe conditions are detected by testing or other means, 
the work area shall be ventilated and otherwise made safe before entry.
    (ii) An adequate continuous supply of air shall be provided while 
work is performed in manholes under any of the following conditions:
    (A) Where combustible or explosive gas vapors have been initially 
detected and subsequently reduced to a safe level by ventilation,
    (B) Where organic solvents are used in the work procedure,
    (C) Where open flame torches are used in the work procedure,
    (D) Where the manhole is located in that portion of a public right 
of way open to vehicular traffic and/or exposed to a seepage of gas or 
gases, or
    (E) Where a toxic gas or oxygen deficiency is found.
    (iii)(A) The requirements of paragraphs (o)(2) (i) and (ii) of this 
section do not apply to work in central office cable vaults that are 
adequately ventilated.
    (B) The requirements of paragraphs (o)(2) (i) and (ii) of this 
section apply to work in unvented vaults.
    (3) Joint power and telecommunication manholes. While work is being 
performed in a manhole occupied jointly by an electric utility and a 
telecommunication utility, an employee with basic first aid training 
shall be available in the immediate vicinity to render emergency 
assistance as may be required. The employee whose presence is required 
in the immediate vicinity for the purposes of rendering emergency 
assistance is not to be precluded from occasionally entering a manhole 
to provide assistance other than in an emergency. The requirement of 
this paragraph (o)(3) does not preclude a qualified employee, working 
alone, from entering for brief periods of time, a manhole where 
energized cables or equipment are in service, for the purpose of 
inspection, housekeeping, taking readings, or similar work if such work 
can be performed safely.
    (4) Ladders. Ladders shall be used to enter and exit manholes 
exceeding 4 feet in depth.
    (5) Flames. When open flames are used in manholes, the following 
precautions

[[Page 754]]

shall be taken to protect against the accumulation of combustible gas:
    (i) A test for combustible gas shall be made immediately before 
using the open flame device, and at least once per hour while using the 
device; and
    (ii) a fuel tank (e.g., acetylene) may not be in the manhole unless 
in actual use.
    (p) Microwave transmission--(1) Eye protection. Employers shall 
insure that employees do not look into an open waveguide which is 
connected to an energized source of microwave radiation.
    (2) Hazardous area. Accessible areas associated with microwave 
communication systems where the electromagnetic radiation level exceeds 
the radiation protection guide given in Sec. 1910.97 shall be posted as 
described in that section. The lower half of the warning symbol shall 
include the following:

    Radiation in this area may exceed hazard limitations and special 
precautions are required. Obtain specific instruction before entering.

    (3) Protective measures. When an employee works in an area where the 
electromagnetic radiation exceeds the radiation protection guide, the 
employer shall institute measures that insure that the employee's 
exposure is not greater than that permitted by the radiation guide. Such 
measures shall include, but not be limited to those of an administrative 
or engineering nature or those involving personal protective equipment.
    (q) Tree trimming--electrical hazards--(1) General. (i) Employees 
engaged in pruning, trimming, removing, or clearing trees from lines 
shall be required to consider all overhead and underground electrical 
power conductors to be energized with potentially fatal voltages, never 
to be touched (contacted) either directly or indirectly.
    (ii) Employees engaged in line-clearing operations shall be 
instructed that:
    (A) A direct contact is made when any part of the body touches or 
contacts an energized conductor, or other energized electrical fixture 
or apparatus.
    (B) An indirect contact is made when any part of the body touches 
any object in contact with an energized electrical conductor, or other 
energized fixture or apparatus.
    (C) An indirect contact can be made through conductive tools, tree 
branches, trucks, equipment, or other objects, or as a result of 
communications wires, cables, fences, or guy wires being accidentally 
energized.
    (D) Electric shock will occur when an employee, by either direct or 
indirect contact with an energized conductor, energized tree limb, tool, 
equipment, or other object, provides a path for the flow of electricity 
to a grounded object or to the ground itself. Simultaneous contact with 
two energized conductors will also cause electric shock which may result 
in serious or fatal injury.
    (iii) Before any work is performed in proximity to energized 
conductors, the system operator/owner of the energized conductors shall 
be contacted to ascertain if he knows of any hazards associated with the 
conductors which may not be readily apparent. This rule does not apply 
when operations are performed by or on behalf of, the system operator/
owner.
    (2) Working in proximity to electrical hazards. (i) Employers shall 
ensure that a close inspection is made by the employee and by the 
foremen or supervisor in charge before climbing, entering, or working 
around any tree, to determine whether an electrical power conductor 
passes through the tree, or passes within reaching distance of an 
employee working in the tree. If any of these conditions exist either 
directly or indirectly, an electrical hazard shall be considered to 
exist unless the system operator/owner has caused the hazard to be 
removed by deenergizing the lines, or installing protective equipment.
    (ii) Only qualified employees or trainees, familiar with the special 
techniques and hazards involved in line clearance, shall be permitted to 
perform the work if it is found that an electrical hazard exists.
    (iii) During all tree working operations aloft where an electrical 
hazard of more than 750V exists, there shall be a second employee or 
trainee qualified in line clearance tree trimming within normal voice 
communication.
    (iv) Where tree work is performed by employees qualified in line-
clearance

[[Page 755]]

tree trimming and trainees qualified in line-clearance tree trimming, 
the clearances from energized conductors given in Table R-3 shall apply.

Table R-3--Minimum Working Distances From Energized Conductors for Line-
    Clearance Tree Trimmers and Line-Clearance Tree-Trimmer Trainees
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Voltage range (phase to phase) (kilovolts)    Minimum working distance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.1 to 15.0................................  2 ft. 0 in.
15.1 to 35.0...............................  2 ft. 4 in.
35.1 to 46.0...............................  2 ft. 6 in.
46.1 to 72.5...............................  3 ft. 0 in.
72.6 to 121.0..............................  3 ft. 4 in.
138.0 to 145.0.............................  3 ft. 6 in.
161.0 to 169.0.............................  3 ft. 8 in.
230.0 to 242.0.............................  5 ft. 0 in.
345.0 to 362.0.............................  7 ft. 0 in.
500.0 to 552.0.............................  11 ft. 0 in.
700.0 to 765.0.............................  15 ft. 0 in.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (v) Branches hanging on an energized conductor may only be removed 
using appropriately insulated equipment.
    (vi) Rubber footwear, including lineman's overshoes, shall not be 
considered as providing any measure of safety from electrical hazards.
    (vii) Ladders, platforms, and aerial devices, including insulated 
aerial devices, may not be brought in contact with an electrical 
conductor. Reliance shall not be placed on their dielectric 
capabilities.
    (viii) When an aerial lift device contacts an electrical conductor, 
the truck supporting the aerial lift device shall be considered as 
energized.
    (3) Storm work and emergency conditions. (i) Since storm work and 
emergency conditions create special hazards, only authorized 
representatives of the electric utility system operator/owner and not 
telecommunication workers may perform tree work in these situations 
where energized electrical power conductors are involved.
    (ii) When an emergency condition develops due to tree operations, 
work shall be suspended and the system operator/owner shall be notified 
immediately.
    (r) Buried facilities--Communications lines and power lines in the 
same trench. [Reserved]
    (s) Definitions--(1) Aerial lifts. Aerial lifts include the 
following types of vehicle-mounted aerial devices used to elevate 
personnel to jobsites above ground:
    (i) Extensible boom platforms,
    (ii) Aerial ladders,
    (iii) Articulating boom platforms,
    (iv) Vertical towers,
    (v) A combination of any of the above defined in ANSI A92.2-1969, 
which is incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6. These 
devices are made of metal, wood, fiberglass reinforced plastic (FRP), or 
other material; are powered or manually operated; and are deemed to be 
aerial lifts whether or not they are capable of rotating about a 
substantially vertical axis.
    (2) Aerial splicing platform. This consists of a platform, 
approximately 3 ft.  x  4 ft., used to perform aerial cable work. It is 
furnished with fiber or synthetic ropes for supporting the platform from 
aerial strand, detachable guy ropes for anchoring it, and a device for 
raising and lowering it with a handline.
    (3) Aerial tent. A small tent usually constructed of vinyl coated 
canvas which is usually supported by light metal or plastic tubing. It 
is designed to protect employees in inclement weather while working on 
ladders, aerial splicing platforms, or aerial devices.
    (4) Alive or live (energized). Electrically connected to a source of 
potential difference, or electrically charged so as to have a potential 
significantly different from that of the earth in the vicinity. The term 
live is sometimes used in the place of the term current-carrying, where 
the intent is clear, to avoid repetition of the longer term.
    (5) Barricade. A physical obstruction such as tapes, cones, or ``A'' 
frame type wood and/or metal structure intended to warn and limit access 
to a work area.
    (6) Barrier. A physical obstruction which is intended to prevent 
contact with energized lines or equipment, or to prevent unauthorized 
access to work area.
    (7) Bond. An electrical connection from one conductive element to 
another for the purpose of minimizing potential differences or providing 
suitable conductivity for fault current or for mitigation of leakage 
current and electrolytic action.

[[Page 756]]

    (8) Cable. A conductor with insulation, or a stranded conductor with 
or without insulation and other coverings (single-conductor cable), or a 
combination of conductors insulated from one another (multiple-conductor 
cable).
    (9) Cable sheath. A protective covering applied to cables.

    Note: A cable sheath may consist of multiple layers of which one or 
more is conductive.

    (10) Circuit. A conductor or system of conductors through which an 
electric current is intended to flow.
    (11) Communication lines. The conductors and their supporting or 
containing structures for telephone, telegraph, railroad signal, data, 
clock, fire, police-alarm, community television antenna and other 
systems which are used for public or private signal or communication 
service, and which operate at potentials not exceeding 400 volts to 
ground or 750 volts between any two points of the circuit, and the 
transmitted power of which does not exceed 150 watts. When 
communications lines operate at less than 150 volts to ground, no limit 
is placed on the capacity of the system. Specifically designed 
communications cables may include communication circuits not complying 
with the preceding limitations, where such circuits are also used 
incidentally to supply power to communication equipment.
    (12) Conductor. A material, usually in the form of a wire, cable, or 
bus bar, suitable for carrying an electric current.
    (13) Effectively grounded. Intentionally connected to earth through 
a ground connection or connections of sufficiently low impedance and 
having sufficient current-carrying capacity to prevent the build-up of 
voltages which may result in undue hazard to connected equipment or to 
persons.
    (14) Equipment. A general term which includes materials, fittings, 
devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, and similar items used as part 
of, or in connection with, a supply or communications installation.
    (15) Ground (reference). That conductive body, usually earth, to 
which an electric potential is referenced.
    (16) Ground (as a noun). A conductive connection, whether 
intentional or accidental, by which an electric circuit or equipment is 
connected to reference ground.
    (17) Ground (as a verb). The connecting or establishment of a 
connection, whether by intention or accident, of an electric circuit or 
equipment to reference ground.
    (18) Ground tent. A small tent usually constructed of vinyl coated 
canvas supported by a metal or plastic frame. Its purpose is to protect 
employees from inclement weather while working at buried cable pedestal 
sites or similar locations.
    (19) Grounded conductor. A system or circuit conductor which is 
intentionally grounded.
    (20) Grounded systems. A system of conductors in which at least one 
conductor or point (usually the middle wire, or the neutral point of 
transformer or generator windings) is intentionally grounded, either 
solidly or through a current-limiting device (not a current-interrupting 
device).
    (21) Grounding electrode conductor. (Grounding conductor). A 
conductor used to connect equipment or the grounded circuit of a wiring 
system to a grounding electrode.
    (22) Insulated. Separated from other conducting surfaces by a 
dielectric substance (including air space) offering a high resistance to 
the passage of current.

    Note: When any object is said to be insulated, it is understood to 
be insulated in suitable manner for the conditions to which it is 
subjected. Otherwise, it is, within the purpose of these rules, 
uninsulated. Insulating coverings of conductors in one means of making 
the conductor insulated.

    (23) Insulation (as applied to cable). That which is relied upon to 
insulate the conductor from other conductors or conducting parts or from 
ground.
    (24) Joint use. The sharing of a common facility, such as a manhole, 
trench or pole, by two or more different kinds of utilities (e.g., power 
and telecommunications).
    (25) Ladder platform. A device designed to facilitate working aloft 
from an extension ladder. A typical device consists of a platform 
(approximately 9"  x  18") hinged to a welded pipe frame. The rear edge 
of the platform and the bottom cross-member of the frame are

[[Page 757]]

equipped with latches to lock the platform to ladder rungs.
    (26) Ladder seat. A removable seat used to facilitate work at an 
elevated position on rolling ladders in telecommunication centers.
    (27) Manhole. A subsurface enclosure which personnel may enter and 
which is used for the purpose of installing, operating, and maintaining 
submersible equipment and/or cable.
    (28) Manhole platform. A platform consisting of separate planks 
which are laid across steel platform supports. The ends of the supports 
are engaged in the manhole cable racks.
    (29) Microwave transmission. The act of communicating or signaling 
utilizing a frequency between 1 GH<INF>z</INF> (gigahertz) and 300 
GH<INF>z</INF> inclusively.
    (30) Nominal voltage. The nominal voltage of a system or circuit is 
the value assigned to a system or circuit of a given voltage class for 
the purpose of convenient designation. The actual voltage may vary above 
or below this value.
    (31) Pole balcony or seat. A balcony or seat used as a support for 
workmen at pole-mounted equipment or terminal boxes. A typical device 
consists of a bolted assembly of steel details and a wooden platform. 
Steel braces run from the pole to the underside of the balcony. A guard 
rail (approximately 30" high) may be provided.
    (32) Pole platform. A platform intended for use by a workman in 
splicing and maintenance operations in an elevated position adjacent to 
a pole. It consists of a platform equipped at one end with a hinged 
chain binder for securing the platform to a pole. A brace from the pole 
to the underside of the platform is also provided.
    (33) Qualified employee. Any worker who by reason of his training 
and experience has demonstrated his ability to safely perform his 
duties.
    (34) Qualified line-clearance tree trimmer. A tree worker who 
through related training and on-the-job experience is familar with the 
special techniques and hazards involved in line clearance.
    (35) Qualified line-clearance tree-trimmer trainee. Any worker 
regularly assigned to a line-clearance tree-trimming crew and undergoing 
on-the-job training who, in the course of such training, has 
demonstrated his ability to perform his duties safely at his level of 
training.
    (36) System operator/owner. The person or organization that operates 
or controls the electrical conductors involved.
    (37) Telecommunications center. An installation of communication 
equipment under the exclusive control of an organization providing 
telecommunications service, that is located outdoors or in a vault, 
chamber, or a building space used primarily for such installations.

    Note: Telecommunication centers are facilities established, equipped 
and arranged in accordance with engineered plans for the purpose of 
providing telecommunications service. They may be located on premises 
owned or leased by the organization providing telecommunication service, 
or on the premises owned or leased by others. This definition includes 
switch rooms (whether electromechanical, electronic, or computer 
controlled), terminal rooms, power rooms, repeater rooms, transmitter 
and receiver rooms, switchboard operating rooms, cable vaults, and 
miscellaneous communications equipment rooms. Simulation rooms of 
telecommunication centers for training or developmental purposes are 
also included.

    (38) Telecommunications derricks. Rotating or nonrotating derrick 
structures permanently mounted on vehicles for the purpose of lifting, 
lowering, or positioning hardware and materials used in 
telecommunications work.
    (39) Telecommunication line truck. A truck used to transport men, 
tools, and material, and to serve as a traveling workshop for 
telecommunication installation and maintenance work. It is sometimes 
equipped with a boom and auxiliary equipment for setting poles, digging 
holes, and elevating material or men.
    (40) Telecommunication service. The furnishing of a capability to 
signal or communicate at a distance by means such as telephone, 
telegraph, police and firealarm, community antenna television, or 
similar system, using wire, conventional cable, coaxial cable, wave 
guides, microwave transmission, or other similar means.
    (41) Unvented vault. An enclosed vault in which the only openings 
are access openings.

[[Page 758]]

    (42) Vault. An enclosure above or below ground which personnel may 
enter, and which is used for the purpose of installing, operating, and/
or maintaining equipment and/or cable which need not be of submersible 
design.
    (43) Vented vault. An enclosure as described in paragraph(s) (42) of 
this section, with provision for air changes using exhaust flue stack(s) 
and low level air intake(s), operating on differentials of pressure and 
temperature providing for air flow.
    (44) Voltage of an effectively grounded circuit. The voltage between 
any conductor and ground unless otherwise indicated.
    (45) Voltage of a circuit not effectively grounded. The voltage 
between any two conductors. If one circuit is directly connected to and 
supplied from another circuit of higher voltage (as in the case of an 
autotransformer), both are considered as of the higher voltage, unless 
the circuit of lower voltage is effectively grounded, in which case its 
voltage is not determined by the circuit of higher voltage. Direct 
connection implies electric connection as distinguished from connection 
merely through electromagnetic or electrostatic induction.
[40 FR 13441, Mar. 26, 1975, as amended at 43 FR 49751, Oct. 24, 1978; 
47 FR 14706, Apr. 6, 1982; 52 FR 36387, Sept. 28, 1987; 54 FR 24334, 
June 7, 1989; 61 FR 9242, Mar. 7, 1996; 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 33467, June 18, 1998, Sec. 1910.268 
was amended by revising paragraph (f)(1), removing paragraphs (f)(2) 
through (f)(4) and (f)(7) through (f)(9), and redesignating paragraphs 
(f)(5) and (f)(6) as paragraphs (f)(2) and (f)(3), effective Aug. 17, 
1998. For the convenience of the user, the superseded text is set forth 
as follows:

Sec. 1910.268  Telecommunications.

                                * * * * *

    (f) * * * (1) Rubber insulating equipment designed for the voltage 
levels to be encountered shall be provided and the employer shall ensure 
that they are used by employees as required by this section. This 
equipment shall meet the electrical and physical requirements contained 
in ANSI J6.6-1971 ``Standard Specifications for Rubber Insulating 
Gloves,'' and ANSI J6.4-1971 ``Standard Specifications for Rubber 
Insulating Blankets,'' with the exception that the maximum proof test 
current for a 14 inch Class I glove shall be no more than 14 mA, and 
with the further exception that existing 14 inch Class I rubber gloves 
that meet a maximum proof test current of 16 mA and a minimum breakdown 
voltage of 17,000 volts (RMS) acquired prior to July 1, 1975 may be used 
as long as these gloves comply with the retest requirements of paragraph 
(f)(5) of this section. (ANSI J6.6-1971 and ANSI J6.4-1971 are 
incorporated by reference as specified in Sec. 1910.6.)
    (2) When these gloves are used on jobs where they may be torn, they 
shall be protected with heavy outer canvas or leather gloves.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Protective equipment fabricated of material other than rubber 
shall provide electrical and mechanical protection at least equal to 
that of the rubber equipment.

                                * * * * *

    (7) When not being used, insulating gloves shall be stored in glove 
bags or in their original containers. Insulating blankets shall be 
stored in a canister or other device which offers equivalent protection.
    (8) Insulating gloves and blankets shall be stored away from direct 
sunlight, steampipes, radiators and other sources of excessive heat. 
Gloves and blankets shall not be folded while in storage; however, 
blankets may be rolled for storage.
    (9) Rubber gloves shall be visually inspected and air tested prior 
to each day's use.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 1910.269  Electric power generation, transmission, and distribution.

    Note: OSHA is staying the enforcement of the following paragraphs of 
Sec. 1910.269 until November 1, 1994: (b)(1)(ii), (d) except for 
(d)(2)(i) and (d)(2)(iii), (e)(2), (e)(3), (j)(2)(iii), (l)(6)(iii), 
(m), (n)(3), (n)(4)(ii), (n)(8), (o) except for (o)(2)(i), (r)(1)(vi), 
(u)(1), (u)(4), (u)(5). OSHA is also staying the enforcement of 
paragraphs (n)(6) and (n)(7) of Sec. 1910.269 until November 1, 1994, 
but only insofar as they apply to lines and equipment operated at 600 
volts or less. Further, OSHA is staying the enforcement of paragraph 
(v)(11)(xii) of Sec. 1910.269 until Februrary 1, 1996.

    (a) General--(1) Application. (i) This section covers the operation 
and maintenance of electric power generation, control, transformation, 
transmission, and distribution lines and equipment. These provisions 
apply to:
    (A) Power generation, transmission, and distribution installations, 
including related equipment for the purpose

[[Page 759]]

of communication or metering, which are accessible only to qualified 
employees;

    Note: The types of installations covered by this paragraph include 
the generation, transmission, and distribution installations of electric 
utilities, as well as equivalent installations of industrial 
establishments. Supplementary electric generating equipment that is used 
to supply a workplace for emergency, standby, or similar purposes only 
is covered under subpart S of this part. (See paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(B) of 
this section.)

    (B) Other installations at an electric power generating station, as 
follows:
    (1) Fuel and ash handling and processing installations, such as coal 
conveyors,
    (2) Water and steam installations, such as penstocks, pipelines, and 
tanks, providing a source of energy for electric generators, and
    (3) Chlorine and hydrogen systems;
    (C) Test sites where electrical testing involving temporary 
measurements associated with electric power generation, transmission, 
and distribution is performed in laboratories, in the field, in 
substations, and on lines, as opposed to metering, relaying, and routine 
line work;
    (D) Work on or directly associated with the installations covered in 
paragraphs (a)(1)(i)(A) through (a)(1)(i)(C) of this section; and
    (E) Line-clearance tree-trimming operations, as follows:
    (1) Entire Sec. 1910.269 of this part, except paragraph (r)(1) of 
this section, applies to line-clearance tree-trimming operations 
performed by qualified employees (those who are knowledgeable in the 
construction and operation of electric power generation, transmission, 
or distribution equipment involved, along with the associated hazards).
    (2) Paragraphs (a)(2), (b), (c), (g), (k), (p), and (r) of this 
section apply to line-clearance tree-trimming operations performed by 
line-clearance tree trimmers who are not qualified employees.
    (ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section, 
Sec. 1910.269 of this part does not apply:
    (A) To construction work, as defined in Sec. 1910.12 of this part; 
or
    (B) To electrical installations, electrical safety-related work 
practices, or electrical maintenance considerations covered by subpart S 
of this part.

    Note 1: Work practices conforming to Secs. 1910.332 through 1910.335 
of this part are considered as complying with the electrical safety-
related work practice requirements of this section identified in Table 1 
of appendix A-2 to this section, provided the work is being performed on 
a generation or distribution installation meeting Secs. 1910.303 through 
1910.308 of this part. This table also identifies provisions in this 
section that apply to work by qualified persons directly on or 
associated with installations of electric power generation, 
transmission, and distribution lines or equipment, regardless of 
compliance with Secs. 1910.332 through 1910.335 of this part.


    Note 2: Work practices performed by qualified persons and conforming 
to Sec. 1910.269 of this part are considered as complying with 
Secs. 1910.333(c) and 1910.335 of this part.

    (iii) This section applies in addition to all other applicable 
standards contained in this part 1910. Specific references in this 
section to other sections of part 1910 are provided for emphasis only.
    (2) Training. (i) Employees shall be trained in and familiar with 
the safety-related work practices, safety procedures, and other safety 
requirements in this section that pertain to their respective job 
assignments. Employees shall also be trained in and familiar with any 
other safety practices, including applicable emergency procedures (such 
as pole top and manhole rescue), that are not specifically addressed by 
this section but that are related to their work and are necessary for 
their safety.
    (ii) Qualified employees shall also be trained and competent in:
    (A) The skills and techniques necessary to distinguish exposed live 
parts from other parts of electric equipment,
    (B) The skills and techniques necessary to determine the nominal 
voltage of exposed live parts,
    (C) The minimum approach distances specified in this section 
corresponding to the voltages to which the qualified employee will be 
exposed, and
    (D) The proper use of the special precautionary techniques, personal 
protective equipment, insulating and shielding materials, and insulated 
tools for working on or near exposed energized parts of electric 
equipment.


[[Page 760]]


    Note: For the purposes of this section, a person must have this 
training in order to be considered a qualified person.

    (iii) The employer shall determine, through regular supervision and 
through inspections conducted on at least an annual basis, that each 
employee is complying with the safety-related work practices required by 
this section.
    (iv) An employee shall receive additional training (or retraining) 
under any of the following conditions:
    (A) If the supervision and annual inspections required by paragraph 
(a)(2)(iii) of this section indicate that the employee is not complying 
with the safety-related work practices required by this section, or
    (B) If new technology, new types of equipment, or changes in 
procedures necessitate the use of safety-related work practices that are 
different from those which the employee would normally use, or
    (C) If he or she must employ safety-related work practices that are 
not normally used during his or her regular job duties.

    Note: OSHA would consider tasks that are performed less often than 
once per year to necessitate retraining before the performance of the 
work practices involved.

    (v) The training required by paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall 
be of the classroom or on-the-job type.
    (vi) The training shall establish employee proficiency in the work 
practices required by this section and shall introduce the procedures 
necessary for compliance with this section.
    (vii) The employer shall certify that each employee has received the 
training required by paragraph (a)(2) of this section. This 
certification shall be made when the employee demonstrates proficiency 
in the work practices involved and shall be maintained for the duration 
of the employee's employment.

    Note: Employment records that indicate that an employee has received 
the required training are an acceptable means of meeting this 
requirement.

    (3) Existing conditions. Existing conditions related to the safety 
of the work to be performed shall be determined before work on or near 
electric lines or equipment is started. Such conditions include, but are 
not limited to, the nominal voltages of lines and equipment, the maximum 
switching transient voltages, the presence of hazardous induced 
voltages, the presence and condition of protective grounds and equipment 
grounding conductors, the condition of poles, environmental conditions 
relative to safety, and the locations of circuits and equipment, 
including power and communication lines and fire protective signaling 
circuits.
    (b) Medical services and first aid. The employer shall provide 
medical services and first aid as required in Sec. 1910.151 of this 
part. In addition to the requirements of Sec. 1910.151 of this part, the 
following requirements also apply:
    (1) Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and first aid training. When 
employees are performing work on or associated with exposed lines or 
equipment energized at 50 volts or more, persons trained in first aid 
including cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) shall be available as 
follows:
    (i) For field work involving two or more employees at a work 
location, at least two trained persons shall be available. However, only 
one trained person need be available if all new employees are trained in 
first aid, including CPR, within 3 months of their hiring dates.
    (ii) For fixed work locations such as generating stations, the 
number of trained persons available shall be sufficient to ensure that 
each employee exposed to electric shock can be reached within 4 minutes 
by a trained person. However, where the existing number of employees is 
insufficient to meet this requirement (at a remote substation, for 
example), all employees at the work location shall be trained.
    (2) First aid supplies. First aid supplies required by 
Sec. 1910.151(b) of this part shall be placed in weatherproof containers 
if the supplies could be exposed to the weather.
    (3) First aid kits. Each first aid kit shall be maintained, shall be 
readily available for use, and shall be inspected frequently enough to 
ensure that expended items are replaced but at least once per year.
    (c) Job briefing. The employer shall ensure that the employee in 
charge

[[Page 761]]

conducts a job briefing with the employees involved before they start 
each job. The briefing shall cover at least the following subjects: 
hazards associated with the job, work procedures involved, special 
precautions, energy source controls, and personal protective equipment 
requirements.
    (1) Number of briefings. If the work or operations to be performed 
during the work day or shift are repetitive and similar, at least one 
job briefing shall be conducted before the start of the first job of 
each day or shift. Additional job briefings shall be held if significant 
changes, which might affect the safety of the employees, occur during 
the course of the work.
    (2) Extent of briefing. A brief discussion is satisfactory if the 
work involved is routine and if the employee, by virtue of training and 
experience, can reasonably be expected to recognize and avoid the 
hazards involved in the job. A more extensive discussion shall be 
conducted:
    (i) If the work is complicated or particularly hazardous, or
    (ii) If the employee cannot be expected to recognize and avoid the 
hazards involved in the job.

    Note: The briefing is always required to touch on all the subjects 
listed in the introductory text to paragraph (c) of this section.

    (3) Working alone. An employee working alone need not conduct a job 
briefing. However, the employer shall ensure that the tasks to be 
performed are planned as if a briefing were required.
    (d) Hazardous energy control (lockout/tagout) procedures--(1) 
Application. The provisions of paragraph (d) of this section apply to 
the use of lockout/tagout procedures for the control of energy sources 
in installations for the purpose of electric power generation, including 
related equipment for communication or metering. Locking and tagging 
procedures for the deenergizing of electric energy sources which are 
used exclusively for purposes of transmission and distribution are 
addressed by paragraph (m) of this section.

    Note 1: Installations in electric power generation facilities that 
are not an integral part of, or inextricably commingled with, power 
generation processes or equipment are covered under Sec. 1910.147 and 
subpart S of this part.

    Note 2: Lockout and tagging procedures that comply with paragraphs 
(c) through (f) of Sec. 1910.147 of this part will also be deemed to 
comply with paragraph (d) of this section if the procedures address the 
hazards covered by paragraph (d) of this section.

    (2) General. (i) The employer shall establish a program consisting 
of energy control procedures, employee training, and periodic 
inspections to ensure that, before any employee performs any servicing 
or maintenance on a machine or equipment where the unexpected 
energizing, start up, or release of stored energy could occur and cause 
injury, the machine or equipment is isolated from the energy source and 
rendered inoperative.
    (ii) The employer's energy control program under paragraph (d)(2) of 
this section shall meet the following requirements:
    (A) If an energy isolating device is not capable of being locked 
out, the employer's program shall use a tagout system.
    (B) If an energy isolating device is capable of being locked out, 
the employer's program shall use lockout, unless the employer can 
demonstrate that the use of a tagout system will provide full employee 
protection as follows:
    (1) When a tagout device is used on an energy isolating device which 
is capable of being locked out, the tagout device shall be attached at 
the same location that the lockout device would have been attached, and 
the employer shall demonstrate that the tagout program will provide a 
level of safety equivalent to that obtained by the use of a lockout 
program.
    (2) In demonstrating that a level of safety is achieved in the 
tagout program equivalent to the level of safety obtained by the use of 
a lockout program, the employer shall demonstrate full compliance with 
all tagout-related provisions of this standard together with such 
additional elements as are necessary to provide the equivalent safety 
available from the use of a lockout device. Additional means to be 
considered as part of the demonstration of full employee protection 
shall include the implementation of additional safety measures such as 
the removal of an isolating circuit element, blocking of a

[[Page 762]]

controlling switch, opening of an extra disconnecting device, or the 
removal of a valve handle to reduce the likelihood of inadvertent 
energizing.
    (C) After November 1, 1994, whenever replacement or major repair, 
renovation, or modification of a machine or equipment is performed, and 
whenever new machines or equipment are installed, energy isolating 
devices for such machines or equipment shall be designed to accept a 
lockout device.
    (iii) Procedures shall be developed, documented, and used for the 
control of potentially hazardous energy covered by paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (iv) The procedure shall clearly and specifically outline the scope, 
purpose, responsibility, authorization, rules, and techniques to be 
applied to the control of hazardous energy, and the measures to enforce 
compliance including, but not limited to, the following:
    (A) A specific statement of the intended use of this procedure;
    (B) Specific procedural steps for shutting down, isolating, blocking 
and securing machines or equipment to control hazardous energy;
    (C) Specific procedural steps for the placement, removal, and 
transfer of lockout devices or tagout devices and the responsibility for 
them; and
    (D) Specific requirements for testing a machine or equipment to 
determine and verify the effectiveness of lockout devices, tagout 
devices, and other energy control measures.
    (v) The employer shall conduct a periodic inspection of the energy 
control procedure at least annually to ensure that the procedure and the 
provisions of paragraph (d) of this section are being followed.
    (A) The periodic inspection shall be performed by an authorized 
employee who is not using the energy control procedure being inspected.
    (B) The periodic inspection shall be designed to identify and 
correct any deviations or inadequacies.
    (C) If lockout is used for energy control, the periodic inspection 
shall include a review, between the inspector and each authorized 
employee, of that employee's responsibilities under the energy control 
procedure being inspected.
    (D) Where tagout is used for energy control, the periodic inspection 
shall include a review, between the inspector and each authorized and 
affected employee, of that employee's responsibilities under the energy 
control procedure being inspected, and the elements set forth in 
paragraph (d)(2)(vii) of this section.
    (E) The employer shall certify that the inspections required by 
paragraph (d)(2)(v) of this section have been accomplished. The 
certification shall identify the machine or equipment on which the 
energy control procedure was being used, the date of the inspection, the 
employees included in the inspection, and the person performing the 
inspection.

    Note: If normal work schedule and operation records demonstrate 
adequate inspection activity and contain the required information, no 
additional certification is required.

    (vi) The employer shall provide training to ensure that the purpose 
and function of the energy control program are understood by employees 
and that the knowledge and skills required for the safe application, 
usage, and removal of energy controls are acquired by employees. The 
training shall include the following:
    (A) Each authorized employee shall receive training in the 
recognition of applicable hazardous energy sources, the type and 
magnitude of energy available in the workplace, and in the methods and 
means necessary for energy isolation and control.
    (B) Each affected employee shall be instructed in the purpose and 
use of the energy control procedure.
    (C) All other employees whose work operations are or may be in an 
area where energy control procedures may be used shall be instructed 
about the procedures and about the prohibition relating to attempts to 
restart or reenergize machines or equipment that are locked out or 
tagged out.
    (vii) When tagout systems are used, employees shall also be trained 
in the following limitations of tags:
    (A) Tags are essentially warning devices affixed to energy isolating 
devices and do not provide the physical restraint on those devices that 
is provided by a lock.

[[Page 763]]

    (B) When a tag is attached to an energy isolating means, it is not 
to be removed without authorization of the authorized person responsible 
for it, and it is never to be bypassed, ignored, or otherwise defeated.
    (C) Tags must be legible and understandable by all authorized 
employees, affected employees, and all other employees whose work 
operations are or may be in the area, in order to be effective.
    (D) Tags and their means of attachment must be made of materials 
which will withstand the environmental conditions encountered in the 
workplace.
    (E) Tags may evoke a false sense of security, and their meaning 
needs to be understood as part of the overall energy control program.
    (F) Tags must be securely attached to energy isolating devices so 
that they cannot be inadvertently or accidentally detached during use.
    (viii) Retraining shall be provided by the employer as follows:
    (A) Retraining shall be provided for all authorized and affected 
employees whenever there is a change in their job assignments, a change 
in machines, equipment, or processes that present a new hazard or 
whenever there is a change in the energy control procedures.
    (B) Retraining shall also be conducted whenever a periodic 
inspection under paragraph (d)(2)(v) of this section reveals, or 
whenever the employer has reason to believe, that there are deviations 
from or inadequacies in an employee's knowledge or use of the energy 
control procedures.
    (C) The retraining shall reestablish employee proficiency and shall 
introduce new or revised control methods and procedures, as necessary.
    (ix) The employer shall certify that employee training has been 
accomplished and is being kept up to date. The certification shall 
contain each employee's name and dates of training.
    (3) Protective materials and hardware. (i) Locks, tags, chains, 
wedges, key blocks, adapter pins, self-locking fasteners, or other 
hardware shall be provided by the employer for isolating, securing, or 
blocking of machines or equipment from energy sources.
    (ii) Lockout devices and tagout devices shall be singularly 
identified; shall be the only devices used for controlling energy; may 
not be used for other purposes; and shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (A) Lockout devices and tagout devices shall be capable of 
withstanding the environment to which they are exposed for the maximum 
period of time that exposure is expected.
    (1) Tagout devices shall be constructed and printed so that exposure 
to weather conditions or wet and damp locations will not cause the tag 
to deteriorate or the message on the tag to become illegible.
    (2) Tagout devices shall be so constructed as not to deteriorate 
when used in corrosive environments.
    (B) Lockout devices and tagout devices shall be standardized within 
the facility in at least one of the following criteria: color, shape, 
size. Additionally, in the case of tagout devices, print and format 
shall be standardized.
    (C) Lockout devices shall be substantial enough to prevent removal 
without the use of excessive force or unusual techniques, such as with 
the use of bolt cutters or metal cutting tools.
    (D) Tagout devices, including their means of attachment, shall be 
substantial enough to prevent inadvertent or accidental removal. Tagout 
device attachment means shall be of a non-reusable type, attachable by 
hand, self-locking, and non-releasable with a minimum unlocking strength 
of no less than 50 pounds and shall have the general design and basic 
characteristics of being at least equivalent to a one-piece, all-
environment-tolerant nylon cable tie.
    (E) Each lockout device or tagout device shall include provisions 
for the identification of the employee applying the device.
    (F) Tagout devices shall warn against hazardous conditions if the 
machine or equipment is energized and shall include a legend such as the 
following: Do Not Start, Do Not Open, Do Not Close, Do Not Energize, Do 
Not Operate.

    Note: For specific provisions covering accident prevention tags, see 
Sec. 1910.145 of this part.


[[Page 764]]


    (4) Energy isolation. Lockout and tagout device application and 
removal may only be performed by the authorized employees who are 
performing the servicing or maintenance.
    (5) Notification. Affected employees shall be notified by the 
employer or authorized employee of the application and removal of 
lockout or tagout devices. Notification shall be given before the 
controls are applied and after they are removed from the machine or 
equipment.

    Note: See also paragraph (d)(7) of this section, which requires that 
the second notification take place before the machine or equipment is 
reenergized.

    (6) Lockout/tagout application. The established procedures for the 
application of energy control (the lockout or tagout procedures) shall 
include the following elements and actions, and these procedures shall 
be performed in the following sequence:
    (i) Before an authorized or affected employee turns off a machine or 
equipment, the authorized employee shall have knowledge of the type and 
magnitude of the energy, the hazards of the energy to be controlled, and 
the method or means to control the energy.
    (ii) The machine or equipment shall be turned off or shut down using 
the procedures established for the machine or equipment. An orderly 
shutdown shall be used to avoid any additional or increased hazards to 
employees as a result of the equipment stoppage.
    (iii) All energy isolating devices that are needed to control the 
energy to the machine or equipment shall be physically located and 
operated in such a manner as to isolate the machine or equipment from 
energy sources.
    (iv) Lockout or tagout devices shall be affixed to each energy 
isolating device by authorized employees.
    (A) Lockout devices shall be attached in a manner that will hold the 
energy isolating devices in a ``safe'' or ``off'' position.
    (B) Tagout devices shall be affixed in such a manner as will clearly 
indicate that the operation or movement of energy isolating devices from 
the ``safe'' or ``off'' position is prohibited.
    (1) Where tagout devices are used with energy isolating devices 
designed with the capability of being locked out, the tag attachment 
shall be fastened at the same point at which the lock would have been 
attached.
    (2) Where a tag cannot be affixed directly to the energy isolating 
device, the tag shall be located as close as safely possible to the 
device, in a position that will be immediately obvious to anyone 
attempting to operate the device.
    (v) Following the application of lockout or tagout devices to energy 
isolating devices, all potentially hazardous stored or residual energy 
shall be relieved, disconnected, restrained, or otherwise rendered safe.
    (vi) If there is a possibility of reaccumulation of stored energy to 
a hazardous level, verification of isolation shall be continued until 
the servicing or maintenance is completed or until the possibility of 
such accumulation no longer exists.
    (vii) Before starting work on machines or equipment that have been 
locked out or tagged out, the authorized employee shall verify that 
isolation and deenergizing of the machine or equipment have been 
accomplished. If normally energized parts will be exposed to contact by 
an employee while the machine or equipment is deenergized, a test shall 
be performed to ensure that these parts are deenergized.
    (7) Release from lockout/tagout. Before lockout or tagout devices 
are removed and energy is restored to the machine or equipment, 
procedures shall be followed and actions taken by the authorized 
employees to ensure the following:
    (i) The work area shall be inspected to ensure that nonessential 
items have been removed and that machine or equipment components are 
operationally intact.
    (ii) The work area shall be checked to ensure that all employees 
have been safely positioned or removed.
    (iii) After lockout or tagout devices have been removed and before a 
machine or equipment is started, affected employees shall be notified 
that the lockout or tagout devices have been removed.
    (iv) Each lockout or tagout device shall be removed from each energy 
isolating device by the authorized employee who applied the lockout or

[[Page 765]]

tagout device. However, if that employee is not available to remove it, 
the device may be removed under the direction of the employer, provided 
that specific procedures and training for such removal have been 
developed, documented, and incorporated into the employer's energy 
control program. The employer shall demonstrate that the specific 
procedure provides a degree of safety equivalent to that provided by the 
removal of the device by the authorized employee who applied it. The 
specific procedure shall include at least the following elements:
    (A) Verification by the employer that the authorized employee who 
applied the device is not at the facility;
    (B) Making all reasonable efforts to contact the authorized employee 
to inform him or her that his or her lockout or tagout device has been 
removed; and
    (C) Ensuring that the authorized employee has this knowledge before 
he or she resumes work at that facility.
    (8) Additional requirements. (i) If the lockout or tagout devices 
must be temporarily removed from energy isolating devices and the 
machine or equipment must be energized to test or position the machine, 
equipment, or component thereof, the following sequence of actions shall 
be followed:
    (A) Clear the machine or equipment of tools and materials in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(7)(i) of this section;
    (B) Remove employees from the machine or equipment area in 
accordance with paragraphs (d)(7)(ii) and (d)(7)(iii) of this section;
    (C) Remove the lockout or tagout devices as specified in paragraph 
(d)(7)(iv) of this section;
    (D) Energize and proceed with the testing or positioning; and
    (E) Deenergize all systems and reapply energy control measures in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(6) of this section to continue the 
servicing or maintenance.
    (ii) When servicing or maintenance is performed by a crew, craft, 
department, or other group, they shall use a procedure which affords the 
employees a level of protection equivalent to that provided by the 
implementation of a personal lockout or tagout device. Group lockout or 
tagout devices shall be used in accordance with the procedures required 
by paragraphs (d)(2)(iii) and (d)(2)(iv) of this section including, but 
not limited to, the following specific requirements:
    (A) Primary responsibility shall be vested in an authorized employee 
for a set number of employees working under the protection of a group 
lockout or tagout device (such as an operations lock);
    (B) Provision shall be made for the authorized employee to ascertain 
the exposure status of all individual group members with regard to the 
lockout or tagout of the machine or equipment;
    (C) When more than one crew, craft, department, or other group is 
involved, assignment of overall job-associated lockout or tagout control 
responsibility shall be given to an authorized employee designated to 
coordinate affected work forces and ensure continuity of protection; and
    (D) Each authorized employee shall affix a personal lockout or 
tagout device to the group lockout device, group lockbox, or comparable 
mechanism when he or she begins work and shall remove those devices when 
he or she stops working on the machine or equipment being serviced or 
maintained.
    (iii) Procedures shall be used during shift or personnel changes to 
ensure the continuity of lockout or tagout protection, including 
provision for the orderly transfer of lockout or tagout device 
protection between off-going and on-coming employees, to minimize their 
exposure to hazards from the unexpected energizing or start-up of the 
machine or equipment or from the release of stored energy.
    (iv) Whenever outside servicing personnel are to be engaged in 
activities covered by paragraph (d) of this section, the on-site 
employer and the outside employer shall inform each other of their 
respective lockout or tagout procedures, and each employer shall ensure 
that his or her personnel understand and comply with restrictions and 
prohibitions of the energy control procedures being used.
    (v) If energy isolating devices are installed in a central location 
and are under the exclusive control of a system operator, the following 
requirements apply:

[[Page 766]]

    (A) The employer shall use a procedure that affords employees a 
level of protection equivalent to that provided by the implementation of 
a personal lockout or tagout device.
    (B) The system operator shall place and remove lockout and tagout 
devices in place of the authorized employee under paragraphs (d)(4), 
(d)(6)(iv), and (d)(7)(iv) of this section.
    (C) Provisions shall be made to identify the authorized employee who 
is responsible for (that is, being protected by) the lockout or tagout 
device, to transfer responsibility for lockout and tagout devices, and 
to ensure that an authorized employee requesting removal or transfer of 
a lockout or tagout device is the one responsible for it before the 
device is removed or transferred.
    (e) Enclosed spaces. This paragraph covers enclosed spaces that may 
be entered by employees. It does not apply to vented vaults if a 
determination is made that the ventilation system is operating to 
protect employees before they enter the space. This paragraph applies to 
routine entry into enclosed spaces in lieu of the permit-space entry 
requirements contained in paragraphs (d) through (k) of Sec. 1910.146 of 
this part. If, after the precautions given in paragraphs (e) and (t) of 
this section are taken, the hazards remaining in the enclosed space 
endanger the life of an entrant or could interfere with escape from the 
space, then entry into the enclosed space shall meet the permit-space 
entry requirements of paragraphs (d) through (k) of Sec. 1910.146 of 
this part.

    Note: Entries into enclosed spaces conducted in accordance with the 
permit-space entry requirements of paragraphs (d) through (k) of 
Sec. 1910.146 of this part are considered as complying with paragraph 
(e) of this section.

    (1) Safe work practices. The employer shall ensure the use of safe 
work practices for entry into and work in enclosed spaces and for rescue 
of employees from such spaces.
    (2) Training. Employees who enter enclosed spaces or who serve as 
attendants shall be trained in the hazards of enclosed space entry, in 
enclosed space entry procedures, and in enclosed space rescue 
procedures.
    (3) Rescue equipment. Employers shall provide equipment to ensure 
the prompt and safe rescue of employees from the enclosed space.
    (4) Evaluation of potential hazards. Before any entrance cover to an 
enclosed space is removed, the employer shall determine whether it is 
safe to do so by checking for the presence of any atmospheric pressure 
or temperature differences and by evaluating whether there might be a 
hazardous atmosphere in the space. Any conditions making it unsafe to 
remove the cover shall be eliminated before the cover is removed.

    Note: The evaluation called for in this paragraph may take the form 
of a check of the conditions expected to be in the enclosed space. For 
example, the cover could be checked to see if it is hot and, if it is 
fastened in place, could be loosened gradually to release any residual 
pressure. A determination must also be made of whether conditions at the 
site could cause a hazardous atmosphere, such as an oxygen deficient or 
flammable atmosphere, to develop within the space.

    (5) Removal of covers. When covers are removed from enclosed spaces, 
the opening shall be promptly guarded by a railing, temporary cover, or 
other barrier intended to prevent an accidental fall through the opening 
and to protect employees working in the space from objects entering the 
space.
    (6) Hazardous atmosphere. Employees may not enter any enclosed space 
while it contains a hazardous atmosphere, unless the entry conforms to 
the generic permit-required confined spaces standard in Sec. 1910.146 of 
this part.

    Note: The term ``entry'' is defined in Sec. 1910.146(b) of this 
part.

    (7) Attendants. While work is being performed in the enclosed space, 
a person with first aid training meeting paragraph (b) of this section 
shall be immediately available outside the enclosed space to render 
emergency assistance if there is reason to believe that a hazard may 
exist in the space or if a hazard exists because of traffic patterns in 
the area of the opening used for entry. That person is not precluded 
from performing other duties outside the enclosed space if these duties 
do not distract the attendant from monitoring employees within the 
space.


[[Page 767]]


    Note: See paragraph (t)(3) of this section for additional 
requirements on attendants for work in manholes.

    (8) Calibration of test instruments. Test instruments used to 
monitor atmospheres in enclosed spaces shall be kept in calibration, 
with a minimum accuracy of <plus-minus>10 percent.
    (9) Testing for oxygen deficiency. Before an employee enters an 
enclosed space, the internal atmosphere shall be tested for oxygen 
deficiency with a direct-reading meter or similar instrument, capable of 
collection and immediate analysis of data samples without the need for 
off-site evaluation. If continuous forced air ventilation is provided, 
testing is not required provided that the procedures used ensure that 
employees are not exposed to the hazards posed by oxygen deficiency.
    (10) Testing for flammable gases and vapors. Before an employee 
enters an enclosed space, the internal atmosphere shall be tested for 
flammable gases and vapors with a direct-reading meter or similar 
instrument capable of collection and immediate analysis of data samples 
without the need for off-site evaluation. This test shall be performed 
after the oxygen testing and ventilation required by paragraph (e)(9) of 
this section demonstrate that there is sufficient oxygen to ensure the 
accuracy of the test for flammability.
    (11) Ventilation and monitoring. If flammable gases or vapors are 
detected or if an oxygen deficiency is found, forced air ventilation 
shall be used to maintain oxygen at a safe level and to prevent a 
hazardous concentration of flammable gases and vapors from accumulating. 
A continuous monitoring program to ensure that no increase in flammable 
gas or vapor concentration occurs may be followed in lieu of 
ventilation, if flammable gases or vapors are detected at safe levels.

    Note: See the definition of hazardous atmosphere for guidance in 
determining whether or not a given concentration of a substance is 
considered to be hazardous.

    (12) Specific ventilation requirements. If continuous forced air 
ventilation is used, it shall begin before entry is made and shall be 
maintained long enough to ensure that a safe atmosphere exists before 
employees are allowed to enter the work area. The forced air ventilation 
shall be so directed as to ventilate the immediate area where employees 
are present within the enclosed space and shall continue until all 
employees leave the enclosed space.
    (13) Air supply. The air supply for the continuous forced air 
ventilation shall be from a clean source and may not increase the 
hazards in the enclosed space.
    (14) Open flames. If open flames are used in enclosed spaces, a test 
for flammable gases and vapors shall be made immediately before the open 
flame device is used and at least once per hour while the device is used 
in the space. Testing shall be conducted more frequently if conditions 
present in the enclosed space indicate that once per hour is 
insufficient to detect hazardous accumulations of flammable gases or 
vapors.

    Note: See the definition of hazardous atmosphere for guidance in 
determining whether or not a given concentration of a substance is 
considered to be hazardous.

    (f) Excavations. Excavation operations shall comply with subpart P 
of part 1926 of this chapter.
    (g) Personal protective equipment--(1) General. Personal protective 
equipment shall meet the requirements of subpart I of this part.
    (2) Fall protection. (i) Personal fall arrest equipment shall meet 
the requirements of subpart M of part 1926 of this chapter.
    (ii) Body belts and safety straps for work positioning shall meet 
the requirements of Sec. 1926.959 of this chapter.
    (iii) Body belts, safety straps, lanyards, lifelines, and body 
harnesses shall be inspected before use each day to determine that the 
equipment is in safe working condition. Defective equipment may not be 
used.
    (iv) Lifelines shall be protected against being cut or abraded.
    (v) Fall arrest equipment, work positioning equipment, or travel 
restricting equipment shall be used by employees working at elevated 
locations more than 4 feet (1.2 m) above the ground on poles, towers, or 
similar structures if other fall protection has not been provided. Fall 
protection equipment is not required to be used by a qualified employee 
climbing or changing location

[[Page 768]]

on poles, towers, or similar structures, unless conditions, such as, but 
not limited to, ice, high winds, the design of the structure (for 
example, no provision for holding on with hands), or the presence of 
contaminants on the structure, could cause the employee to lose his or 
her grip or footing.

    Note 1: This paragraph applies to structures that support overhead 
electric power generation, transmission, and distribution lines and 
equipment. It does not apply to portions of buildings, such as loading 
docks, to electric equipment, such as transformers and capacitors, nor 
to aerial lifts. Requirements for fall protection associated with 
walking and working surfaces are contained in subpart D of this part; 
requirements for fall protection associated with aerial lifts are 
contained in Sec. 1910.67 of this part.


    Note 2: Employees undergoing training are not considered ``qualified 
employees'' for the purposes of this provision. Unqualified employees 
(including trainees) are required to use fall protection any time they 
are more than 4 feet (1.2 m) above the ground.

    (vi) The following requirements apply to personal fall arrest 
systems:
    (A) When stopping or arresting a fall, personal fall arrest systems 
shall limit the maximum arresting force on an employee to 900 pounds (4 
kN) if used with a body belt.
    (B) When stopping or arresting a fall, personal fall arrest systems 
shall limit the maximum arresting force on an employee to 1800 pounds (8 
kN) if used with a body harness.
    (C) Personal fall arrest systems shall be rigged such that an 
employee can neither free fall more than 6 feet (1.8 m) nor contact any 
lower level.
    (vii) If vertical lifelines or droplines are used, not more than one 
employee may be attached to any one lifeline.
    (viii) Snaphooks may not be connected to loops made in webbing-type 
lanyards.
    (ix) Snaphooks may not be connected to each other.
    (h) Ladders, platforms, step bolts, and manhole steps--(1) General. 
Requirements for ladders contained in subpart D of this part apply, 
except as specifically noted in paragraph (h)(2) of this section.
    (2) Special ladders and platforms. Portable ladders and platforms 
used on structures or conductors in conjunction with overhead line work 
need not meet paragraphs (d)(2)(i) and (d)(2)(iii) of Sec. 1910.25 of 
this part or paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of Sec. 1910.26 of this part. 
However, these ladders and platforms shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (i) Ladders and platforms shall be secured to prevent their becoming 
accidentally dislodged.
    (ii) Ladders and platforms may not be loaded in excess of the 
working loads for which they are designed.
    (iii) Ladders and platforms may be used only in applications for 
which they were designed.
    (iv) In the configurations in which they are used, ladders and 
platforms shall be capable of supporting without failure at least 2.5 
times the maximum intended load.
    (3) Conductive ladders. Portable metal ladders and other portable 
conductive ladders may not be used near exposed energized lines or 
equipment. However, in specialized high-voltage work, conductive ladders 
shall be used where the employer can demonstrate that nonconductive 
ladders would present a greater hazard than conductive ladders.
    (i) Hand and portable power tools--(1) General. Paragraph (i)(2) of 
this section applies to electric equipment connected by cord and plug. 
Paragraph (i)(3) of this section applies to portable and vehicle-mounted 
generators used to supply cord-and plug-connected equipment. Paragraph 
(i)(4) of this section applies to hydraulic and pneumatic tools.
    (2) Cord- and plug-connected equipment. (i) Cord-and plug-connected 
equipment supplied by premises wiring is covered by subpart S of this 
part.
    (ii) Any cord- and plug-connected equipment supplied by other than 
premises wiring shall comply with one of the following in lieu of 
Sec. 1910.243(a)(5) of this part:
    (A) It shall be equipped with a cord containing an equipment 
grounding conductor connected to the tool frame and to a means for 
grounding the other end (however, this option may not be used where the 
introduction of the ground into the work environment increases the 
hazard to an employee); or

[[Page 769]]

    (B) It shall be of the double-insulated type conforming to subpart S 
of this part; or
    (C) It shall be connected to the power supply through an isolating 
transformer with an ungrounded secondary.
    (3) Portable and vehicle-mounted generators. Portable and vehicle-
mounted generators used to supply cord- and plug-connected equipment 
shall meet the following requirements:
    (i) The generator may only supply equipment located on the generator 
or the vehicle and cord- and plug-connected equipment through 
receptacles mounted on the generator or the vehicle.
    (ii) The non-current-carrying metal parts of equipment and the 
equipment grounding conductor terminals of the receptacles shall be 
bonded to the generator frame.
    (iii) In the case of vehicle-mounted generators, the frame of the 
generator shall be bonded to the vehicle frame.
    (iv) Any neutral conductor shall be bonded to the generator frame.
    (4) Hydraulic and pneumatic tools. (i) Safe operating pressures for 
hydraulic and pneumatic tools, hoses, valves, pipes, filters, and 
fittings may not be exceeded.

    Note: If any hazardous defects are present, no operating pressure 
would be safe, and the hydraulic or pneumatic equipment involved may not 
be used. In the absence of defects, the maximum rated operating pressure 
is the maximum safe pressure.

    (ii) A hydraulic or pneumatic tool used where it may contact exposed 
live parts shall be designed and maintained for such use.
    (iii) The hydraulic system supplying a hydraulic tool used where it 
may contact exposed live parts shall provide protection against loss of 
insulating value for the voltage involved due to the formation of a 
partial vacuum in the hydraulic line.

    Note: Hydraulic lines without check valves having a separation of 
more than 35 feet (10.7 m) between the oil reservoir and the upper end 
of the hydraulic system promote the formation of a partial vacuum.

    (iv) A pneumatic tool used on energized electric lines or equipment 
or used where it may contact exposed live parts shall provide protection 
against the accumulation of moisture in the air supply.
    (v) Pressure shall be released before connections are broken, unless 
quick acting, self-closing connectors are used. Hoses may not be kinked.
    (vi) Employees may not use any part of their bodies to locate or 
attempt to stop a hydraulic leak.
    (j) Live-line tools--(1) Design of tools. Live-line tool rods, 
tubes, and poles shall be designed and constructed to withstand the 
following minimum tests:
    (i) 100,000 volts per foot (3281 volts per centimeter) of length for 
5 minutes if the tool is made of fiberglass-reinforced plastic (FRP), or
    (ii) 75,000 volts per foot (2461 volts per centimeter) of length for 
3 minutes if the tool is made of wood, or
    (iii) Other tests that the employer can demonstrate are equivalent.

    Note: Live-line tools using rod and tube that meet ASTM F711-89, 
Standard Specification for Fiberglass-Reinforced Plastic (FRP) Rod and 
Tube Used in Live-Line Tools, conform to paragraph (j)(1)(i) of this 
section.

    (2) Condition of tools. (i) Each live-line tool shall be wiped clean 
and visually inspected for defects before use each day.
    (ii) If any defect or contamination that could adversely affect the 
insulating qualities or mechanical integrity of the live-line tool is 
present after wiping, the tool shall be removed from service and 
examined and tested according to paragraph (j)(2)(iii) of this section 
before being returned to service.
    (iii) Live-line tools used for primary employee protection shall be 
removed from service every 2 years and whenever required under paragraph 
(j)(2)(ii) of this section for examination, cleaning, repair, and 
testing as follows:
    (A) Each tool shall be thoroughly examined for defects.
    (B) If a defect or contamination that could adversely affect the 
insulating qualities or mechanical integrity of the live-line tool is 
found, the tool shall be repaired and refinished or shall be permanently 
removed from service. If no such defect or contamination is found, the 
tool shall be cleaned and waxed.

[[Page 770]]

    (C) The tool shall be tested in accordance with paragraphs 
(j)(2)(iii)(D) and (j)(2)(iii)(E) of this section under the following 
conditions:
    (1) After the tool has been repaired or refinished; and
    (2) After the examination if repair or refinishing is not performed, 
unless the tool is made of FRP rod or foam-filled FRP tube and the 
employer can demonstrate that the tool has no defects that could cause 
it to fail in use.
    (D) The test method used shall be designed to verify the tool's 
integrity along its entire working length and, if the tool is made of 
fiberglass-reinforced plastic, its integrity under wet conditions.
    (E) The voltage applied during the tests shall be as follows:
    (1) 75,000 volts per foot (2461 volts per centimeter) of length for 
1 minute if the tool is made of fiberglass, or
    (2) 50,000 volts per foot (1640 volts per centimeter) of length for 
1 minute if the tool is made of wood, or
    (3) Other tests that the employer can demonstrate are equivalent.

    Note: Guidelines for the examination, cleaning, repairing, and in-
service testing of live-line tools are contained in the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Guide for In-Service Maintenance 
and Electrical Testing of Live-Line Tools, IEEE Std. 978-1984.

    (k) Materials handling and storage--(1) General. Material handling 
and storage shall conform to the requirements of subpart N of this part.
    (2) Materials storage near energized lines or equipment. (i) In 
areas not restricted to qualified persons only, materials or equipment 
may not be stored closer to energized lines or exposed energized parts 
of equipment than the following distances plus an amount providing for 
the maximum sag and side swing of all conductors and providing for the 
height and movement of material handling equipment:
    (A) For lines and equipment energized at 50 kV or less, the distance 
is 10 feet (305 cm).
    (B) For lines and equipment energized at more than 50 kV, the 
distance is 10 feet (305 cm) plus 4 inches (10 cm) for every 10 kV over 
50 kV.
    (ii) In areas restricted to qualified employees, material may not be 
stored within the working space about energized lines or equipment.

    Note: Requirements for the size of the working space are contained 
in paragraphs (u)(1) and (v)(3) of this section.

    (l) Working on or near exposed energized parts. This paragraph 
applies to work on exposed live parts, or near enough to them, to expose 
the employee to any hazard they present.
    (1) General. Only qualified employees may work on or with exposed 
energized lines or parts of equipment. Only qualified employees may work 
in areas containing unguarded, uninsulated energized lines or parts of 
equipment operating at 50 volts or more. Electric lines and equipment 
shall be considered and treated as energized unless the provisions of 
paragraph (d) or paragraph (m) of this section have been followed.
    (i) Except as provided in paragraph (l)(1)(ii) of this section, at 
least two employees shall be present while the following types of work 
are being performed:
    (A) Installation, removal, or repair of lines that are energized at 
more than 600 volts,
    (B) Installation, removal, or repair of deenergized lines if an 
employee is exposed to contact with other parts energized at more than 
600 volts,
    (C) Installation, removal, or repair of equipment, such as 
transformers, capacitors, and regulators, if an employee is exposed to 
contact with parts energized at more than 600 volts,
    (D) Work involving the use of mechanical equipment, other than 
insulated aerial lifts, near parts energized at more than 600 volts, and
    (E) Other work that exposes an employee to electrical hazards 
greater than or equal to those posed by operations that are specifically 
listed in paragraphs (l)(1)(i)(A) through (l)(1)(i)(D) of this section.
    (ii) Paragraph (l)(1)(i) of this section does not apply to the 
following operations:
    (A) Routine switching of circuits, if the employer can demonstrate 
that conditions at the site allow this work to be performed safely,
    (B) Work performed with live-line tools if the employee is 
positioned so that he or she is neither within reach

[[Page 771]]

of nor otherwise exposed to contact with energized parts, and
    (C) Emergency repairs to the extent necessary to safeguard the 
general public.
    (2) Minimum approach distances. The employer shall ensure that no 
employee approaches or takes any conductive object closer to exposed 
energized parts than set forth in Table R-6 through Table R-10, unless:
    (i) The employee is insulated from the energized part (insulating 
gloves or insulating gloves and sleeves worn in accordance with 
paragraph (l)(3) of this section are considered insulation of the 
employee only with regard to the energized part upon which work is being 
performed), or
    (ii) The energized part is insulated from the employee and from any 
other conductive object at a different potential, or
    (iii) The employee is insulated from any other exposed conductive 
object, as during live-line bare-hand work.

    Note: Paragraphs (u)(5)(i) and (v)(5)(i) of this section contain 
requirements for the guarding and isolation of live parts. Parts of 
electric circuits that meet these two provisions are not considered as 
``exposed'' unless a guard is removed or an employee enters the space 
intended to provide isolation from the live parts.

    (3) Type of insulation. If the employee is to be insulated from 
energized parts by the use of insulating gloves (under paragraph 
(l)(2)(i) of this section), insulating sleeves shall also be used. 
However, insulating sleeves need not be used under the following 
conditions:
    (i) If exposed energized parts on which work is not being performed 
are insulated from the employee and
    (ii) If such insulation is placed from a position not exposing the 
employee's upper arm to contact with other energized parts.
    (4) Working position. The employer shall ensure that each employee, 
to the extent that other safety-related conditions at the worksite 
permit, works in a position from which a slip or shock will not bring 
the employee's body into contact with exposed, uninsulated parts 
energized at a potential different from the employee.
    (5) Making connections. The employer shall ensure that connections 
are made as follows:
    (i) In connecting deenergized equipment or lines to an energized 
circuit by means of a conducting wire or device, an employee shall first 
attach the wire to the deenergized part;
    (ii) When disconnecting equipment or lines from an energized circuit 
by means of a conducting wire or device, an employee shall remove the 
source end first; and
    (iii) When lines or equipment are connected to or disconnected from 
energized circuits, loose conductors shall be kept away from exposed 
energized parts.
    (6) Apparel. (i) When work is performed within reaching distance of 
exposed energized parts of equipment, the employer shall ensure that 
each employee removes or renders nonconductive all exposed conductive 
articles, such as key or watch chains, rings, or wrist watches or bands, 
unless such articles do not increase the hazards associated with contact 
with the energized parts.
    (ii) The employer shall train each employee who is exposed to the 
hazards of flames or electric arcs in the hazards involved.
    (iii) The employer shall ensure that each employee who is exposed to 
the hazards of flames or electric arcs does not wear clothing that, when 
exposed to flames or electric arcs, could increase the extent of injury 
that would be sustained by the employee.

    Note: Clothing made from the following types of fabrics, either 
alone or in blends, is prohibited by this paragraph, unless the employer 
can demonstrate that the fabric has been treated to withstand the 
conditions that may be encountered or that the clothing is worn in such 
a manner as to eliminate the hazard involved: acetate, nylon, polyester, 
rayon.

    (7) Fuse handling. When fuses must be installed or removed with one 
or both terminals energized at more than 300 volts or with exposed parts 
energized at more than 50 volts, the employer shall ensure that tools or 
gloves rated for the voltage are used. When expulsion-type fuses are 
installed with one or both terminals energized at more

[[Page 772]]

than 300 volts, the employer shall ensure that each employee wears eye 
protection meeting the requirements of subpart I of this part, uses a 
tool rated for the voltage, and is clear of the exhaust path of the fuse 
barrel.
    (8) Covered (noninsulated) conductors. The requirements of this 
section which pertain to the hazards of exposed live parts also apply 
when work is performed in the proximity of covered (noninsulated) wires.
    (9) Noncurrent-carrying metal parts. Noncurrent-carrying metal parts 
of equipment or devices, such as transformer cases and circuit breaker 
housings, shall be treated as energized at the highest voltage to which 
they are exposed, unless the employer inspects the installation and 
determines that these parts are grounded before work is performed.
    (10) Opening circuits under load. Devices used to open circuits 
under load conditions shall be designed to interrupt the current 
involved.

        Table R-6.-- AC Live-Line Work Minimum Approach Distance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Distance
                                         -------------------------------
                                             Phase to     Phase to phase
  Nominal voltage in kilovolts phase to       ground         exposure
                  phase                      exposure    ---------------
                                         ----------------
                                           (ft-            (ft-     (m)
                                            in)     (m)     in)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.05 to 1.0.............................   (\4\)   (\4\)   (\4\)   (\4\)
1.1 to 15.0.............................     2-1    0.64     2-2    0.66
15.1 to 36.0............................     2-4    0.72     2-7    0.77
36.1 to 46.0............................     2-7    0.77    2-10    0.85
46.1 to 72.5............................     3-0    0.90     3-6    1.05
72.6 to 121.............................     3-2    0.95     4-3    1.29
138 to 145..............................     3-7    1.09    4-11    1.50
161 to 169..............................     4-0    1.22     5-8    1.71
230 to 242..............................     5-3    1.59     7-6    2.27
345 to 362..............................     8-6    2.59    12-6    3.80
500 to 550..............................    11-3    3.42    18-1    5.50
765 to 800..............................   14-11    4.53    26-0    7.91
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: These distances take into consideration the highest switching
  surge an employee will be exposed to on any system with air as the
  insulating medium and the maximum voltages shown.
Note 2: The clear live-line tool distance shall equal or exceed the
  values for the indicated voltage ranges.
Note 3: See appendix B to this section for information on how the
  minimum approach distances listed in the tables were derived.
\4\ Avoid contact.


    Table R-7.--AC Live-Line Work Minimum Approach Distance With Overvoltage Factor Phase-to-Ground Exposure
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Maximum                                          Distance in feet-inches
 anticipated  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   per-unit                               Maximum phase-to-phase voltage in kilovolts
  transient   --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 overvoltage        121            145           169           242           362           552           800
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.5..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............           6-0           9-8
1.6..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............           6-6          10-8
1.7..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............           7-0          11-8
1.8..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............           7-7          12-8
1.9..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............           8-1          13-9
2.0..........           2-5            2-9           3-0          3-10           5-3           8-9         14-11
2.1..........           2-6           2-10           3-2           4-0           5-5           9-4  ............
2.2..........           2-7           2-11           3-3           4-1           5-9          9-11  ............
2.3..........           2-8            3-0           3-4           4-3           6-1          10-6  ............
2.4..........           2-9            3-1           3-5           4-5           6-4          11-3  ............
2.5..........           2-9            3-2           3-6           4-6           6-8  ............  ............
2.6..........          2-10            3-3           3-8           4-8           7-1  ............  ............
2.7..........          2-11            3-4           3-9          4-10           7-5  ............  ............
2.8..........           3-0            3-5          3-10          4-11           7-9  ............  ............
2.9..........           3-1            3-6          3-11           5-1           8-2  ............  ............
3.0..........           3-2            3-7           4-0           5-3           8-6  ............  ............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: The distance specified in this table may be applied only where the maximum anticipated per-unit
  transient overvoltage has been determined by engineering analysis and has been supplied by the employer. Table
  R-6 applies otherwise.
Note 2: The distances specified in this table are the air, bare-hand, and live-line tool distances.
Note 3: See appendix B to this section for information on how the minimum approach distances listed in the
  tables were derived and on how to calculate revised minimum approach distances based on the control of
  transient overvoltages.


     Table R-8.--AC Live-Line Work Minimum Approach Distance With Overvoltage Factor Phase-to-Phase Exposure
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Maximum                                          Distance in feet-inches
 anticipated  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   per-unit                               Maximum phase-to-phase voltage in kilovolts
  transient   --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 overvoltage        121            145           169           242           362           552           800
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.5..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............           7-4          12-1
1.6..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............           8-9          14-6

[[Page 773]]

1.7..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............          10-2          17-2
1.8..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............          11-7         19-11
1.9..........  .............  ............  ............  ............  ............          13-2         22-11
2.0..........           3-7            4-1           4-8           6-1           8-7         14-10          26-0
2.1..........           3-7            4-2           4-9           6-3          8-10          15-7  ............
2.2..........           3-8            4-3          4-10           6-4           9-2          16-4  ............
2.3..........           3-9            4-4          4-11           6-6           9-6          17-2  ............
2.4..........          3-10            4-5           5-0           6-7          9-11          18-1  ............
2.5..........          3-11            4-6           5-2           6-9          10-4  ............  ............
2.6..........           4-0            4-7           5-3          6-11          10-9  ............  ............
2.7..........           4-1            4-8           5-4           7-0          11-2  ............  ............
2.8..........           4-1            4-9           5-5           7-2          11-7  ............  ............
2.9..........           4-2           4-10           5-6           7-4          12-1  ............  ............
3.0..........           4-3           4-11           5-8           7-6          12-6  ............  ............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: The distance specified in this table may be applied only where the maximum anticipated per-unit
  transient overvoltage has been determined by engineering analysis and has been supplied by the employer. Table
  R-6 applies otherwise.
Note 2: The distances specified in this table are the air, bare-hand, and live-line tool distances.
Note 3: See appendix B to this section for information on how the minimum approach distances listed in the
  tables were derived and on how to calculate revised minimum approach distances based on the control of
  transient overvoltages.


                 Table R-9.--DC Live-Line Work Minimum Approach Distance With Overvoltage Factor
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   Distance in feet-inches
                                           ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Maximum anticipated per-unit transient                 Maximum line-to-ground voltage in kilovolts
                overvoltage                ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 250           400           500           600           750
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.5 or lower..............................           3-8           5-3           6-9           8-7         11-10
1.6.......................................          3-10           5-7           7-4           9-5          13-1
1.7.......................................           4-1           6-0          7-11          10-3          14-4
1.8.......................................           4-3           6-5           8-7          11-2          15-9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: The distances specified in this table may be applied only where the maximum anticipated per-unit
  transient overvoltage has been determined by engineering analysis and has been supplied by the employer.
  However, if the transient overvoltage factor is not known, a factor of 1.8 shall be assumed.
Note 2: The distances specified in this table are the air, bare-hand, and live-line tool distances.


                 Table R-10.--Altitude Correction Factor
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Altitude
-------------------------------------------------    Correction factor
           ft                       m
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3000...................               900                    1.00
4000...................              1200                    1.02
5000...................              1500                    1.05
6000...................              1800                    1.08
7000...................              2100                    1.11
8000...................              2400                    1.14
9000...................              2700                    1.17
10000..................              3000                    1.20
12000..................              3600                    1.25
14000..................              4200                    1.30
16000..................              4800                    1.35
18000..................              5400                    1.39
20000..................              6000                    1.44
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: If the work is performed at elevations greater than 3000 ft (900
  m) above mean sea level, the minimum approach distance shall be
  determined by multiplying the distances in Table R-6 through Table R-9
  by the correction factor corresponding to the altitude at which work
  is performed.

    (m) Deenergizing lines and equipment for employee protection--(1) 
Application. Paragraph (m) of this section applies to the deenergizing 
of transmission and distribution lines and equipment for the purpose of 
protecting employees. Control of hazardous energy sources used in the 
generation of electric energy is covered in paragraph (d) of this 
section. Conductors and parts of electric equipment that have been 
deenergized under procedures other than those required by paragraph (d) 
or (m) of this section, as applicable, shall be treated as energized.
    (2) General. (i) If a system operator is in charge of the lines or 
equipment and their means of disconnection, all of the requirements of 
paragraph (m)(3) of this section shall be observed, in the order given.
    (ii) If no system operator is in charge of the lines or equipment 
and their means of disconnection, one employee in the crew shall be 
designated as being in charge of the clearance. All of the requirements 
of paragraph (m)(3) of

[[Page 774]]

this section apply, in the order given, except as provided in paragraph 
(m)(2)(iii) of this section. The employee in charge of the clearance 
shall take the place of the system operator, as necessary.
    (iii) If only one crew will be working on the lines or equipment and 
if the means of disconnection is accessible and visible to and under the 
sole control of the employee in charge of the clearance, paragraphs 
(m)(3)(i), (m)(3)(iii), (m)(3)(iv), (m)(3)(viii), and (m)(3)(xii) of 
this section do not apply. Additionally, tags required by the remaining 
provisions of paragraph (m)(3) of this section need not be used.
    (iv) Any disconnecting means that are accessible to persons outside 
the employer's control (for example, the general public) shall be 
rendered inoperable while they are open for the purpose of protecting 
employees.
    (3) Deenergizing lines and equipment. (i) A designated employee 
shall make a request of the system operator to have the particular 
section of line or equipment deenergized. The designated employee 
becomes the employee in charge (as this term is used in paragraph (m)(3) 
of this section) and is responsible for the clearance.
    (ii) All switches, disconnectors, jumpers, taps, and other means 
through which known sources of electric energy may be supplied to the 
particular lines and equipment to be deenergized shall be opened. Such 
means shall be rendered inoperable, unless its design does not so 
permit, and tagged to indicate that employees are at work.
    (iii) Automatically and remotely controlled switches that could 
cause the opened disconnecting means to close shall also be tagged at 
the point of control. The automatic or remote control feature shall be 
rendered inoperable, unless its design does not so permit.
    (iv) Tags shall prohibit operation of the disconnecting means and 
shall indicate that employees are at work.
    (v) After the applicable requirements in paragraphs (m)(3)(i) 
through (m)(3)(iv) of this section have been followed and the employee 
in charge of the work has been given a clearance by the system operator, 
the lines and equipment to be worked shall be tested to ensure that they 
are deenergized.
    (vi) Protective grounds shall be installed as required by paragraph 
(n) of this section.
    (vii) After the applicable requirements of paragraphs (m)(3)(i) 
through (m)(3)(vi) of this section have been followed, the lines and 
equipment involved may be worked as deenergized.
    (viii) If two or more independent crews will be working on the same 
lines or equipment, each crew shall independently comply with the 
requirements in paragraph (m)(3) of this section.
    (ix) To transfer the clearance, the employee in charge (or, if the 
employee in charge is forced to leave the worksite due to illness or 
other emergency, the employee's supervisor) shall inform the system 
operator; employees in the crew shall be informed of the transfer; and 
the new employee in charge shall be responsible for the clearance.
    (x) To release a clearance, the employee in charge shall:
    (A) Notify employees under his or her direction that the clearance 
is to be released;
    (B) Determine that all employees in the crew are clear of the lines 
and equipment;
    (C) Determine that all protective grounds installed by the crew have 
been removed; and
    (D) Report this information to the system operator and release the 
clearance.
    (xi) The person releasing a clearance shall be the same person that 
requested the clearance, unless responsibility has been transferred 
under paragraph (m)(3)(ix) of this section.
    (xii) Tags may not be removed unless the associated clearance has 
been released under paragraph (m)(3)(x) of this section.
    (xiii) Only after all protective grounds have been removed, after 
all crews working on the lines or equipment have released their 
clearances, after all employees are clear of the lines and equipment, 
and after all protective tags have been removed from a given point of 
disconnection, may action be initiated to reenergize the lines or 
equipment at that point of disconnection.

[[Page 775]]

    (n) Grounding for the protection of employees--(1) Application. 
Paragraph (n) of this section applies to the grounding of transmission 
and distribution lines and equipment for the purpose of protecting 
employees. Paragraph (n)(4) of this section also applies to the 
protective grounding of other equipment as required elsewhere in this 
section.
    (2) General. For the employee to work lines or equipment as 
deenergized, the lines or equipment shall be deenergized under the 
provisions of paragraph (m) of this section and shall be grounded as 
specified in paragraphs (n)(3) through (n)(9) of this section. However, 
if the employer can demonstrate that installation of a ground is 
impracticable or that the conditions resulting from the installation of 
a ground would present greater hazards than working without grounds, the 
lines and equipment may be treated as deenergized provided all of the 
following conditions are met:
    (i) The lines and equipment have been deenergized under the 
provisions of paragraph (m) of this section.
    (ii) There is no possibility of contact with another energized 
source.
    (iii) The hazard of induced voltage is not present.
    (3) Equipotential zone. Temporary protective grounds shall be placed 
at such locations and arranged in such a manner as to prevent each 
employee from being exposed to hazardous differences in electrical 
potential.
    (4) Protective grounding equipment. (i) Protective grounding 
equipment shall be capable of conducting the maximum fault current that 
could flow at the point of grounding for the time necessary to clear the 
fault. This equipment shall have an ampacity greater than or equal to 
that of No. 2 AWG copper.

    Note: Guidelines for protective grounding equipment are contained in 
American Society for Testing and Materials Standard Specifications for 
Temporary Grounding Systems to be Used on De-Energized Electric Power 
Lines and Equipment, ASTM F855-1990.

    (ii) Protective grounds shall have an impedance low enough to cause 
immediate operation of protective devices in case of accidental 
energizing of the lines or equipment.
    (5) Testing. Before any ground is installed, lines and equipment 
shall be tested and found absent of nominal voltage, unless a previously 
installed ground is present.
    (6) Order of connection. When a ground is to be attached to a line 
or to equipment, the ground-end connection shall be attached first, and 
then the other end shall be attached by means of a live-line tool.
    (7) Order of removal. When a ground is to be removed, the grounding 
device shall be removed from the line or equipment using a live-line 
tool before the ground-end connection is removed.
    (8) Additional precautions. When work is performed on a cable at a 
location remote from the cable terminal, the cable may not be grounded 
at the cable terminal if there is a possibility of hazardous transfer of 
potential should a fault occur.
    (9) Removal of grounds for test. Grounds may be removed temporarily 
during tests. During the test procedure, the employer shall ensure that 
each employee uses insulating equipment and is isolated from any hazards 
involved, and the employer shall institute any additional measures as 
may be necessary to protect each exposed employee in case the previously 
grounded lines and equipment become energized.
    (o) Testing and test facilities--(1) Application. Paragraph (o) of 
this section provides for safe work practices for high-voltage and high-
power testing performed in laboratories, shops, and substations, and in 
the field and on electric transmission and distribution lines and 
equipment. It applies only to testing involving interim measurements 
utilizing high voltage, high power, or combinations of both, and not to 
testing involving continuous measurements as in routine metering, 
relaying, and normal line work.

    Note: Routine inspection and maintenance measurements made by 
qualified employees are considered to be routine line work and are not 
included in the scope of paragraph (o) of this section, as long as the 
hazards related to the use of intrinsic high-voltage or high-power 
sources require only the normal precautions associated with routine 
operation and maintenance work required in the other paragraphs of this 
section. Two typical examples of such excluded test work procedures are 
``phasing-out'' testing and testing for a ``no-voltage'' condition.


[[Page 776]]


    (2) General requirements. (i) The employer shall establish and 
enforce work practices for the protection of each worker from the 
hazards of high-voltage or high-power testing at all test areas, 
temporary and permanent. Such work practices shall include, as a 
minimum, test area guarding, grounding, and the safe use of measuring 
and control circuits. A means providing for periodic safety checks of 
field test areas shall also be included. (See paragraph (o)(6) of this 
section.)
    (ii) Employees shall be trained in safe work practices upon their 
initial assignment to the test area, with periodic reviews and updates 
provided as required by paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (3) Guarding of test areas. (i) Permanent test areas shall be 
guarded by walls, fences, or barriers designed to keep employees out of 
the test areas.
    (ii) In field testing, or at a temporary test site where permanent 
fences and gates are not provided, one of the following means shall be 
used to prevent unauthorized employees from entering:
    (A) The test area shall be guarded by the use of distinctively 
colored safety tape that is supported approximately waist high and to 
which safety signs are attached,
    (B) The test area shall be guarded by a barrier or barricade that 
limits access to the test area to a degree equivalent, physically and 
visually, to the barricade specified in paragraph (o)(3)(ii)(A) of this 
section, or
    (C) The test area shall be guarded by one or more test observers 
stationed so that the entire area can be monitored.
    (iii) The barriers required by paragraph (o)(3)(ii) of this section 
shall be removed when the protection they provide is no longer needed.
    (iv) Guarding shall be provided within test areas to control access 
to test equipment or to apparatus under test that may become energized 
as part of the testing by either direct or inductive coupling, in order 
to prevent accidental employee contact with energized parts.
    (4) Grounding practices. (i) The employer shall establish and 
implement safe grounding practices for the test facility.
    (A) All conductive parts accessible to the test operator during the 
time the equipment is operating at high voltage shall be maintained at 
ground potential except for portions of the equipment that are isolated 
from the test operator by guarding.
    (B) Wherever ungrounded terminals of test equipment or apparatus 
under test may be present, they shall be treated as energized until 
determined by tests to be deenergized.
    (ii) Visible grounds shall be applied, either automatically or 
manually with properly insulated tools, to the high-voltage circuits 
after they are deenergized and before work is performed on the circuit 
or item or apparatus under test. Common ground connections shall be 
solidly connected to the test equipment and the apparatus under test.
    (iii) In high-power testing, an isolated ground-return conductor 
system shall be provided so that no intentional passage of current, with 
its attendant voltage rise, can occur in the ground grid or in the 
earth. However, an isolated ground-return conductor need not be provided 
if the employer can demonstrate that both the following conditions are 
met:
    (A) An isolated ground-return conductor cannot be provided due to 
the distance of the test site from the electric energy source, and
    (B) Employees are protected from any hazardous step and touch 
potentials that may develop during the test.

    Note: See appendix C to this section for information on measures 
that can be taken to protect employees from hazardous step and touch 
potentials.

    (iv) In tests in which grounding of test equipment by means of the 
equipment grounding conductor located in the equipment power cord cannot 
be used due to increased hazards to test personnel or the prevention of 
satisfactory measurements, a ground that the employer can demonstrate 
affords equivalent safety shall be provided, and the safety ground shall 
be clearly indicated in the test set-up.
    (v) When the test area is entered after equipment is deenergized, a 
ground shall be placed on the high-voltage terminal and any other 
exposed terminals.

[[Page 777]]

    (A) High capacitance equipment or apparatus shall be discharged 
through a resistor rated for the available energy.
    (B) A direct ground shall be applied to the exposed terminals when 
the stored energy drops to a level at which it is safe to do so.
    (vi) If a test trailer or test vehicle is used in field testing, its 
chassis shall be grounded. Protection against hazardous touch potentials 
with respect to the vehicle, instrument panels, and other conductive 
parts accessible to employees shall be provided by bonding, insulation, 
or isolation.
    (5) Control and measuring circuits. (i) Control wiring, meter 
connections, test leads and cables may not be run from a test area 
unless they are contained in a grounded metallic sheath and terminated 
in a grounded metallic enclosure or unless other precautions are taken 
that the employer can demonstrate as ensuring equivalent safety.
    (ii) Meters and other instruments with accessible terminals or parts 
shall be isolated from test personnel to protect against hazards arising 
from such terminals and parts becoming energized during testing. If this 
isolation is provided by locating test equipment in metal compartments 
with viewing windows, interlocks shall be provided to interrupt the 
power supply if the compartment cover is opened.
    (iii) The routing and connections of temporary wiring shall be made 
secure against damage, accidental interruptions and other hazards. To 
the maximum extent possible, signal, control, ground, and power cables 
shall be kept separate.
    (iv) If employees will be present in the test area during testing, a 
test observer shall be present. The test observer shall be capable of 
implementing the immediate deenergizing of test circuits for safety 
purposes.
    (6) Safety check. (i) Safety practices governing employee work at 
temporary or field test areas shall provide for a routine check of such 
test areas for safety at the beginning of each series of tests.
    (ii) The test operator in charge shall conduct these routine safety 
checks before each series of tests and shall verify at least the 
following conditions:
    (A) That barriers and guards are in workable condition and are 
properly placed to isolate hazardous areas;
    (B) That system test status signals, if used, are in operable 
condition;
    (C) That test power disconnects are clearly marked and readily 
available in an emergency;
    (D) That ground connections are clearly identifiable;
    (E) That personal protective equipment is provided and used as 
required by subpart I of this part and by this section; and
    (F) That signal, ground, and power cables are properly separated.
    (p) Mechanical equipment--(1) General requirements. (i) The critical 
safety components of mechanical elevating and rotating equipment shall 
receive a thorough visual inspection before use on each shift.

    Note: Critical safety components of mechanical elevating and 
rotating equipment are components whose failure would result in a free 
fall or free rotation of the boom.

    (ii) No vehicular equipment having an obstructed view to the rear 
may be operated on off-highway jobsites where any employee is exposed to 
the hazards created by the moving vehicle, unless:
    (A) The vehicle has a reverse signal alarm audible above the 
surrounding noise level, or
    (B) The vehicle is backed up only when a designated employee signals 
that it is safe to do so.
    (iii) The operator of an electric line truck may not leave his or 
her position at the controls while a load is suspended, unless the 
employer can demonstrate that no employee (including the operator) might 
be endangered.
    (iv) Rubber-tired, self-propelled scrapers, rubber-tired front-end 
loaders, rubber-tired dozers, wheel-type agricultural and industrial 
tractors, crawler-type tractors, crawler-type loaders, and motor 
graders, with or without attachments, shall have roll-over protective 
structures that meet the requirements of subpart W of part 1926 of this 
chapter.
    (2) Outriggers. (i) Vehicular equipment, if provided with 
outriggers, shall be operated with the outriggers extended and firmly 
set as necessary for the stability of the specific configuration of the 
equipment. Outriggers may

[[Page 778]]

not be extended or retracted outside of clear view of the operator 
unless all employees are outside the range of possible equipment motion.
    (ii) If the work area or the terrain precludes the use of 
outriggers, the equipment may be operated only within its maximum load 
ratings for the particular configuration of the equipment without 
outriggers.
    (3) Applied loads. Mechanical equipment used to lift or move lines 
or other material shall be used within its maximum load rating and other 
design limitations for the conditions under which the work is being 
performed.
    (4) Operations near energized lines or equipment. (i) Mechanical 
equipment shall be operated so that the minimum approach distances of 
Table R-6 through Table R-10 are maintained from exposed energized lines 
and equipment. However, the insulated portion of an aerial lift operated 
by a qualified employee in the lift is exempt from this requirement.
    (ii) A designated employee other than the equipment operator shall 
observe the approach distance to exposed lines and equipment and give 
timely warnings before the minimum approach distance required by 
paragraph (p)(4)(i) is reached, unless the employer can demonstrate that 
the operator can accurately determine that the minimum approach distance 
is being maintained.
    (iii) If, during operation of the mechanical equipment, the 
equipment could become energized, the operation shall also comply with 
at least one of paragraphs (p)(4)(iii)(A) through (p)(4)(iii)(C) of this 
section.
    (A) The energized lines exposed to contact shall be covered with 
insulating protective material that will withstand the type of contact 
that might be made during the operation.
    (B) The equipment shall be insulated for the voltage involved. The 
equipment shall be positioned so that its uninsulated portions cannot 
approach the lines or equipment any closer than the minimum approach 
distances specified in Table R-6 through Table R-10.
    (C) Each employee shall be protected from hazards that might arise 
from equipment contact with the energized lines. The measures used shall 
ensure that employees will not be exposed to hazardous differences in 
potential. Unless the employer can demonstrate that the methods in use 
protect each employee from the hazards that might arise if the equipment 
contacts the energized line, the measures used shall include all of the 
following techniques:
    (1) Using the best available ground to minimize the time the lines 
remain energized,
    (2) Bonding equipment together to minimize potential differences,
    (3) Providing ground mats to extend areas of equipotential, and
    (4) Employing insulating protective equipment or barricades to guard 
against any remaining hazardous potential differences.

    Note: Appendix C to this section contains information on hazardous 
step and touch potentials and on methods of protecting employees from 
hazards resulting from such potentials.

    (q) Overhead lines. This paragraph provides additional requirements 
for work performed on or near overhead lines and equipment.
    (1) General. (i) Before elevated structures, such as poles or 
towers, are subjected to such stresses as climbing or the installation 
or removal of equipment may impose, the employer shall ascertain that 
the structures are capable of sustaining the additional or unbalanced 
stresses. If the pole or other structure cannot withstand the loads 
which will be imposed, it shall be braced or otherwise supported so as 
to prevent failure.

    Note: Appendix D to this section contains test methods that can be 
used in ascertaining whether a wood pole is capable of sustaining the 
forces that would be imposed by an employee climbing the pole. This 
paragraph also requires the employer to ascertain that the pole can 
sustain all other forces that will be imposed by the work to be 
performed.

    (ii) When poles are set, moved, or removed near exposed energized 
overhead conductors, the pole may not contact the conductors.
    (iii) When a pole is set, moved, or removed near an exposed 
energized overhead conductor, the employer shall ensure that each 
employee wears electrical protective equipment or uses insulated devices 
when handling the pole and that no employee contacts the pole

[[Page 779]]

with uninsulated parts of his or her body.
    (iv) To protect employees from falling into holes into which poles 
are to be placed, the holes shall be attended by employees or physically 
guarded whenever anyone is working nearby.
    (2) Installing and removing overhead lines. The following provisions 
apply to the installation and removal of overhead conductors or cable.
    (i) The employer shall use the tension stringing method, barriers, 
or other equivalent measures to minimize the possibility that conductors 
and cables being installed or removed will contact energized power lines 
or equipment.
    (ii) The protective measures required by paragraph (p)(4)(iii) of 
this section for mechanical equipment shall also be provided for 
conductors, cables, and pulling and tensioning equipment when the 
conductor or cable is being installed or removed close enough to 
energized conductors that any of the following failures could energize 
the pulling or tensioning equipment or the wire or cable being installed 
or removed:
    (A) Failure of the pulling or tensioning equipment,
    (B) Failure of the wire or cable being pulled, or
    (C) Failure of the previously installed lines or equipment.
    (iii) If the conductors being installed or removed cross over 
energized conductors in excess of 600 volts and if the design of the 
circuit-interrupting devices protecting the lines so permits, the 
automatic-reclosing feature of these devices shall be made inoperative.
    (iv) Before lines are installed parallel to existing energized 
lines, the employer shall make a determination of the approximate 
voltage to be induced in the new lines, or work shall proceed on the 
assumption that the induced voltage is hazardous. Unless the employer 
can demonstrate that the lines being installed are not subject to the 
induction of a hazardous voltage or unless the lines are treated as 
energized, the following requirements also apply:
    (A) Each bare conductor shall be grounded in increments so that no 
point along the conductor is more than 2 miles (3.22 km) from a ground.
    (B) The grounds required in paragraph (q)(2)(iv)(A) of this section 
shall be left in place until the conductor installation is completed 
between dead ends.
    (C) The grounds required in paragraph (q)(2)(iv)(A) of this section 
shall be removed as the last phase of aerial cleanup.
    (D) If employees are working on bare conductors, grounds shall also 
be installed at each location where these employees are working, and 
grounds shall be installed at all open dead-end or catch-off points or 
the next adjacent structure.
    (E) If two bare conductors are to be spliced, the conductors shall 
be bonded and grounded before being spliced.
    (v) Reel handling equipment, including pulling and tensioning 
devices, shall be in safe operating condition and shall be leveled and 
aligned.
    (vi) Load ratings of stringing lines, pulling lines, conductor 
grips, load-bearing hardware and accessories, rigging, and hoists may 
not be exceeded.
    (vii) Pulling lines and accessories shall be repaired or replaced 
when defective.
    (viii) Conductor grips may not be used on wire rope, unless the grip 
is specifically designed for this application.
    (ix) Reliable communications, through two-way radios or other 
equivalent means, shall be maintained between the reel tender and the 
pulling rig operator.
    (x) The pulling rig may only be operated when it is safe to do so.

    Note: Examples of unsafe conditions include employees in locations 
prohibited by paragraph (q)(2)(xi) of this section, conductor and 
pulling line hang-ups, and slipping of the conductor grip.

    (xi) While the conductor or pulling line is being pulled (in motion) 
with a power-driven device, employees are not permitted directly under 
overhead operations or on the cross arm, except as necessary to guide 
the stringing sock or board over or through the stringing sheave.

[[Page 780]]

    (3) Live-line bare-hand work. In addition to other applicable 
provisions contained in this section, the following requirements apply 
to live-line bare-hand work:
    (i) Before using or supervising the use of the live-line bare-hand 
technique on energized circuits, employees shall be trained in the 
technique and in the safety requirements of paragraph (q)(3) of this 
section. Employees shall receive refresher training as required by 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (ii) Before any employee uses the live-line bare-hand technique on 
energized high-voltage conductors or parts, the following information 
shall be ascertained:
    (A) The nominal voltage rating of the circuit on which the work is 
to be performed,
    (B) The minimum approach distances to ground of lines and other 
energized parts on which work is to be performed, and
    (C) The voltage limitations of equipment to be used.
    (iii) The insulated equipment, insulated tools, and aerial devices 
and platforms used shall be designed, tested, and intended for live-line 
bare-hand work. Tools and equipment shall be kept clean and dry while 
they are in use.
    (iv) The automatic-reclosing feature of circuit-interrupting devices 
protecting the lines shall be made inoperative, if the design of the 
devices permits.
    (v) Work may not be performed when adverse weather conditions would 
make the work hazardous even after the work practices required by this 
section are employed. Additionally, work may not be performed when winds 
reduce the phase-to-phase or phase-to-ground minimum approach distances 
at the work location below that specified in paragraph (q)(3)(xiii) of 
this section, unless the grounded objects and other lines and equipment 
are covered by insulating guards.

    Note: Thunderstorms in the immediate vicinity, high winds, snow 
storms, and ice storms are examples of adverse weather conditions that 
are presumed to make live-line bare-hand work too hazardous to perform 
safely.

    (vi) A conductive bucket liner or other conductive device shall be 
provided for bonding the insulated aerial device to the energized line 
or equipment.
    (A) The employee shall be connected to the bucket liner or other 
conductive device by the use of conductive shoes, leg clips, or other 
means.
    (B) Where differences in potentials at the worksite pose a hazard to 
employees, electrostatic shielding designed for the voltage being worked 
shall be provided.
    (vii) Before the employee contacts the energized part, the 
conductive bucket liner or other conductive device shall be bonded to 
the energized conductor by means of a positive connection. This 
connection shall remain attached to the energized conductor until the 
work on the energized circuit is completed.
    (viii) Aerial lifts to be used for live-line bare-hand work shall 
have dual controls (lower and upper) as follows:
    (A) The upper controls shall be within easy reach of the employee in 
the bucket. On a two-bucket-type lift, access to the controls shall be 
within easy reach from either bucket.
    (B) The lower set of controls shall be located near the base of the 
boom, and they shall be so designed that they can override operation of 
the equipment at any time.
    (ix) Lower (ground-level) lift controls may not be operated with an 
employee in the lift, except in case of emergency.
    (x) Before employees are elevated into the work position, all 
controls (ground level and bucket) shall be checked to determine that 
they are in proper working condition.
    (xi) Before the boom of an aerial lift is elevated, the body of the 
truck shall be grounded, or the body of the truck shall be barricaded 
and treated as energized.
    (xii) A boom-current test shall be made before work is started each 
day, each time during the day when higher voltage is encountered, and 
when changed conditions indicate a need for an additional test. This 
test shall consist of placing the bucket in contact with an energized 
source equal to the voltage to be encountered for a minimum of 3 
minutes. The leakage current may not exceed 1 microampere per kilovolt 
of nominal phase-to-ground

[[Page 781]]

voltage. Work from the aerial lift shall be immediately suspended upon 
indication of a malfunction in the equipment.
    (xiii) The minimum approach distances specified in Table R-6 through 
Table R-10 shall be maintained from all grounded objects and from lines 
and equipment at a potential different from that to which the live-line 
bare-hand equipment is bonded, unless such grounded objects and other 
lines and equipment are covered by insulating guards.
    (xiv) While an employee is approaching, leaving, or bonding to an 
energized circuit, the minimum approach distances in Table R-6 through 
Table R-10 shall be maintained between the employee and any grounded 
parts, including the lower boom and portions of the truck.
    (xv) While the bucket is positioned alongside an energized bushing 
or insulator string, the phase-to-ground minimum approach distances of 
Table R-6 through Table R-10 shall be maintained between all parts of 
the bucket and the grounded end of the bushing or insulator string or 
any other grounded surface.
    (xvi) Hand lines may not be used between the bucket and the boom or 
between the bucket and the ground. However, non-conductive-type hand 
lines may be used from conductor to ground if not supported from the 
bucket. Ropes used for live-line bare-hand work may not be used for 
other purposes.
    (xvii) Uninsulated equipment or material may not be passed between a 
pole or structure and an aerial lift while an employee working from the 
bucket is bonded to an energized part.
    (xviii) A minimum approach distance table reflecting the minimum 
approach distances listed in Table R-6 through Table R-10 shall be 
printed on a plate of durable non-conductive material. This table shall 
be mounted so as to be visible to the operator of the boom.
    (xix) A non-conductive measuring device shall be readily accessible 
to assist employees in maintaining the required minimum approach 
distance.
    (4) Towers and structures. The following requirements apply to work 
performed on towers or other structures which support overhead lines.
    (i) The employer shall ensure that no employee is under a tower or 
structure while work is in progress, except where the employer can 
demonstrate that such a working position is necessary to assist 
employees working above.
    (ii) Tag lines or other similar devices shall be used to maintain 
control of tower sections being raised or positioned, unless the 
employer can demonstrate that the use of such devices would create a 
greater hazard.
    (iii) The loadline may not be detached from a member or section 
until the load is safely secured.
    (iv) Except during emergency restoration procedures, work shall be 
discontinued when adverse weather conditions would make the work 
hazardous in spite of the work practices required by this section.

    Note: Thunderstorms in the immediate vicinity, high winds, snow 
storms, and ice storms are examples of adverse weather conditions that 
are presumed to make this work too hazardous to perform, except under 
emergency conditions.

    (r) Line-clearance tree trimming operations. This paragraph provides 
additional requirements for line-clearance tree-trimming operations and 
for equipment used in these operations.
    (1) Electrical hazards. This paragraph does not apply to qualified 
employees.
    (i) Before an employee climbs, enters, or works around any tree, a 
determination shall be made of the nominal voltage of electric power 
lines posing a hazard to employees. However, a determination of the 
maximum nominal voltage to which an employee will be exposed may be made 
instead, if all lines are considered as energized at this maximum 
voltage.
    (ii) There shall be a second line-clearance tree trimmer within 
normal (that is, unassisted) voice communication under any of the 
following conditions:
    (A) If a line-clearance tree trimmer is to approach more closely 
than 10 feet (305 cm) any conductor or electric apparatus energized at 
more than 750 volts or
    (B) If branches or limbs being removed are closer to lines energized 
at more than 750 volts than the distances listed in Table R-6, Table R-
9, and Table R-10 or

[[Page 782]]

    (C) If roping is necessary to remove branches or limbs from such 
conductors or apparatus.
    (iii) Line-clearance tree trimmers shall maintain the minimum 
approach distances from energized conductors given in Table R-6, Table 
R-9, and Table R-10.
    (iv) Branches that are contacting exposed energized conductors or 
equipment or that are within the distances specified in Table R-6, Table 
R-9, and Table R-10 may be removed only through the use of insulating 
equipment.

    Note: A tool constructed of a material that the employer can 
demonstrate has insulating qualities meeting paragraph (j)(1) of this 
section is considered as insulated under this paragraph if the tool is 
clean and dry.

    (v) Ladders, platforms, and aerial devices may not be brought closer 
to an energized part than the distances listed in Table R-6, Table R-9, 
and Table R-10.
    (vi) Line-clearance tree-trimming work may not be performed when 
adverse weather conditions make the work hazardous in spite of the work 
practices required by this section. Each employee performing line-
clearance tree trimming work in the aftermath of a storm or under 
similar emergency conditions shall be trained in the special hazards 
related to this type of work.

    Note: Thunderstorms in the immediate vicinity, high winds, snow 
storms, and ice storms are examples of adverse weather conditions that 
are presumed to make line-clearance tree trimming work too hazardous to 
perform safely.

    (2) Brush chippers. (i) Brush chippers shall be equipped with a 
locking device in the ignition system.
    (ii) Access panels for maintenance and adjustment of the chipper 
blades and associated drive train shall be in place and secure during 
operation of the equipment.
    (iii) Brush chippers not equipped with a mechanical infeed system 
shall be equipped with an infeed hopper of length sufficient to prevent 
employees from contacting the blades or knives of the machine during 
operation.
    (iv) Trailer chippers detached from trucks shall be chocked or 
otherwise secured.
    (v) Each employee in the immediate area of an operating chipper feed 
table shall wear personal protective equipment as required by subpart I 
of this part.
    (3) Sprayers and related equipment. (i) Walking and working surfaces 
of sprayers and related equipment shall be covered with slip-resistant 
material. If slipping hazards cannot be eliminated, slip-resistant 
footwear or handrails and stair rails meeting the requirements of 
subpart D may be used instead of slip-resistant material.
    (ii) Equipment on which employees stand to spray while the vehicle 
is in motion shall be equipped with guardrails around the working area. 
The guardrail shall be constructed in accordance with subpart D of this 
part.
    (4) Stump cutters. (i) Stump cutters shall be equipped with 
enclosures or guards to protect employees.
    (ii) Each employee in the immediate area of stump grinding 
operations (including the stump cutter operator) shall wear personal 
protective equipment as required by subpart I of this part.
    (5) Gasoline-engine power saws. Gasoline-engine power saw operations 
shall meet the requirements of Sec. 1910.266(e) and the following:
    (i) Each power saw weighing more than 15 pounds (6.8 kilograms, 
service weight) that is used in trees shall be supported by a separate 
line, except when work is performed from an aerial lift and except 
during topping or removing operations where no supporting limb will be 
available.
    (ii) Each power saw shall be equipped with a control that will 
return the saw to idling speed when released.
    (iii) Each power saw shall be equipped with a clutch and shall be so 
adjusted that the clutch will not engage the chain drive at idling 
speed.
    (iv) A power saw shall be started on the ground or where it is 
otherwise firmly supported. Drop starting of saws over 15 pounds (6.8 
kg) is permitted outside of the bucket of an aerial lift only if the 
area below the lift is clear of personnel.
    (v) A power saw engine may be started and operated only when all 
employees other than the operator are clear of the saw.

[[Page 783]]

    (vi) A power saw may not be running when the saw is being carried up 
into a tree by an employee.
    (vii) Power saw engines shall be stopped for all cleaning, 
refueling, adjustments, and repairs to the saw or motor, except as the 
manufacturer's servicing procedures require otherwise.
    (6) Backpack power units for use in pruning and clearing. (i) While 
a backpack power unit is running, no one other than the operator may be 
within 10 feet (305 cm) of the cutting head of a brush saw.
    (ii) A backpack power unit shall be equipped with a quick shutoff 
switch readily accessible to the operator.
    (iii) Backpack power unit engines shall be stopped for all cleaning, 
refueling, adjustments, and repairs to the saw or motor, except as the 
manufacturer's servicing procedures require otherwise.
    (7) Rope. (i) Climbing ropes shall be used by employees working 
aloft in trees. These ropes shall have a minimum diameter of 0.5 inch 
(1.2 cm) with a minimum breaking strength of 2300 pounds (10.2 kN). 
Synthetic rope shall have elasticity of not more than 7 percent.
    (ii) Rope shall be inspected before each use and, if unsafe (for 
example, because of damage or defect), may not be used.
    (iii) Rope shall be stored away from cutting edges and sharp tools. 
Rope contact with corrosive chemicals, gas, and oil shall be avoided.
    (iv) When stored, rope shall be coiled and piled, or shall be 
suspended, so that air can circulate through the coils.
    (v) Rope ends shall be secured to prevent their unraveling.
    (vi) Climbing rope may not be spliced to effect repair.
    (vii) A rope that is wet, that is contaminated to the extent that 
its insulating capacity is impaired, or that is otherwise not considered 
to be insulated for the voltage involved may not be used near exposed 
energized lines.
    (8) Fall protection. Each employee shall be tied in with a climbing 
rope and safety saddle when the employee is working above the ground in 
a tree, unless he or she is ascending into the tree.
    (s) Communication facilities--(1) Microwave transmission. (i) The 
employer shall ensure that no employee looks into an open waveguide or 
antenna that is connected to an energized microwave source.
    (ii) If the electromagnetic radiation level within an accessible 
area associated with microwave communications systems exceeds the 
radiation protection guide given in Sec. 1910.97(a)(2) of this part, the 
area shall be posted with the warning symbol described in 
Sec. 1910.97(a)(3) of this part. The lower half of the warning symbol 
shall include the following statements or ones that the employer can 
demonstrate are equivalent:

    Radiation in this area may exceed hazard limitations and special 
precautions are required. Obtain specific instruction before entering.

    (iii) When an employee works in an area where the electromagnetic 
radiation could exceed the radiation protection guide, the employer 
shall institute measures that ensure that the employee's exposure is not 
greater than that permitted by that guide. Such measures may include 
administrative and engineering controls and personal protective 
equipment.
    (2) Power line carrier. Power line carrier work, including work on 
equipment used for coupling carrier current to power line conductors, 
shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of this section 
pertaining to work on energized lines.
    (t) Underground electrical installations. This paragraph provides 
additional requirements for work on underground electrical 
installations.
    (1) Access. A ladder or other climbing device shall be used to enter 
and exit a manhole or subsurface vault exceeding 4 feet (122 cm) in 
depth. No employee may climb into or out of a manhole or vault by 
stepping on cables or hangers.
    (2) Lowering equipment into manholes. Equipment used to lower 
materials and tools into manholes or vaults shall be capable of 
supporting the weight to be lowered and shall be checked for defects 
before use. Before tools or material are lowered into the opening for a 
manhole or vault, each employee working in the manhole or vault shall be

[[Page 784]]

clear of the area directly under the opening.
    (3) Attendants for manholes. (i) While work is being performed in a 
manhole containing energized electric equipment, an employee with first 
aid and CPR training meeting paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall be 
available on the surface in the immediate vicinity to render emergency 
assistance.
    (ii) Occasionally, the employee on the surface may briefly enter a 
manhole to provide assistance, other than emergency.

    Note 1: An attendant may also be required under paragraph (e)(7) of 
this section. One person may serve to fulfill both requirements. 
However, attendants required under paragraph (e)(7) of this section are 
not permitted to enter the manhole.

    Note 2: Employees entering manholes containing unguarded, 
uninsulated energized lines or parts of electric equipment operating at 
50 volts or more are required to be qualified under paragraph (l)(1) of 
this section.

    (iii) For the purpose of inspection, housekeeping, taking readings, 
or similar work, an employee working alone may enter, for brief periods 
of time, a manhole where energized cables or equipment are in service, 
if the employer can demonstrate that the employee will be protected from 
all electrical hazards.
    (iv) Reliable communications, through two-way radios or other 
equivalent means, shall be maintained among all employees involved in 
the job.
    (4) Duct rods. If duct rods are used, they shall be installed in the 
direction presenting the least hazard to employees. An employee shall be 
stationed at the far end of the duct line being rodded to ensure that 
the required minimum approach distances are maintained.
    (5) Multiple cables. When multiple cables are present in a work 
area, the cable to be worked shall be identified by electrical means, 
unless its identity is obvious by reason of distinctive appearance or 
location or by other readily apparent means of identification. Cables 
other than the one being worked shall be protected from damage.
    (6) Moving cables. Energized cables that are to be moved shall be 
inspected for defects.
    (7) Defective cables. Where a cable in a manhole has one or more 
abnormalities that could lead to or be an indication of an impending 
fault, the defective cable shall be deenergized before any employee may 
work in the manhole, except when service load conditions and a lack of 
feasible alternatives require that the cable remain energized. In that 
case, employees may enter the manhole provided they are protected from 
the possible effects of a failure by shields or other devices that are 
capable of containing the adverse effects of a fault in the joint.

    Note: Abnormalities such as oil or compound leaking from cable or 
joints, broken cable sheaths or joint sleeves, hot localized surface 
temperatures of cables or joints, or joints that are swollen beyond 
normal tolerance are presumed to lead to or be an indication of an 
impending fault.

    (8) Sheath continuity. When work is performed on buried cable or on 
cable in manholes, metallic sheath continuity shall be maintained or the 
cable sheath shall be treated as energized.
    (u) Substations. This paragraph provides additional requirements for 
substations and for work performed in them.
    (1) Access and working space. Sufficient access and working space 
shall be provided and maintained about electric equipment to permit 
ready and safe operation and maintenance of such equipment.

    Note: Guidelines for the dimensions of access and working space 
about electric equipment in substations are contained in American 
National Standard--National Electrical Safety Code, ANSI C2-1987. 
Installations meeting the ANSI provisions comply with paragraph (u)(1) 
of this section. An installation that does not conform to this ANSI 
standard will, nonetheless, be considered as complying with paragraph 
(u)(1) of this section if the employer can demonstrate that the 
installation provides ready and safe access based on the following 
evidence:
    (1) That the installation conforms to the edition of ANSI C2 that 
was in effect at the time the installation was made,
    (2) That the configuration of the installation enables employees to 
maintain the minimum approach distances required by paragraph (l)(2) of 
this section while they are working on exposed, energized parts, and
    (3) That the precautions taken when work is performed on the 
installation provide protection equivalent to the protection that

[[Page 785]]

would be provided by access and working space meeting ANSI C2-1987.

    (2) Draw-out-type circuit breakers. When draw-out-type circuit 
breakers are removed or inserted, the breaker shall be in the open 
position. The control circuit shall also be rendered inoperative, if the 
design of the equipment permits.
    (3) Substation fences. Conductive fences around substations shall be 
grounded. When a substation fence is expanded or a section is removed, 
fence grounding continuity shall be maintained, and bonding shall be 
used to prevent electrical discontinuity.
    (4) Guarding of rooms containing electric supply equipment. (i) 
Rooms and spaces in which electric supply lines or equipment are 
installed shall meet the requirements of paragraphs (u)(4)(ii) through 
(u)(4)(v) of this section under the following conditions:
    (A) If exposed live parts operating at 50 to 150 volts to ground are 
located within 8 feet of the ground or other working surface inside the 
room or space,
    (B) If live parts operating at 151 to 600 volts and located within 8 
feet of the ground or other working surface inside the room or space are 
guarded only by location, as permitted under paragraph (u)(5)(i) of this 
section, or
    (C) If live parts operating at more than 600 volts are located 
within the room or space, unless:
    (1) The live parts are enclosed within grounded, metal-enclosed 
equipment whose only openings are designed so that foreign objects 
inserted in these openings will be deflected from energized parts, or
    (2) The live parts are installed at a height above ground and any 
other working surface that provides protection at the voltage to which 
they are energized corresponding to the protection provided by an 8-foot 
height at 50 volts.
    (ii) The rooms and spaces shall be so enclosed within fences, 
screens, partitions, or walls as to minimize the possibility that 
unqualified persons will enter.
    (iii) Signs warning unqualified persons to keep out shall be 
displayed at entrances to the rooms and spaces.
    (iv) Entrances to rooms and spaces that are not under the 
observation of an attendant shall be kept locked.
    (v) Unqualified persons may not enter the rooms or spaces while the 
electric supply lines or equipment are energized.
    (5) Guarding of energized parts. (i) Guards shall be provided around 
all live parts operating at more than 150 volts to ground without an 
insulating covering, unless the location of the live parts gives 
sufficient horizontal or vertical or a combination of these clearances 
to minimize the possibility of accidental employee contact.

    Note: Guidelines for the dimensions of clearance distances about 
electric equipment in substations are contained in American National 
Standard--National Electrical Safety Code, ANSI C2-1987. Installations 
meeting the ANSI provisions comply with paragraph (u)(5)(i) of this 
section. An installation that does not conform to this ANSI standard 
will, nonetheless, be considered as complying with paragraph (u)(5)(i) 
of this section if the employer can demonstrate that the installation 
provides sufficient clearance based on the following evidence:
    (1) That the installation conforms to the edition of ANSI C2 that 
was in effect at the time the installation was made,
    (2) That each employee is isolated from energized parts at the point 
of closest approach, and
    (3) That the precautions taken when work is performed on the 
installation provide protection equivalent to the protection that would 
be provided by horizontal and vertical clearances meeting ANSI C2-1987.

    (ii) Except for fuse replacement and other necessary access by 
qualified persons, the guarding of energized parts within a compartment 
shall be maintained during operation and maintenance functions to 
prevent accidental contact with energized parts and to prevent tools or 
other equipment from being dropped on energized parts.
    (iii) When guards are removed from energized equipment, barriers 
shall be installed around the work area to prevent employees who are not 
working on the equipment, but who are in the area, from contacting the 
exposed live parts.
    (6) Substation entry. (i) Upon entering an attended substation, each 
employee other than those regularly working in the station shall report 
his or her presence to the employee in charge in order

[[Page 786]]

to receive information on special system conditions affecting employee 
safety.
    (ii) The job briefing required by paragraph (c) of this section 
shall cover such additional subjects as the location of energized 
equipment in or adjacent to the work area and the limits of any 
deenergized work area.
    (v) Power generation. This paragraph provides additional 
requirements and related work practices for power generating plants.
    (1) Interlocks and other safety devices. (i) Interlocks and other 
safety devices shall be maintained in a safe, operable condition.
    (ii) No interlock or other safety device may be modified to defeat 
its function, except for test, repair, or adjustment of the device.
    (2) Changing brushes. Before exciter or generator brushes are 
changed while the generator is in service, the exciter or generator 
field shall be checked to determine whether a ground condition exists. 
The brushes may not be changed while the generator is energized if a 
ground condition exists.
    (3) Access and working space. Sufficient access and working space 
shall be provided and maintained about electric equipment to permit 
ready and safe operation and maintenance of such equipment.

    Note: Guidelines for the dimensions of access and working space 
about electric equipment in generating stations are contained in 
American National Standard--National Electrical Safety Code, ANSI C2-
1987. Installations meeting the ANSI provisions comply with paragraph 
(v)(3) of this section. An installation that does not conform to this 
ANSI standard will, nonetheless, be considered as complying with 
paragraph (v)(3) of this section if the employer can demonstrate that 
the installation provides ready and safe access based on the following 
evidence:
    (1) That the installation conforms to the edition of ANSI C2 that 
was in effect at the time the installation was made,
    (2) That the configuration of the installation enables employees to 
maintain the minimum approach distances required by paragraph (l)(2) of 
this section while they are working on exposed, energized parts, and
    (3) That the precautions taken when are working is performed on the 
installation provide protection equivalent to the protection that would 
be provided by access and working space meeting ANSI C2-1987.

    (4) Guarding of rooms containing electric supply equipment. (i) 
Rooms and spaces in which electric supply lines or equipment are 
installed shall meet the requirements of paragraphs (v)(4)(ii) through 
(v)(4)(v) of this section under the following conditions:
    (A) If exposed live parts operating at 50 to 150 volts to ground are 
located within 8 feet of the ground or other working surface inside the 
room or space,
    (B) If live parts operating at 151 to 600 volts and located within 8 
feet of the ground or other working surface inside the room or space are 
guarded only by location, as permitted under paragraph (v)(5)(i) of this 
section, or
    (C) If live parts operating at more than 600 volts are located 
within the room or space, unless:
    (1) The live parts are enclosed within grounded, metal-enclosed 
equipment whose only openings are designed so that foreign objects 
inserted in these openings will be deflected from energized parts, or
    (2) The live parts are installed at a height above ground and any 
other working surface that provides protection at the voltage to which 
they are energized corresponding to the protection provided by an 8-foot 
height at 50 volts.
    (ii) The rooms and spaces shall be so enclosed within fences, 
screens, partitions, or walls as to minimize the possibility that 
unqualified persons will enter.
    (iii) Signs warning unqualified persons to keep out shall be 
displayed at entrances to the rooms and spaces.
    (iv) Entrances to rooms and spaces that are not under the 
observation of an attendant shall be kept locked.
    (v) Unqualified persons may not enter the rooms or spaces while the 
electric supply lines or equipment are energized.
    (5) Guarding of energized parts. (i) Guards shall be provided around 
all live parts operating at more than 150 volts to ground without an 
insulating covering, unless the location of the live parts gives 
sufficient horizontal or vertical or a combination of these clearances 
to minimize the possibility of accidental employee contact.


[[Page 787]]


    Note: Guidelines for the dimensions of clearance distances about 
electric equipment in generating stations are contained in American 
National Standard--National Electrical Safety Code, ANSI C2-1987. 
Installations meeting the ANSI provisions comply with paragraph 
(v)(5)(i) of this section. An installation that does not conform to this 
ANSI standard will, nonetheless, be considered as complying with 
paragraph (v)(5)(i) of this section if the employer can demonstrate that 
the installation provides sufficient clearance based on the following 
evidence:
    (1) That the installation conforms to the edition of ANSI C2 that 
was in effect at the time the installation was made,
    (2) That each employee is isolated from energized parts at the point 
of closest approach, and
    (3) That the precautions taken when work is performed on the 
installation provide protection equivalent to the protection that would 
be provided by horizontal and vertical clearances meeting ANSI C2-1987.

    (ii) Except for fuse replacement or other necessary access by 
qualified persons, the guarding of energized parts within a compartment 
shall be maintained during operation and maintenance functions to 
prevent accidental contact with energized parts and to prevent tools or 
other equipment from being dropped on energized parts.
    (iii) When guards are removed from energized equipment, barriers 
shall be installed around the work area to prevent employees who are not 
working on the equipment, but who are in the area, from contacting the 
exposed live parts.
    (6) Water or steam spaces. The following requirements apply to work 
in water and steam spaces associated with boilers:
    (i) A designated employee shall inspect conditions before work is 
permitted and after its completion. Eye protection, or full face 
protection if necessary, shall be worn at all times when condenser, 
heater, or boiler tubes are being cleaned.
    (ii) Where it is necessary for employees to work near tube ends 
during cleaning, shielding shall be installed at the tube ends.
    (7) Chemical cleaning of boilers and pressure vessels. The following 
requirements apply to chemical cleaning of boilers and pressure vessels:
    (i) Areas where chemical cleaning is in progress shall be cordoned 
off to restrict access during cleaning. If flammable liquids, gases, or 
vapors or combustible materials will be used or might be produced during 
the cleaning process, the following requirements also apply:
    (A) The area shall be posted with signs restricting entry and 
warning of the hazards of fire and explosion; and
    (B) Smoking, welding, and other possible ignition sources are 
prohibited in these restricted areas.
    (ii) The number of personnel in the restricted area shall be limited 
to those necessary to accomplish the task safely.
    (iii) There shall be ready access to water or showers for emergency 
use.

    Note: See Sec. 1910.141 of this part for requirements that apply to 
the water supply and to washing facilities.

    (iv) Employees in restricted areas shall wear protective equipment 
meeting the requirements of subpart I of this part and including, but 
not limited to, protective clothing, boots, goggles, and gloves.
    (8) Chlorine systems. (i) Chlorine system enclosures shall be posted 
with signs restricting entry and warning of the hazard to health and the 
hazards of fire and explosion.

    Note: See subpart Z of this part for requirements necessary to 
protect the health of employees from the effects of chlorine.

    (ii) Only designated employees may enter the restricted area. 
Additionally, the number of personnel shall be limited to those 
necessary to accomplish the task safely.
    (iii) Emergency repair kits shall be available near the shelter or 
enclosure to allow for the prompt repair of leaks in chlorine lines, 
equipment, or containers.
    (iv) Before repair procedures are started, chlorine tanks, pipes, 
and equipment shall be purged with dry air and isolated from other 
sources of chlorine.
    (v) The employer shall ensure that chlorine is not mixed with 
materials that would react with the chlorine in a dangerously exothermic 
or other hazardous manner.
    (9) Boilers. (i) Before internal furnace or ash hopper repair work 
is started, overhead areas shall be inspected for possible falling 
objects. If the hazard of

[[Page 788]]

falling objects exists, overhead protection such as planking or nets 
shall be provided.
    (ii) When opening an operating boiler door, employees shall stand 
clear of the opening of the door to avoid the heat blast and gases which 
may escape from the boiler.
    (10) Turbine generators. (i) Smoking and other ignition sources are 
prohibited near hydrogen or hydrogen sealing systems, and signs warning 
of the danger of explosion and fire shall be posted.
    (ii) Excessive hydrogen makeup or abnormal loss of pressure shall be 
considered as an emergency and shall be corrected immediately.
    (iii) A sufficient quantity of inert gas shall be available to purge 
the hydrogen from the largest generator.
    (11) Coal and ash handling. (i) Only designated persons may operate 
railroad equipment.
    (ii) Before a locomotive or locomotive crane is moved, a warning 
shall be given to employees in the area.
    (iii) Employees engaged in switching or dumping cars may not use 
their feet to line up drawheads.
    (iv) Drawheads and knuckles may not be shifted while locomotives or 
cars are in motion.
    (v) When a railroad car is stopped for unloading, the car shall be 
secured from displacement that could endanger employees.
    (vi) An emergency means of stopping dump operations shall be 
provided at railcar dumps.
    (vii) The employer shall ensure that employees who work in coal- or 
ash-handling conveyor areas are trained and knowledgeable in conveyor 
operation and in the requirements of paragraphs (v)(11)(viii) through 
(v)(11)(xii) of this section.
    (viii) Employees may not ride a coal- or ash-handling conveyor belt 
at any time. Employees may not cross over the conveyor belt, except at 
walkways, unless the conveyor's energy source has been deenergized and 
has been locked out or tagged in accordance with paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (ix) What could cause injury when started may not be started until 
personnel in the area are alerted by a signal or by a designated person 
that the conveyor is about to start.
    (x) If a conveyor that could cause injury when started is 
automatically controlled or is controlled from a remote location, an 
audible device shall be provided that sounds an alarm that will be 
recognized by each employee as a warning that the conveyor will start 
and that can be clearly heard at all points along the conveyor where 
personnel may be present. The warning device shall be actuated by the 
device starting the conveyor and shall continue for a period of time 
before the conveyor starts that is long enough to allow employees to 
move clear of the conveyor system. A visual warning may be used in place 
of the audible device if the employer can demonstrate that it will 
provide an equally effective warning in the particular circumstances 
involved.

    Exception: If the employer can demonstrate that the system's 
function would be seriously hindered by the required time delay, warning 
signs may be provided in place of the audible warning device. If the 
system was installed before January 31, 1995, warning signs may be 
provided in place of the audible warning device until such time as the 
conveyor or its control system is rebuilt or rewired. These warning 
signs shall be clear, concise, and legible and shall indicate that 
conveyors and allied equipment may be started at any time, that danger 
exists, and that personnel must keep clear. These warning signs shall be 
provided along the conveyor at areas not guarded by position or 
location.

    (xi) Remotely and automatically controlled conveyors, and conveyors 
that have operating stations which are not manned or which are beyond 
voice and visual contact from drive areas, loading areas, transfer 
points, and other locations on the conveyor path not guarded by 
location, position, or guards shall be furnished with emergency stop 
buttons, pull cords, limit switches, or similar emergency stop devices. 
However, if the employer can demonstrate that the design, function, and 
operation of the conveyor do not expose an employee to hazards, an 
emergency stop device is not required.

[[Page 789]]

    (A) Emergency stop devices shall be easily identifiable in the 
immediate vicinity of such locations.
    (B) An emergency stop device shall act directly on the control of 
the conveyor involved and may not depend on the stopping of any other 
equipment.
    (C) Emergency stop devices shall be installed so that they cannot be 
overridden from other locations.
    (xii) Where coal-handling operations may produce a combustible 
atmosphere from fuel sources or from flammable gases or dust, sources of 
ignition shall be eliminated or safely controlled to prevent ignition of 
the combustible atmosphere.

    Note: Locations that are hazardous because of the presence of 
combustible dust are classified as Class II hazardous locations. See 
Sec. 1910.307 of this part.

    (xiii) An employee may not work on or beneath overhanging coal in 
coal bunkers, coal silos, or coal storage areas, unless the employee is 
protected from all hazards posed by shifting coal.
    (xiv) An employee entering a bunker or silo to dislodge the contents 
shall wear a body harness with lifeline attached. The lifeline shall be 
secured to a fixed support outside the bunker and shall be attended at 
all times by an employee located outside the bunker or facility.
    (12) Hydroplants and equipment. Employees working on or close to 
water gates, valves, intakes, forebays, flumes, or other locations where 
increased or decreased water flow or levels may pose a significant 
hazard shall be warned and shall vacate such dangerous areas before 
water flow changes are made.
    (w) Special conditions--(1) Capacitors. The following additional 
requirements apply to work on capacitors and on lines connected to 
capacitors.

    Note: See paragraphs (m) and (n) of this section for requirements 
pertaining to the deenergizing and grounding of capacitor installations.

    (i) Before employees work on capacitors, the capacitors shall be 
disconnected from energized sources and, after a wait of at least 5 
minutes from the time of disconnection, short-circuited.
    (ii) Before the units are handled, each unit in series-parallel 
capacitor banks shall be short-circuited between all terminals and the 
capacitor case or its rack. If the cases of capacitors are on ungrounded 
substation racks, the racks shall be bonded to ground.
    (iii) Any line to which capacitors are connected shall be short-
circuited before it is considered deenergized.
    (2) Current transformer secondaries. The secondary of a current 
transformer may not be opened while the transformer is energized. If the 
primary of the current transformer cannot be deenergized before work is 
performed on an instrument, a relay, or other section of a current 
transformer secondary circuit, the circuit shall be bridged so that the 
current transformer secondary will not be opened.
    (3) Series streetlighting. (i) If the open-circuit voltage exceeds 
600 volts, the series streetlighting circuit shall be worked in 
accordance with paragraph (q) or (t) of this section, as appropriate.
    (ii) A series loop may only be opened after the streetlighting 
transformer has been deenergized and isolated from the source of supply 
or after the loop is bridged to avoid an open-circuit condition.
    (4) Illumination. Sufficient illumination shall be provided to 
enable the employee to perform the work safely.
    (5) Protection against drowning. (i) Whenever an employee may be 
pulled or pushed or may fall into water where the danger of drowning 
exists, the employee shall be provided with and shall use U.S. Coast 
Guard approved personal flotation devices.
    (ii) Each personal flotation device shall be maintained in safe 
condition and shall be inspected frequently enough to ensure that it 
does not have rot, mildew, water saturation, or any other condition that 
could render the device unsuitable for use.
    (iii) An employee may cross streams or other bodies of water only if 
a safe means of passage, such as a bridge, is provided.
    (6) Employee protection in public work areas. (i) Traffic control 
signs and traffic control devices used for the protection of employees 
shall meet the requirements of Sec. 1926.200(g)(2) of this chapter.
    (ii) Before work is begun in the vicinity of vehicular or pedestrian 
traffic

[[Page 790]]

that may endanger employees, warning signs or flags and other traffic 
control devices shall be placed in conspicuous locations to alert and 
channel approaching traffic.
    (iii) Where additional employee protection is necessary, barricades 
shall be used.
    (iv) Excavated areas shall be protected with barricades.
    (v) At night, warning lights shall be prominently displayed.
    (7) Backfeed. If there is a possibility of voltage backfeed from 
sources of cogeneration or from the secondary system (for example, 
backfeed from more than one energized phase feeding a common load), the 
requirements of paragraph (l) of this section apply if the lines or 
equipment are to be worked as energized, and the requirements of 
paragraphs (m) and (n) of this section apply if the lines or equipment 
are to be worked as deenergized.
    (8) Lasers. Laser equipment shall be installed, adjusted, and 
operated in accordance with Sec. 1926.54 of this chapter.
    (9) Hydraulic fluids. Hydraulic fluids used for the insulated 
sections of equipment shall provide insulation for the voltage involved.
    (x) Definitions.
    Affected employee. An employee whose job requires him or her to 
operate or use a machine or equipment on which servicing or maintenance 
is being performed under lockout or tagout, or whose job requires him or 
her to work in an area in which such servicing or maintenance is being 
performed.
    Attendant. An employee assigned to remain immediately outside the 
entrance to an enclosed or other space to render assistance as needed to 
employees inside the space.
    Authorized employee. An employee who locks out or tags out machines 
or equipment in order to perform servicing or maintenance on that 
machine or equipment. An affected employee becomes an authorized 
employee when that employee's duties include performing servicing or 
maintenance covered under this section.
    Automatic circuit recloser. A self-controlled device for 
interrupting and reclosing an alternating current circuit with a 
predetermined sequence of opening and reclosing followed by resetting, 
hold-closed, or lockout operation.
    Barricade. A physical obstruction such as tapes, cones, or A-frame 
type wood or metal structures intended to provide a warning about and to 
limit access to a hazardous area.
    Barrier. A physical obstruction which is intended to prevent contact 
with energized lines or equipment or to prevent unauthorized access to a 
work area.
    Bond. The electrical interconnection of conductive parts designed to 
maintain a common electrical potential.
    Bus. A conductor or a group of conductors that serve as a common 
connection for two or more circuits.
    Bushing. An insulating structure, including a through conductor or 
providing a passageway for such a conductor, with provision for mounting 
on a barrier, conducting or otherwise, for the purposes of insulating 
the conductor from the barrier and conducting current from one side of 
the barrier to the other.
    Cable. A conductor with insulation, or a stranded conductor with or 
without insulation and other coverings (single-conductor cable), or a 
combination of conductors insulated from one another (multiple-conductor 
cable).
    Cable sheath. A conductive protective covering applied to cables.

    Note: A cable sheath may consist of multiple layers of which one or 
more is conductive.

    Circuit. A conductor or system of conductors through which an 
electric current is intended to flow.
    Clearance (between objects). The clear distance between two objects 
measured surface to surface.
    Clearance (for work). Authorization to perform specified work or 
permission to enter a restricted area.
    Communication lines. (See Lines, communication.)
    Conductor. A material, usually in the form of a wire, cable, or bus 
bar, used for carrying an electric current.
    Covered conductor. A conductor covered with a dielectric having no 
rated insulating strength or having a rated insulating strength less 
than the voltage of the circuit in which the conductor is used.

[[Page 791]]

    Current-carrying part. A conducting part intended to be connected in 
an electric circuit to a source of voltage. Non-current-carrying parts 
are those not intended to be so connected.
    Deenergized. Free from any electrical connection to a source of 
potential difference and from electric charge; not having a potential 
different from that of the earth.

    Note: The term is used only with reference to current-carrying 
parts, which are sometimes energized (alive).

    Designated employee (designated person). An employee (or person) who 
is designated by the employer to perform specific duties under the terms 
of this section and who is knowledgeable in the construction and 
operation of the equipment and the hazards involved.
    Electric line truck. A truck used to transport personnel, tools, and 
material for electric supply line work.
    Electric supply equipment. Equipment that produces, modifies, 
regulates, controls, or safeguards a supply of electric energy.
    Electric supply lines. (See Lines, electric supply.)
    Electric utility. An organization responsible for the installation, 
operation, or maintenance of an electric supply system.
    Enclosed space. A working space, such as a manhole, vault, tunnel, 
or shaft, that has a limited means of egress or entry, that is designed 
for periodic employee entry under normal operating conditions, and that 
under normal conditions does not contain a hazardous atmosphere, but 
that may contain a hazardous atmosphere under abnormal conditions.

    Note: Spaces that are enclosed but not designed for employee entry 
under normal operating conditions are not considered to be enclosed 
spaces for the purposes of this section. Similarly, spaces that are 
enclosed and that are expected to contain a hazardous atmosphere are not 
considered to be enclosed spaces for the purposes of this section. Such 
spaces meet the definition of permit spaces in Sec. 1910.146 of this 
part, and entry into them must be performed in accordance with that 
standard.

    Energized (alive, live). Electrically connected to a source of 
potential difference, or electrically charged so as to have a potential 
significantly different from that of earth in the vicinity.
    Energy isolating device. A physical device that prevents the 
transmission or release of energy, including, but not limited to, the 
following: a manually operated electric circuit breaker, a disconnect 
switch, a manually operated switch, a slide gate, a slip blind, a line 
valve, blocks, and any similar device with a visible indication of the 
position of the device. (Push buttons, selector switches, and other 
control-circuit-type devices are not energy isolating devices.)
    Energy source. Any electrical, mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, 
chemical, nuclear, thermal, or other energy source that could cause 
injury to personnel.
    Equipment (electric). A general term including material, fittings, 
devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, and the like used as part of 
or in connection with an electrical installation.
    Exposed. Not isolated or guarded.
    Ground. A conducting connection, whether intentional or accidental, 
between an electric circuit or equipment and the earth, or to some 
conducting body that serves in place of the earth.
    Grounded. Connected to earth or to some conducting body that serves 
in place of the earth.
    Guarded. Covered, fenced, enclosed, or otherwise protected, by means 
of suitable covers or casings, barrier rails or screens, mats, or 
platforms, designed to minimize the possibility, under normal 
conditions, of dangerous approach or accidental contact by persons or 
objects.

    Note: Wires which are insulated, but not otherwise protected, are 
not considered as guarded.

    Hazardous atmosphere means an atmosphere that may expose employees 
to the risk of death, incapacitation, impairment of ability to self-
rescue (that is, escape unaided from an enclosed space), injury, or 
acute illness from one or more of the following causes:
    (1) Flammable gas, vapor, or mist in excess of 10 percent of its 
lower flammable limit (LFL);
    (2) Airborne combustible dust at a concentration that meets or 
exceeds its LFL;



[[Page 792]]


    Note: This concentration may be approximated as a condition in which 
the dust obscures vision at a distance of 5 feet (1.52 m) or less.

    (3) Atmospheric oxygen concentration below 19.5 percent or above 
23.5 percent;
    (4) Atmospheric concentration of any substance for which a dose or a 
permissible exposure limit is published in Subpart G, Occupational 
Health and Environmental Control, or in Subpart Z, Toxic and Hazardous 
Substances, of this part and which could result in employee exposure in 
excess of its dose or permissible exposure limit;

    Note: An atmospheric concentration of any substance that is not 
capable of causing death, incapacitation, impairment of ability to self-
rescue, injury, or acute illness due to its health effects is not 
covered by this provision.

    (5) Any other atmospheric condition that is immediately dangerous to 
life or health.

    Note: For air contaminants for which OSHA has not determined a dose 
or permissible exposure limit, other sources of information, such as 
Material Safety Data Sheets that comply with the Hazard Communication 
Standard, Sec. 1910.1200 of this part, published information, and 
internal documents can provide guidance in establishing acceptable 
atmospheric conditions.

    High-power tests. Tests in which fault currents, load currents, 
magnetizing currents, and line-dropping currents are used to test 
equipment, either at the equipment's rated voltage or at lower voltages.
    High-voltage tests. Tests in which voltages of approximately 1000 
volts are used as a practical minimum and in which the voltage source 
has sufficient energy to cause injury.
    High wind. A wind of such velocity that the following hazards would 
be present:
    (1) An employee would be exposed to being blown from elevated 
locations, or
    (2) An employee or material handling equipment could lose control of 
material being handled, or
    (3) An employee would be exposed to other hazards not controlled by 
the standard involved.

    Note: Winds exceeding 40 miles per hour (64.4 kilometers per hour), 
or 30 miles per hour (48.3 kilometers per hour) if material handling is 
involved, are normally considered as meeting this criteria unless 
precautions are taken to protect employees from the hazardous effects of 
the wind.

    Immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH) means any condition 
that poses an immediate or delayed threat to life or that would cause 
irreversible adverse health effects or that would interfere with an 
individual's ability to escape unaided from a permit space.

    Note: Some materials--hydrogen fluoride gas and cadmium vapor, for 
example--may produce immediate transient effects that, even if severe, 
may pass without medical attention, but are followed by sudden, possibly 
fatal collapse 12-72 hours after exposure. The victim ``feels normal'' 
from recovery from transient effects until collapse. Such materials in 
hazardous quantities are considered to be ``immediately'' dangerous to 
life or health.

    Insulated. Separated from other conducting surfaces by a dielectric 
(including air space) offering a high resistance to the passage of 
current.

    Note: When any object is said to be insulated, it is understood to 
be insulated for the conditions to which it is normally subjected. 
Otherwise, it is, within the purpose of this section, uninsulated.

    Insulation (cable). That which is relied upon to insulate the 
conductor from other conductors or conducting parts or from ground.
    Line-clearance tree trimmer. An employee who, through related 
training or on-the-job experience or both, is familiar with the special 
techniques and hazards involved in line-clearance tree trimming.

    Note 1: An employee who is regularly assigned to a line-clearance 
tree-trimming crew and who is undergoing on-the-job training and who, in 
the course of such training, has demonstrated an ability to perform 
duties safely at his or her level of training and who is under the 
direct supervision of a line-clearance tree trimmer is considered to be 
a line-clearance tree trimmer for the performance of those duties.

    Note 2: A line-clearance tree trimmer is not considered to be a 
``qualified employee'' under this section unless he or she has the 
training required for a qualified employee under paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of 
this section. However, under the electrical safety-related work 
practices standard in subpart S of this

[[Page 793]]

part, a line-clearance tree trimmer is considered to be a ``qualified 
employee''. Tree trimming performed by such ``qualified employees'' is 
not subject to the electrical safety-related work practice requirements 
contained in Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.335 of this part. (See also the 
note following Sec. 1910.332(b)(3) of this part for information 
regarding the training an employee must have to be considered a 
qualified employee under Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.335 of this part.)

    Line-clearance tree trimming. The pruning, trimming, repairing, 
maintaining, removing, or clearing of trees or the cutting of brush that 
is within 10 feet (305 cm) of electric supply lines and equipment.
    Lines--(1) Communication lines. The conductors and their supporting 
or containing structures which are used for public or private signal or 
communication service, and which operate at potentials not exceeding 400 
volts to ground or 750 volts between any two points of the circuit, and 
the transmitted power of which does not exceed 150 watts. If the lines 
are operating at less than 150 volts, no limit is placed on the 
transmitted power of the system. Under certain conditions, communication 
cables may include communication circuits exceeding these limitations 
where such circuits are also used to supply power solely to 
communication equipment.

    Note: Telephone, telegraph, railroad signal, data, clock, fire, 
police alarm, cable television, and other systems conforming to this 
definition are included. Lines used for signaling purposes, but not 
included under this definition, are considered as electric supply lines 
of the same voltage.

    (2) Electric supply lines. Conductors used to transmit electric 
energy and their necessary supporting or containing structures. Signal 
lines of more than 400 volts are always supply lines within this 
section, and those of less than 400 volts are considered as supply 
lines, if so run and operated throughout.
    Manhole. A subsurface enclosure which personnel may enter and which 
is used for the purpose of installing, operating, and maintaining 
submersible equipment or cable.
    Manhole steps. A series of steps individually attached to or set 
into the walls of a manhole structure.
    Minimum approach distance. The closest distance an employee is 
permitted to approach an energized or a grounded object.
    Qualified employee (qualified person). One knowledgeable in the 
construction and operation of the electric power generation, 
transmission, and distribution equipment involved, along with the 
associated hazards.

    Note 1: An employee must have the training required by paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) of this section in order to be considered a qualified 
employee.

    Note 2: Except under paragraph (g)(2)(v) of this section, an 
employee who is undergoing on-the-job training and who, in the course of 
such training, has demonstrated an ability to perform duties safely at 
his or her level of training and who is under the direct supervision of 
a qualified person is considered to be a qualified person for the 
performance of those duties.

    Step bolt. A bolt or rung attached at intervals along a structural 
member and used for foot placement during climbing or standing.
    Switch. A device for opening and closing or for changing the 
connection of a circuit. In this section, a switch is understood to be 
manually operable, unless otherwise stated.
    System operator. A qualified person designated to operate the system 
or its parts.
    Vault. An enclosure, above or below ground, which personnel may 
enter and which is used for the purpose of installing, operating, or 
maintaining equipment or cable.
    Vented vault. A vault that has provision for air changes using 
exhaust flue stacks and low level air intakes operating on differentials 
of pressure and temperature providing for airflow which precludes a 
hazardous atmosphere from developing.
    Voltage. The effective (rms) potential difference between any two 
conductors or between a conductor and ground. Voltages are expressed in 
nominal values unless otherwise indicated. The nominal voltage of a 
system or circuit is the value assigned to a system or circuit of a 
given voltage class for the purpose of convenient designation. The 
operating voltage of the system may vary above or below this value.

[[Page 794]]

                Appendix A to Sec. 1910.269--Flow Charts

    This appendix presents information, in the form of flow charts, that 
illustrates the scope and application of Sec. 1910.269. This appendix 
addresses the interface between Sec. 1910.269 and subpart S of this part 
(Electrical), between Sec. 1910.269 and Sec. 1910.146 of this part 
(Permit-required confined spaces), and between Sec. 1910.269 and 
Sec. 1910.147 of this part (The control of hazardous energy (lockout/
tagout)). These flow charts provide guidance for employers trying to 
implement the requirements of Sec. 1910.269 in combination with other 
General Industry Standards contained in part 1910.


[[Page 795]]



Appendix A-1 to Sec. 1910.269--Application of Sec. 1910.269 and Subpart 
               S of This Part to Electrical Installations.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.002


[[Page 796]]



Appendix A-2 to Sec. 1910.269--Application of Sec. 1910.269 and Subpart 
       S of This Part to Electrical Safety-Related Work Practices.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.003


  Table 1.--Electrical Safety-Related Work Practices in Sec.  1910.269
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Compliance with subpart S is
 considered as compliance with Sec.  Paragraphs that apply regardless of
            1910.269 \1\                  compliance with subpart S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(d), electric shock hazards only...  (a)(2) \2\ and (a)(3) \2\.
(h)(3).............................  (b) \2\.

[[Page 797]]

(i)(2).............................  (c) \2\.
(k)................................  (d), other than electric shock
                                      hazards.
(l)(1) through (l)(4), (l)(6)(i),    (e).
 and (l)(8) through (l)(10).
(m)................................  (f).
(p)(4).............................  (g).
(s)(2).............................  (h)(1) and (h)(2).
(u)(1) and (u)(3) through (u)(5)...  (i)(3) \2\ and (i)(4) \2\.
(v)(3) through (v)(5)..............  (j) \2\.
(w)(1) and (w)(7)..................  (l)(5) \2\, (l)(6)(ii) \2\,
                                      (l)(6)(iii) \2\, and (l)(7) \2\.
                                     (n) \2\.
                                     (o) \2\.
                                     (p)(1) through (p)(3).
                                     (q) \2\.
                                     (r) \2\.
                                     (s)(1).
                                     (t) \2\.
                                     (u)(2) \2\ and (u)(6) \2\.
                                     (v)(1), (v)(2) \2\, and (v)(6)
                                      through (v)(12).
                                     (w)(2) through (w)(6) \2\, (w)(8),
                                      and (w)(9) \2\.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ If the electrical installation meets the requirements of Secs.
  1910.303 through 1910.308 of this part, then the electrical
  installation and any associated electrical safety-related work
  practices conforming to Secs.  1910.332 through 1910.335 of this part
  are considered to comply with these provisions of Sec.  1910.269 of
  this part.
\2\ These provisions include electrical safety requirements that must be
  met regardless of compliance with subpart S of this part.


[[Page 798]]

Appendix A-3 to Sec. 1910.269--Application of Sec. 1910.269 and Subpart 
               S of This Part to Tree-Trimming Operations.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.004


[[Page 799]]



 Appendix A-4 to Sec. 1910.269--Application of Secs. 1910.147, 1910.269 
  and 1910.333 to Hazardous Energy Control Procedures (Lockout/Tagout).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.005


[[Page 800]]



    Appendix A-5 to Sec. 1910.269--Application of Secs. 1910.146 and 
              1910.269 to Permit-Required Confined Spaces.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.006


[[Page 801]]



     Appendix B to Sec. 1910.269--Working on Exposed Energized Parts

                             I. Introduction

    Electric transmission and distribution line installations have been 
designed to meet National Electrical Safety Code (NESC), ANSI C2, 
requirements and to provide the level of line outage performance 
required by system reliability criteria. Transmission and distribution 
lines are also designed to withstand the maximum overvoltages expected 
to be impressed on the system. Such overvoltages can be caused by such 
conditions as switching surges, faults, or lightning. Insulator design 
and lengths and the clearances to structural parts (which, for low 
voltage through extra-high voltage, or EHV, facilities, are generally 
based on the performance of the line as a result of contamination of the 
insulation or during storms) have, over the years, come closer to the 
minimum approach distances used by workers (which are generally based on 
non-storm conditions). Thus, as minimum approach (working) distances and 
structural distances (clearances) converge, it is increasingly important 
that basic considerations for establishing safe approach distances for 
performing work be understood by the designers and the operating and 
maintenance personnel involved.
    The information in this appendix will assist employers in complying 
with the minimum approach distance requirements contained in paragraphs 
(l)(2) and (q)(3) of this section. The technical criteria and 
methodology presented herein is mandatory for employers using reduced 
minimum approach distances as permitted in Table R-7 and Table R-8. This 
appendix is intended to provide essential background information and 
technical criteria for the development or modification, if possible, of 
the safe minimum approach distances for electric transmission and 
distribution live-line work. The development of these safe distances 
must be undertaken by persons knowledgeable in the techniques discussed 
in this appendix and competent in the field of electric transmission and 
distribution system design.

                               II. General

                             A. Definitions

    The following definitions from Sec. 1910.269(x) relate to work on or 
near transmission and distribution lines and equipment and the 
electrical hazards they present.
    Exposed. Not isolated or guarded.
    Guarded. Covered, fenced, enclosed, or otherwise protected, by means 
of suitable covers or casings, barrier rails or screens, mats, or 
platforms, designed to minimize the possibility, under normal 
conditions, of dangerous approach or accidental contact by persons or 
objects.

    Note: Wires which are insulated, but not otherwise protected, are 
not considered as guarded.

    Insulated. Separated from other conducting surfaces by a dielectric 
(including air space) offering a high resistance to the passage of 
current.

    Note: When any object is said to be insulated, it is understood to 
be insulated for the conditions to which it is normally subjected. 
Otherwise, it is, within the purpose of this section, uninsulated.

              B. Installations Energized at 50 to 300 Volts

    The hazards posed by installations energized at 50 to 300 volts are 
the same as those found in many other workplaces. That is not to say 
that there is no hazard, but the complexity of electrical protection 
required does not compare to that required for high voltage systems. The 
employee must avoid contact with the exposed parts, and the protective 
equipment used (such as rubber insulating gloves) must provide 
insulation for the voltages involved.

              C. Exposed Energized Parts Over 300 Volts AC

    Table R-6, Table R-7, and Table R-8 of Sec. 1910.269 provide safe 
approach and working distances in the vicinity of energized electric 
apparatus so that work can be done safely without risk of electrical 
flashover.
    The working distances must withstand the maximum transient 
overvoltage that can reach the work site under the working conditions 
and practices in use. Normal system design may provide or include a 
means to control transient overvoltages, or temporary devices may be 
employed to achieve the same result. The use of technically correct 
practices or procedures to control overvoltages (for example, portable 
gaps or preventing the automatic control from initiating breaker 
reclosing) enables line design and operation to be based on reduced 
transient overvoltage values. Technical information for U.S. electrical 
systems indicates that current design provides for the following maximum 
transient overvoltage values (usually produced by switching surges): 362 
kV and less--3.0 per unit; 552 kV--2.4 per unit; 800 kV--2.0 per unit.
    Additional discussion of maximum transient overvoltages can be found 
in paragraph IV.A.2, later in this appendix.

[[Page 802]]

   III. Determination of the Electrical Component of Minimum Approach 
                                Distances

                    A. Voltages of 1.1 kV to 72.5 kV

    For voltages of 1.1 kV to 72.5 kV, the electrical component of 
minimum approach distances is based on American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI)/American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE) 
Standard No.4, March 1943, Tables III and IV. (AIEE is the predecessor 
technical society to the Institute of Electrical and Electronic 
Engineers (IEEE).) These distances are calculated by the following 
formula:

             Equation (1)--For voltages of 1.1 kV to 72.5 kV
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.010

Where:

D=Electrical component of the minimum approach distance in air in feet
V<INF>max</INF>=Maximum rated line-to-ground rms voltage in kV
pu=Maximum transient overvoltage factor in per unit

    Source: AIEE Standard No. 4, 1943.
    This formula has been used to generate Table 1.

 Table 1.--AC Energized Line-Work Phase-to-Ground Electrical Component of the Minimum Approach Distance--1.1 to
                                                     72.5 kV
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Phase to phase voltage
     Maximum anticipated per-unit transient overvoltage      ---------------------------------------------------
                                                                 15,000       36,000       46,000       72,500
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.0.........................................................         0.08         0.33         0.49         1.03
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: The distances given (in feet) are for air as the insulating medium and provide no additional clearance for
  inadvertent movement.

                    B. Voltages of 72.6 kV to 800 kV

    For voltages of 72.6 kV to 800 kV, the electrical component of 
minimum approach distances is based on ANSI/IEEE Standard 516-1987, 
``IEEE Guide for Maintenance Methods on Energized Power Lines.'' This 
standard gives the electrical component of the minimum approach distance 
based on power frequency rod-gap data, supplemented with transient 
overvoltage information and a saturation factor for high voltages. The 
distances listed in ANSI/IEEE Standard 516 have been calculated 
according to the following formula:

             Equation (2)--For voltages of 72.6 kV to 800 kV

                        D=(C+a)puV<INF>max</INF>

Where:

D=Electrical component of the minimum approach distance in air in feet
C=0.01 to take care of correction factors associated with the variation 
          of gap sparkover with voltage
a=A factor relating to the saturation of air at voltages of 345 kV or 
          higher
pu=Maximum anticipated transient overvoltage, in per unit (p.u.)
V<INF>max</INF>=Maximum rms system line-to-ground voltage in kilovolts--
          it should be the ``actual'' maximum, or the normal highest 
          voltage for the range (for example, 10 percent above the 
          nominal voltage)

    Source: Formula developed from ANSI/IEEE Standard No. 516, 1987.
    This formula is used to calculate the electrical component of the 
minimum approach distances in air and is used in the development of 
Table 2 and Table 3.

  Table 2.--AC Energized Line-Work Phase-to-Ground Electrical Component of the Minimum Approach Distance--121to
                                                     242 kV
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Phase to phase voltage
     Maximum anticipated per-unit transient overvoltage      ---------------------------------------------------
                                                                121,000      145,000      169,000      242,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.0.........................................................         1.40         1.70         2.00         2.80
2.1.........................................................         1.47         1.79         2.10         2.94
2.2.........................................................         1.54         1.87         2.20         3.08
2.3.........................................................         1.61         1.96         2.30         3.22
2.4.........................................................         1.68         2.04         2.40         3.35
2.5.........................................................         1.75         2.13         2.50         3.50
2.6.........................................................         1.82         2.21         2.60         3.64
2.7.........................................................         1.89         2.30         2.70         3.76
2.8.........................................................         1.96         2.38         2.80         3.92
2.9.........................................................         2.03         2.47         2.90         4.05

[[Page 803]]

3.0.........................................................         2.10         2.55         3.00         4.29
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: The distances given (in feet) are for air as the insulating medium and provide no additional clearance for
  inadvertent movement.


 Table 3.--AC Energized Line-Work Phase-to-Ground Electrical Component of the Minimum Approach Distance--362 to
                                                     800 kv
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                              Phase to phase voltage
       Maximum anticipated per-unit transient overvoltage        -----------------------------------------------
                                                                      362,000         552,000         800,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.5.............................................................  ..............            4.97            8.66
1.6.............................................................  ..............            5.46            9.60
1.7.............................................................  ..............            5.98           10.60
1.8.............................................................  ..............            6.51           11.64
1.9.............................................................  ..............            7.08           12.73
2.0.............................................................            4.20            7.68           13.86
2.1.............................................................            4.41            8.27  ..............
2.2.............................................................            4.70            8.87  ..............
2.3.............................................................            5.01            9.49  ..............
2.4.............................................................            5.34           10.21  ..............
2.5.............................................................            5.67  ..............  ..............
2.6.............................................................            6.01  ..............  ..............
2.7.............................................................            6.36  ..............  ..............
2.8.............................................................            6.73  ..............  ..............
2.9.............................................................            7.10  ..............  ..............
3.0.............................................................            7.48  ..............  ..............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: The distances given (in feet) are for air as the insulating medium and provide no additional clearance for
  inadvertent movement.

                 C. Provisions for Inadvertent Movement

    The minimum approach distances (working distances) must include an 
``adder'' to compensate for the inadvertent movement of the worker 
relative to an energized part or the movement of the part relative to 
the worker. A certain allowance must be made to account for this 
possible inadvertent movement and to provide the worker with a 
comfortable and safe zone in which to work. A distance for inadvertent 
movement (called the ``ergonomic component of the minimum approach 
distance'') must be added to the electrical component to determine the 
total safe minimum approach distances used in live-line work.
    One approach that can be used to estimate the ergonomic component of 
the minimum approach distance is response time-distance analysis. When 
this technique is used, the total response time to a hazardous incident 
is estimated and converted to distance travelled. For example, the 
driver of a car takes a given amount of time to respond to a 
``stimulus'' and stop the vehicle. The elapsed time involved results in 
a distance being travelled before the car comes to a complete stop. This 
distance is dependent on the speed of the car at the time the stimulus 
appears.
    In the case of live-line work, the employee must first perceive that 
he or she is approaching the danger zone. Then, the worker responds to 
the danger and must decelerate and stop all motion toward the energized 
part. During the time it takes to stop, a distance will have been 
traversed. It is this distance that must be added to the electrical 
component of the minimum approach distance to obtain the total safe 
minimum approach distance.
    At voltages below 72.5 kV, the electrical component of the minimum 
approach distance is smaller than the ergonomic component. At 72.5 kV 
the electrical component is only a little more than 1 foot. An ergonomic 
component of the minimum approach distance is needed that will provide 
for all the worker's unexpected movements. The usual live-line work 
method for these voltages is the use of rubber insulating equipment, 
frequently rubber gloves. The energized object needs to be far enough 
away to provide the worker's face with a safe approach distance, as his 
or her hands and arms are insulated. In this case, 2 feet has been 
accepted as a sufficient and practical value.
    For voltages between 72.6 and 800 kV, there is a change in the work 
practices employed during energized line work. Generally, live-line 
tools (hot sticks) are employed to perform work while equipment is 
energized. These tools, by design, keep the energized

[[Page 804]]

part at a constant distance from the employee and thus maintain the 
appropriate minimum approach distance automatically.
    The length of the ergonomic component of the minimum approach 
distance is also influenced by the location of the worker and by the 
nature of the work. In these higher voltage ranges, the employees use 
work methods that more tightly control their movements than when the 
workers perform rubber glove work. The worker is farther from energized 
line or equipment and needs to be more precise in his or her movements 
just to perform the work.
    For these reasons, a smaller ergonomic component of the minimum 
approach distance is needed, and a distance of 1 foot has been selected 
for voltages between 72.6 and 800 kV.
    Table 4 summarizes the ergonomic component of the minimum approach 
distance for the two voltage ranges.

       Table 4.--Ergonomic Component of Minimum Approach Distance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Distance
                      Voltage range (kV)                         (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.1 to 72.5..................................................        2.0
72.6 to 800..................................................       1.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: This distance must be added to the electrical component of the
  minimum approach distance to obtain the full minimum approach
  distance.

            D. Bare-Hand Live-Line Minimum Approach Distances

    Calculating the strength of phase-to-phase transient overvoltages is 
complicated by the varying time displacement between overvoltages on 
parallel conductors (electrodes) and by the varying ratio between the 
positive and negative voltages on the two electrodes. The time 
displacement causes the maximum voltage between phases to be less than 
the sum of the phase-to-ground voltages. The International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Technical Committee 28, Working Group 
2, has developed the following formula for determining the phase-to-
phase maximum transient overvoltage, based on the per unit (p.u.) of the 
system nominal voltage phase-to-ground crest:

pu<INF>p</INF>=pu<INF>g</INF>+1.6.

Where:

pu<INF>g</INF>=p.u. phase-to-ground maximum transient overvoltage
pu<INF>p</INF>=p.u. phase-to-phase maximum transient overvoltage

    This value of maximum anticipated transient overvoltage must be used 
in Equation (2) to calculate the phase-to-phase minimum approach 
distances for live-line bare-hand work.

            E. Compiling the Minimum Approach Distance Tables

    For each voltage involved, the distance in Table 4 in this appendix 
has been added to the distance in Table 1, Table 2 or Table 3 in this 
appendix to determine the resulting minimum approach distances in Table 
R-6, Table R-7, and Table R-8 in Sec. 1910.269.

                   F. Miscellaneous Correction Factors

    The strength of an air gap is influenced by the changes in the air 
medium that forms the insulation. A brief discussion of each factor 
follows, with a summary at the end.
    1. Dielectric strength of air. The dielectric strength of air in a 
uniform electric field at standard atmospheric conditions is 
approximately 31 kV (crest) per cm at 60 Hz. The disruptive gradient is 
affected by the air pressure, temperature, and humidity, by the shape, 
dimensions, and separation of the electrodes, and by the characteristics 
of the applied voltage (wave shape).
    2. Atmospheric effect. Flashover for a given air gap is inhibited by 
an increase in the density (humidity) of the air. The empirically 
determined electrical strength of a given gap is normally applicable at 
standard atmospheric conditions (20 deg.C, 101.3 kPa, 11 g/cm3 
humidity).
    The combination of temperature and air pressure that gives the 
lowest gap flashover voltage is high temperature and low pressure. These 
are conditions not likely to occur simultaneously. Low air pressure is 
generally associated with high humidity, and this causes increased 
electrical strength. An average air pressure is more likely to be 
associated with low humidity. Hot and dry working conditions are thus 
normally associated with reduced electrical strength.
    The electrical component of the minimum approach distances in Table 
1, Table 2, and Table 3 has been calculated using the maximum transient 
overvoltages to determine withstand voltages at standard atmospheric 
conditions.
    3. Altitude. The electrical strength of an air gap is reduced at 
high altitude, due principally to the reduced air pressure. An increase 
of about 3 percent per 300 meters in the minimum approach distance for 
altitudes above 900 meters is required. Table R-10 of Sec. 1910.269 
presents this information in tabular form.
    Summary. After taking all these correction factors into account and 
after considering their interrelationships relative to the air gap 
insulation strength and the conditions under which live work is 
performed, one finds that only a correction for altitude need be made. 
An elevation of 900 meters is established as the base elevation, and the 
values of the electrical component of the minimum approach distances has 
been derived with

[[Page 805]]

this correction factor in mind. Thus, the values used for elevations 
below 900 meters are conservative without any change; corrections have 
to be made only above this base elevation.

         IV. Determination of Reduced Minimum Approach Distances

          A. Factors Affecting Voltage Stress at the Work Site

    1. System voltage (nominal). The nominal system voltage range sets 
the absolute lower limit for the minimum approach distance. The highest 
value within the range, as given in the relevant table, is selected and 
used as a reference for per unit calculations.
    2. Transient overvoltages. Transient overvoltages may be generated 
on an electrical system by the operation of switches or breakers, by the 
occurrence of a fault on the line or circuit being worked or on an 
adjacent circuit, and by similar activities. Most of the overvoltages 
are caused by switching, and the term ``switching surge'' is often used 
to refer generically to all types of overvoltages. However, each 
overvoltage has an associated transient voltage wave shape. The wave 
shape arriving at the site and its magnitude vary considerably.
    The information used in the development of the minimum approach 
distances takes into consideration the most common wave shapes; thus, 
the required minimum approach distances are appropriate for any 
transient overvoltage level usually found on electric power generation, 
transmission, and distribution systems. The values of the per unit 
(p.u.) voltage relative to the nominal maximum voltage are used in the 
calculation of these distances.
    3. Typical magnitude of overvoltages. The magnitude of typical 
transient overvoltages is given in Table 5.
    4. Standard deviation--air-gap withstand. For each air gap length, 
and under the same atmospheric conditions, there is a statistical 
variation in the breakdown voltage. The probability of the breakdown 
voltage is assumed to have a normal (Gaussian) distribution. The 
standard deviation of this distribution varies with the wave shape, gap 
geometry, and atmospheric conditions. The withstand voltage of the air 
gap used in calculating the electrical component of the minimum approach 
distance has been set at three standard deviations (3<greek-s> \1\) 
below the critical flashover voltage. (The critical flashover voltage is 
the crest value of the impulse wave that, under specified conditions, 
causes flashover on 50 percent of the applications. An impulse wave of 
three standard deviations below this value, that is, the withstand 
voltage, has a probability of flashover of approximately 1 in 1000.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Sigma, <greek-s>, is the symbol for standard deviation.

          Table 5.--Magnitude of Typical Transient Overvoltages
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Magnitude
                            Cause                                 (per
                                                                 unit)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energized 200 mile line without closing resistors............        3.5
Energized 200 mile line with one step closing resistor.......        2.1
Energized 200 mile line with multi-step resistor.............        2.5
Reclosed with trapped charge one step resistor...............        2.2
Opening surge with single restrike...........................        3.0
Fault initiation unfaulted phase.............................        2.1
Fault initiation adjacent circuit............................        2.5
Fault clearing...............................................   1.7-1.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: ANSI/IEEE Standard No. 516, 1987.

    5. Broken Insulators. Tests have shown that the insulation strength 
of an insulator string with broken skirts is reduced. Broken units may 
have lost up to 70% of their withstand capacity. Because the insulating 
capability of a broken unit cannot be determined without testing it, 
damaged units in an insulator are usually considered to have no 
insulating value. Additionally, the overall insulating strength of a 
string with broken units may be further reduced in the presence of a 
live-line tool alongside it. The number of good units that must be 
present in a string is based on the maximum overvoltage possible at the 
worksite.

  B. Minimum Approach Distances Based on Known Maximum Anticipated Per-
                       Unit Transient Overvoltages

    1. Reduction of the minimum approach distance for AC systems. When 
the transient overvoltage values are known and supplied by the employer, 
Table R-7 and Table R-8 of Sec. 1910.269 allow the minimum approach 
distances from energized parts to be reduced. In order to determine what 
this maximum overvoltage is, the employer must undertake an engineering 
analysis of the system. As a result of this engineering study, the 
employer must provide new live work procedures, reflecting the new 
minimum approach distances, the conditions and limitations of 
application of the new minimum approach distances, and the specific 
practices to be used when these procedures are implemented.
    2. Calculation of reduced approach distance values. The following 
method of calculating reduced minimum approach distances is based on 
ANSI/IEEE Standard 516:
    Step 1. Determine the maximum voltage (with respect to a given 
nominal voltage range) for the energized part.
    Step 2. Determine the maximum transient overvoltage (normally a 
switching surge) that can be present at the work site during work 
operation.

[[Page 806]]

    Step 3. Determine the technique to be used to control the maximum 
transient overvoltage. (See paragraphs IV.C and IV.D of this appendix.) 
Determine the maximum voltage that can exist at the work site with that 
form of control in place and with a confidence level of 3<greek-s>. This 
voltage is considered to be the withstand voltage for the purpose of 
calculating the appropriate minimum approach distance.
    Step 4. Specify in detail the control technique to be used, and 
direct its implementation during the course of the work.
    Step 5. Using the new value of transient overvoltage in per unit 
(p.u.), determine the required phase-to-ground minimum approach distance 
from Table R-7 or Table R-8 of Sec. 1910.269.

C. Methods of Controlling Possible Transient Overvoltage Stress Found on 
                                a System

    1. Introduction. There are several means of controlling overvoltages 
that occur on transmission systems. First, the operation of circuit 
breakers or other switching devices may be modified to reduce switching 
transient overvoltages. Second, the overvoltage itself may be forcibly 
held to an acceptable level by means of installation of surge arresters 
at the specific location to be protected. Third, the transmission system 
may be changed to minimize the effect of switching operations.
    2. Operation of circuit breakers.\2\ The maximum transient 
overvoltage that can reach the work site is often due to switching on 
the line on which work is being performed. If the automatic-reclosing is 
removed during energized line work so that the line will not be re-
energized after being opened for any reason, the maximum switching surge 
overvoltage is then limited to the larger of the opening surge or the 
greatest possible fault-generated surge, provided that the devices (for 
example, insertion resistors) are operable and will function to limit 
the transient overvoltage. It is essential that the operating ability of 
such devices be assured when they are employed to limit the overvoltage 
level. If it is prudent not to remove the reclosing feature (because of 
system operating conditions), other methods of controlling the switching 
surge level may be necessary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\  The detailed design of a circuit interrupter, such as the 
design of the contacts, of resistor insertion, and of breaker timing 
control, are beyond the scope of this appendix. These features are 
routinely provided as part of the design for the system. Only features 
that can limit the maximum switching transient overvoltage on a system 
are discussed in this appendix.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Transient surges on an adjacent line, particularly for double 
circuit construction, may cause a significant overvoltage on the line on 
which work is being performed. The coupling to adjacent lines must be 
accounted for when minimum approach distances are calculated based on 
the maximum transient overvoltage.
    3. Surge arresters. The use of modern surge arresters has permitted 
a reduction in the basic impulse-insulation levels of much transmission 
system equipment. The primary function of early arresters was to protect 
the system insulation from the effects of lightning. Modern arresters 
not only dissipate lightning-caused transients, but may also control 
many other system transients that may be caused by switching or faults.
    It is possible to use properly designed arresters to control 
transient overvoltages along a transmission line and thereby reduce the 
requisite length of the insulator string. On the other hand, if the 
installation of arresters has not been used to reduce the length of the 
insulator string, it may be used to reduce the minimum approach distance 
instead.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\  Surge arrestor application is beyond the scope of this 
appendix. However, if the arrester is installed near the work site, the 
application would be similar to protective gaps as discussed in 
paragraph IV.D. of this appendix.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    4. Switching Restrictions. Another form of overvoltage control is 
the establishment of switching restrictions, under which breakers are 
not permitted to be operated until certain system conditions are 
satisfied. Restriction of switching is achieved by the use of a tagging 
system, similar to that used for a ``permit'', except that the common 
term used for this activity is a ``hold-off'' or ``restriction''. These 
terms are used to indicate that operation is not prevented, but only 
modified during the live-work activity.

    D. Minimum Approach Distance Based on Control of Voltage Stress 
                    (Overvoltages) at the Work Site.

    Reduced minimum approach distances can be calculated as follows:
    1. First Method--Determining the reduced minimum approach distance 
from a given withstand voltage.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\  Since a given rod gap of a given configuration corresponds to a 
certain withstand voltage, this method can also be used to determine the 
minimum approach distance for a known gap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Step 1. Select the appropriate withstand voltage for the protective 
gap based on system requirements and an acceptable probability of actual 
gap flashover.

[[Page 807]]

    Step 2. Determine a gap distance that provides a withstand voltage 
\5\ greater than or equal to the one selected in the first step.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \5\  The withstand voltage for the gap is equal to 85 percent of its 
critical flashover voltage.
    \6\  Switch steps 1 and 2 if the length of the protective gap is 
known. The withstand voltage must then be checked to ensure that it 
provides an acceptable probability of gap flashover. In general, it 
should be at least 1.25 times the maximum crest operating voltage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Step 3. Using 110 percent of the gap's critical flashover voltage, 
determine the electrical component of the minimum approach distance from 
Equation (2) or Table 6, which is a tabulation of distance vs. withstand 
voltage based on Equation (2).
    Step 4. Add the 1-foot ergonomic component to obtain the total 
minimum approach distance to be maintained by the employee.
    2. Second Method--Determining the necessary protective gap length 
from a desired (reduced) minimum approach distance.
    Step 1. Determine the desired minimum approach distance for the 
employee. Subtract the 1-foot ergonomic component of the minimum 
approach distance.
    Step 2. Using this distance, calculate the air gap withstand voltage 
from Equation (2). Alternatively, find the voltage corresponding to the 
distance in Table 6.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \7\  Since the value of the saturation factor, a, in Equation (2) is 
dependent on the maximum voltage, several iterative computations may be 
necessary to determine the correct withstand voltage using the equation. 
A graph of withstand voltage vs. distance is given in ANSI/IEEE Std. 
516, 1987. This graph could also be used to determine the appropriate 
withstand voltage for the minimum approach distance involved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Step 3. Select a protective gap distance corresponding to a critical 
flashover voltage that, when multiplied by 110 percent, is less than or 
equal to the withstand voltage from Step 2.
    Step 4. Calculate the withstand voltage of the protective gap (85 
percent of the critical flashover voltage) to ensure that it provides an 
acceptable risk of flashover during the time the gap is installed.

        Table 6.--Withstand Distances for Transient Overvoltages
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Withstand
                                                               distance
                     Crest voltage (kV)                        (in feet)
                                                                air gap
------------------------------------------------------------------------
100.........................................................        0.71
150.........................................................        1.06
200.........................................................        1.41
250.........................................................        1.77
300.........................................................        2.12
350.........................................................        2.47
400.........................................................        2.83
450.........................................................        3.18
500.........................................................        3.54
550.........................................................        3.89
600.........................................................        4.24
650.........................................................        4.60
700.........................................................        5.17
750.........................................................        5.73
800.........................................................        6.31
850.........................................................        6.91
900.........................................................        7.57
950.........................................................        8.23
1000........................................................        8.94
1050........................................................        9.65
1100........................................................       10.42
1150........................................................       11.18
1200........................................................       12.05
1250........................................................       12.90
1300........................................................       13.79
1350........................................................       14.70
1400........................................................       15.64
1450........................................................       16.61
1500........................................................       17.61
1550........................................................       18.63
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Calculations are based on Equation (2).
Note: The air gap is based on the 60-Hz rod-gap withstand distance.

    3. Sample protective gap calculations.
    Problem 1: Work is to be performed on a 500-kV transmission line 
that is subject to transient overvoltages of 2.4 p.u. The maximum 
operating voltage of the line is 552 kV. Determine the length of the 
protective gap that will provide the minimum practical safe approach 
distance. Also, determine what that minimum approach distance is.
    Step 1. Calculate the smallest practical maximum transient 
overvoltage (1.25 times the crest line-to-ground voltage):\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \8\ To eliminate unwanted flashovers due to minor system 
disturbances, it is desirable to have the crest withstand voltage no 
lower than 1.25 p.u.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.012

This will be the withstand voltage of the protective gap.
    Step 2. Using test data for a particular protective gap, select a 
gap that has a critical flashover voltage greater than or equal to:

                       563 kV<bullet>0.85=662 kV.

For example, if a protective gap with a 4.0-foot spacing tested to a 
critical flashover voltage of 665 kV, crest, select this gap spacing.

[[Page 808]]

    Step 3. This protective gap corresponds to a 110 percent of critical 
flashover voltage value of:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.014

    This corresponds to the withstand voltage of the electrical 
component of the minimum approach distance.
    Step 4. Using this voltage in Equation (2) results in an electrical 
component of the minimum approach distance of:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.015

    Step 5. Add 1 foot to the distance calculated in step 4, resulting 
in a total minimum approach distance of 6.5 feet.
    Problem 2: For a line operating at a maximum voltage of 552 kV 
subject to a maximum transient overvoltage of 2.4 p.u., find a 
protective gap distance that will permit the use of a 9.0-foot minimum 
approach distance. (A minimum approach distance of 11 feet, 3 inches is 
normally required.)
    Step 1. The electrical component of the minimum approach distance is 
8.0 feet (9.0-1.0).
    Step 2. From Table 6, select the withstand voltage corresponding to 
a distance of 8.0 feet. By interpolation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.016

    Step 3. The voltage calculated in Step 2 corresponds to 110 percent 
of the critical flashover voltage of the gap that should be employed. 
Using test data for a particular protective gap, select a gap that has a 
critical flashover voltage less than or equal to:

                D=(0.01+0.0006) x 732kV<divide><radical>2

For example, if a protective gap with a 5.8-foot spacing tested to a 
critical flashover voltage of 820 kV, crest, select this gap spacing.
    Step 4. The withstand voltage of this protective gap would be:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.018
    
The maximum operating crest voltage would be:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.019

The crest withstand voltage of the protective gap in per unit is thus:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.020

    If this is acceptable, the protective gap could be installed with a 
5.8-foot spacing, and the minimum approach distance could then be 
reduced to 9.0 feet.
    4. Comments and variations. The 1-foot ergonomic component of the 
minimum approach distance must be added to the electrical component of 
the minimum approach distance calculated under paragraph IV.D of this 
appendix. The calculations may be varied by starting with the protective 
gap distance or by starting with the minimum approach distance.

                     E. Location of Protective Gaps

    1. Installation of the protective gap on a structure adjacent to the 
work site is an acceptable practice, as this does not significantly 
reduce the protection afforded by the gap.
    2. Gaps installed at terminal stations of lines or circuits provide 
a given level of protection. The level may not, however, extend 
throughout the length of the line to the worksite. The use of gaps at 
terminal stations must be studied in depth. The use of substation 
terminal gaps raises the possibility that separate surges could enter 
the line at opposite ends, each with low enough magnitude to pass the 
terminal gaps without flashover. When voltage surges are initiated 
simultaneously at each end of a line and travel toward each other, the 
total voltage on the line at the point where they meet is the arithmetic 
sum of the two surges. A gap that is installed within 0.5 mile of the 
work site will protect against such intersecting waves. Engineering 
studies of a particular line or system may indicate that adequate 
protection can be provided by even more distant gaps.
    3. If protective gaps are used at the work site, the work site 
impulse insulation strength is established by the gap setting. Lightning 
strikes as much as 6 miles away from the worksite may cause a voltage 
surge greater than the insulation withstand voltage, and a gap flashover 
may occur. The flashover will not occur between the employee and the 
line, but across the protective gap instead.
    4. There are two reasons to disable the automatic-reclosing feature 
of circuit-interrupting devices while employees are performing live-line 
maintenance:
    <bullet> To prevent the reenergizing of a circuit faulted by actions 
of a worker, which could possibly create a hazard or compound injuries 
or damage produced by the original fault;
    <bullet> To prevent any transient overvoltage caused by the 
switching surge that would occur if the circuit were reenergized.
    However, due to system stability considerations, it may not always 
be feasible to disable the automatic-reclosing feature.

[[Page 809]]

 Appendix C to Sec. 1910.269--Protection from Step and Touch Potentials

                             I. Introduction

    When a ground fault occurs on a power line, voltage is impressed on 
the ``grounded'' object faulting the line. The voltage to which this 
object rises depends largely on the voltage on the line, on the 
impedance of the faulted conductor, and on the impedance to ``true,'' or 
``absolute,'' ground represented by the object. If the object causing 
the fault represents a relatively large impedance, the voltage impressed 
on it is essentially the phase-to-ground system voltage. However, even 
faults to well grounded transmission towers or substation structures can 
result in hazardous voltages.\1\ The degree of the hazard depends upon 
the magnitude of the fault current and the time of exposure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\  This appendix provides information primarily with respect to 
employee protection from contact between equipment being used and an 
energized power line. The information presented is also relevant to 
ground faults to transmission towers and substation structures; however, 
grounding systems for these structures should be designed to minimize 
the step and touch potentials involved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    II. Voltage-Gradient Distribution

                 A. Voltage-Gradient Distribution Curve

    The dissipation of voltage from a grounding electrode (or from the 
grounded end of an energized grounded object) is called the ground 
potential gradient. Voltage drops associated with this dissipation of 
voltage are called ground potentials. Figure 1 is a typical voltage-
gradient distribution curve (assuming a uniform soil texture). This 
graph shows that voltage decreases rapidly with increasing distance from 
the grounding electrode.

                      B. Step and Touch Potentials

    ``Step potential'' is the voltage between the feet of a person 
standing near an energized grounded object. It is equal to the 
difference in voltage, given by the voltage distribution curve, between 
two points at different distances from the ``electrode''. A person could 
be at risk of injury during a fault simply by standing near the 
grounding point.
    ``Touch potential'' is the voltage between the energized object and 
the feet of a person in contact with the object. It is equal to the 
difference in voltage between the object (which is at a distance of 0 
feet) and a point some distance away. It should be noted that the touch 
potential could be nearly the full voltage across the grounded object if 
that object is grounded at a point remote from the place where the 
person is in contact with it. For example, a crane that was grounded to 
the system neutral and that contacted an energized line would expose any 
person in contact with the crane or its uninsulated load line to a touch 
potential nearly equal to the full fault voltage.
    Step and touch potentials are illustrated in Figure 2.

[[Page 810]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.007


[[Page 811]]


          Figure 1--Typical Voltage-Gradient Distribution Curve
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.008

      C. Protection From the Hazards of Ground-Potential Gradients.

    An engineering analysis of the power system under fault conditions 
can be used to determine whether or not hazardous step and touch 
voltages will develop. The result of this analysis can ascertain the 
need for protective measures and can guide the selection of appropriate 
precautions.
    Several methods may be used to protect employees from hazardous 
ground-potential

[[Page 812]]

gradients, including equipotential zones, insulating equipment, and 
restricted work areas.
    1. The creation of an equipotential zone will protect a worker 
standing within it from hazardous step and touch potentials. (See Figure 
3.) Such a zone can be produced through the use of a metal mat connected 
to the grounded object. In some cases, a grounding grid can be used to 
equalize the voltage within the grid. Equipotential zones will not, 
however, protect employees who are either wholly or partially outside 
the protected area. Bonding conductive objects in the immediate work 
area can also be used to minimize the potential between the objects and 
between each object and ground. (Bonding an object outside the work area 
can increase the touch potential to that object in some cases, however.)
    2. The use of insulating equipment, such as rubber gloves, can 
protect employees handling grounded equipment and conductors from 
hazardous touch potentials. The insulating equipment must be rated for 
the highest voltage that can be impressed on the grounded objects under 
fault conditions (rather than for the full system voltage).
    3. Restricting employees from areas where hazardous step or touch 
potentials could arise can protect employees not directly involved in 
the operation being performed. Employees on the ground in the vicinity 
of transmission structures should be kept at a distance where step 
voltages would be insufficient to cause injury. Employees should not 
handle grounded conductors or equipment likely to become energized to 
hazardous voltages unless the employees are within an equipotential zone 
or are protected by insulating equipment.

[[Page 813]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA94.009


[[Page 814]]



  Appendix D to Sec. 1910.269--Methods of Inspecting and Testing Wood 
                                  Poles

                             I. Introduction

    When work is to be performed on a wood pole, it is important to 
determine the condition of the pole before it is climbed. The weight of 
the employee, the weight of equipment being installed, and other working 
stresses (such as the removal or retensioning of conductors) can lead to 
the failure of a defective pole or one that is not designed to handle 
the additional stresses.\1\ For these reasons, it is essential that an 
inspection and test of the condition of a wood pole be performed before 
it is climbed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ A properly guyed pole in good condition should, at a minimum, be 
able to handle the weight of an employee climbing it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    If the pole is found to be unsafe to climb or to work from, it must 
be secured so that it does not fail while an employee is on it. The pole 
can be secured by a line truck boom, by ropes or guys, or by lashing a 
new pole alongside it. If a new one is lashed alongside the defective 
pole, work should be performed from the new one.

                      II. Inspection of Wood Poles

    Wood poles should be inspected by a qualified employee for the 
following conditions:\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ The presence of any of these conditions is an indication that 
the pole may not be safe to climb or to work from. The employee 
performing the inspection must be qualified to make a determination as 
to whether or not it is safe to perform the work without taking 
additional precautions. I71A. General Condition
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The pole should be inspected for buckling at the ground line and for 
an unusual angle with respect to the ground. Buckling and odd angles may 
indicate that the pole has rotted or is broken.

                                B. Cracks

    The pole should be inspected for cracks. Horizontal cracks 
perpendicular to the grain of the wood may weaken the pole. Vertical 
ones, although not considered to be a sign of a defective pole, can pose 
a hazard to the climber, and the employee should keep his or her gaffs 
away from them while climbing.

                                C. Holes

    Hollow spots and woodpecker holes can reduce the strength of a wood 
pole.

                         D. Shell Rot and Decay

    Rotting and decay are cutout hazards and are possible indications of 
the age and internal condition of the pole.

                                E. Knots

    One large knot or several smaller ones at the same height on the 
pole may be evidence of a weak point on the pole.

                           F. Depth of Setting

    Evidence of the existence of a former ground line substantially 
above the existing ground level may be an indication that the pole is no 
longer buried to a sufficient extent.

                           G. Soil Conditions

    Soft, wet, or loose soil may not support any changes of stress on 
the pole.

                              H. Burn Marks

    Burning from transformer failures or conductor faults could damage 
the pole so that it cannot withstand mechanical stress changes.

                       III. Testing of Wood Poles

    The following tests, which have been taken from Sec. 1910.268(n)(3), 
are recognized as acceptable methods of testing wood poles:

                             A. Hammer Test

    Rap the pole sharply with a hammer weighing about 3 pounds, starting 
near the ground line and continuing upwards circumferentially around the 
pole to a height of approximately 6 feet. The hammer will produce a 
clear sound and rebound sharply when striking sound wood. Decay pockets 
will be indicated by a dull sound or a less pronounced hammer rebound. 
Also, prod the pole as near the ground line as possible using a pole 
prod or a screwdriver with a blade at least 5 inches long. If 
substantial decay is encountered, the pole is considered unsafe.

                             B. Rocking Test

    Apply a horizontal force to the pole and attempt to rock it back and 
forth in a direction perpendicular to the line. Caution must be 
exercised to avoid causing power lines to swing together. The force may 
be applied either by pushing with a pike pole or pulling with a rope. If 
the pole cracks during the test, it shall be considered unsafe.

            Appendix E to Sec. 1910.269--Reference Documents

    The references contained in this appendix provide information that 
can be helpful in understanding and complying with the requirements 
contained in Sec. 1910.269. The national consensus standards referenced 
in this appendix contain detailed specifications that employers may 
follow in complying with the more performance-oriented requirements of 
OSHA's final rule. Except as specifically noted in Sec. 1910.269, 
however, compliance with

[[Page 815]]

the national consensus standards is not a substitute for compliance with 
the provisions of the OSHA standard.

    ANSI/SIA A92.2-1990, American National Standard for Vehicle-Mounted 
Elevating and Rotating Aerial Devices.
    ANSI C2-1993, National Electrical Safety Code.
    ANSI Z133.1-1988, American National Standard Safety Requirements for 
Pruning, Trimming, Repairing, Maintaining, and Removing Trees, and for 
Cutting Brush.
    ANSI/ASME B20.1-1990, Safety Standard for Conveyors and Related 
Equipment.
    ANSI/IEEE Std. 4-1978 (Fifth Printing), IEEE Standard Techniques for 
High-Voltage Testing.
    ANSI/IEEE Std. 100-1988, IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and 
Electronic Terms.
    ANSI/IEEE Std. 516-1987, IEEE Guide for Maintenance Methods on 
Energized Power-Lines.
    ANSI/IEEE Std. 935-1989, IEEE Guide on Terminology for Tools and 
Equipment to Be Used in Live Line Working.
    ANSI/IEEE Std. 957-1987, IEEE Guide for Cleaning Insulators.
    ANSI/IEEE Std. 978-1984 (R1991), IEEE Guide for In-Service 
Maintenance and Electrical Testing of Live-Line Tools.
    ASTM D 120-87, Specification for Rubber Insulating Gloves.
    ASTM D 149-92, Test Method for Dielectric Breakdown Voltage and 
Dielectric Strength of Solid Electrical Insulating Materials at 
Commercial Power Frequencies.
    ASTM D 178-93, Specification for Rubber Insulating Matting.
    ASTM D 1048-93, Specification for Rubber Insulating Blankets.
    ASTM D 1049-93, Specification for Rubber Insulating Covers.
    ASTM D 1050-90, Specification for Rubber Insulating Line Hose.
    ASTM D 1051-87, Specification for Rubber Insulating Sleeves.
    ASTM F 478-92, Specification for In-Service Care of Insulating Line 
Hose and Covers.
    ASTM F 479-93, Specification for In-Service Care of Insulating 
Blankets.
    ASTM F 496-93b, Specification for In-Service Care of Insulating 
Gloves and Sleeves.
    ASTM F 711-89, Specification for Fiberglass-Reinforced Plastic (FRP) 
Rod and Tube Used in Live Line Tools.
    ASTM F 712-88, Test Methods for Electrically Insulating Plastic 
Guard Equipment for Protection of Workers.
    ASTM F 819-83a (1988), Definitions of Terms Relating to Electrical 
Protective Equipment for Workers.
    ASTM F 855-90, Specifications for Temporary Grounding Systems to Be 
Used on De-Energized Electric Power Lines and Equipment.
    ASTM F 887-91a, Specifications for Personal Climbing Equipment.
    ASTM F 914-91, Test Method for Acoustic Emission for Insulated 
Aerial Personnel Devices.
    ASTM F 968-93, Specification for Electrically Insulating Plastic 
Guard Equipment for Protection of Workers.
    ASTM F 1116-88, Test Method for Determining Dielectric Strength of 
Overshoe Footwear.
    ASTM F 1117-87, Specification for Dielectric Overshoe Footwear.
    ASTM F 1236-89, Guide for Visual Inspection of Electrical Protective 
Rubber Products.
    ASTM F 1505-94, Standard Specification for Insulated and Insulating 
Hand Tools.
    ASTM F 1506-94, Standard Performance Specification for Textile 
Materials for Wearing Apparel for Use by Electrical Workers Exposed to 
Momentary Electric Arc and Related Thermal Hazards.
    IEEE Std. 62-1978, IEEE Guide for Field Testing Power Apparatus 
Insulation.
    IEEE Std. 524-1992, IEEE Guide to the Installation of Overhead 
Transmission Line Conductors.
    IEEE Std. 1048-1990, IEEE Guide for Protective Grounding of Power 
Lines.
    IEEE Std. 1067-1990, IEEE Guide for the In-Service Use, Care, 
Maintenance, and Testing of Conductive Clothing for Use on Voltages up 
to 765 kV AC.
[59 FR 4437, Jan. 31, 1994; 59 FR 33658, June 30, 1994, as amended at 59 
FR 4458, Jan. 31, 1994; 59 FR 40729, Aug. 9, 1994; 59 FR 51748, Oct. 12, 
1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.272  Grain handling facilities.

    (a) Scope. This section contains requirements for the control of 
grain dust fires and explosions, and certain other safety hazards 
associated with grain handling facilities. It applies in addition to all 
other relevant provisions of part 1910 (or part 1917 at marine 
terminals).
    (b) Application. (1) Paragraphs (a) through (n) of this section 
apply to grain elevators, feed mills, flour mills, rice mills, dust 
pelletizing plants, dry corn mills, soybean flaking operations, and the 
dry grinding operations of soycake.
    (2) Paragraphs (o), (p), and (q) of this section apply only to grain 
elevators.
    (c) Definitions.
    Choked leg means a condition of material buildup in the bucket 
elevator that results in the stoppage of material flow and bucket 
movement. A bucket elevator is not considered choked that

[[Page 816]]

has the up-leg partially or fully loaded and has the boot and discharge 
cleared allowing bucket movement.
    Flat storage structure means a grain storage building or structure 
that will not empty completely by gravity, has an unrestricted ground 
level opening for entry, and must be entered to reclaim the residual 
grain using powered equipment or manual means.
    Fugitive grain dust means combustible dust particles, emitted from 
the stock handling system, of such size as will pass through a U.S. 
Standard 40 mesh sieve (425 microns or less).
    Grain elevator means a facility engaged in the receipt, handling, 
storage, and shipment of bulk raw agricultural commodities such as corn, 
wheat, oats, barley, sunflower seeds, and soybeans.
    Hot work means work involving electric or gas welding, cutting, 
brazing, or similar flame producing operations.
    Inside bucket elevator means a bucket elevator that has the boot and 
more than 20 percent of the total leg height (above grade or ground 
level) inside the grain elevator structure. Bucket elevators with leg 
casings that are inside (and pass through the roofs) of rail or truck 
dump sheds with the remainder of the leg outside of the grain elevator 
structure, are not considered inside bucket elevators.
    Jogging means repeated starting and stopping of drive motors in an 
attempt to clear choked legs.
    Lagging means a covering on drive pulleys used to increase the 
coefficient of friction between the pulley and the belt.
    Permit means the written certification by the employer authorizing 
employees to perform identified work operations subject to specified 
precautions.
    (d) Emergency action plan. The employer shall develop and implement 
an emergency action plan meeting the requirements contained in 
Sec. 1910.38(a).
    (e)Training. (1) The employer shall provide training to employees at 
least annually and when changes in job assignment will expose them to 
new hazards. Current employees, and new employees prior to starting 
work, shall be trained in at least the following:
    (i) General safety precautions associated with the facility, 
including recognition and preventive measures for the hazards related to 
dust accumulations and common ignition sources such as smoking; and,
    (ii) Specific procedures and safety practices applicable to their 
job tasks including but not limited to, cleaning procedures for grinding 
equipment, clearing procedures for choked legs, housekeeping procedures, 
hot work procedures, preventive maintenance procedures and lock-out/tag-
out procedures.
    (2) Employees assigned special tasks, such as bin entry and handling 
of flammable or toxic substances, shall be provided training to perform 
these tasks safely.

    Note to paragraph (e)(2): Training for an employee who enters grain 
storage structures includes training about engulfment and mechanical 
hazards and how to avoid them.

    (f) Hot work permit. (1) The employer shall issue a permit for all 
hot work, with the following exceptions:
    (i) Where the employer or the employer's representative (who would 
otherwise authorize the permit) is present while the hot work is being 
performed;
    (ii) In welding shops authorized by the employer;
    (iii) In hot work areas authorized by the employer which are located 
outside of the grain handling structure.
    (2) The permit shall certify that the requirements contained in 
Sec. 1910.252(a) have been implemented prior to beginning the hot work 
operations. The permit shall be kept on file until completion of the hot 
work operations.
    (g) Entry into grain storage structures. This paragraph applies to 
employee entry into bins, silos , tanks, and other grain storage 
structures. Exception: Entry through unrestricted ground level openings 
into flat storage structures in which there are no toxicity, 
flammability, oxygen-deficiency, or other atmospheric hazards is covered 
by paragraph (h) of this section. For the purposes of this paragraph 
(g), the term ``grain'' includes raw and processed grain and grain 
products in facilities within the scope of paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section.
    (1) The following actions shall be taken before employees enter 
bins, silos, or tanks:

[[Page 817]]

    (i) The employer shall issue a permit for entering bins, silos, or 
tanks unless the employer or the employer's representative (who would 
otherwise authorize the permit) is present during the entire operation. 
The permit shall certify that the precautions contained in this 
paragraph (Sec. 1910.272(g)) have been implemented prior to employees 
entering bins, silos or tanks. The permit shall be kept on file until 
completion of the entry operations.
    (ii) All mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, and pneumatic equipment 
which presents a danger to employees inside grain storage structures 
shall be deenergized and shall be disconnected, locked-out and tagged, 
blocked-off, or otherwise prevented from operating by other equally 
effective means or methods.
    (iii) The atmosphere within a bin, silo, or tank shall be tested for 
the presence of combustible gases, vapors, and toxic agents when the 
employer has reason to believe they may be present. Additionally, the 
atmosphere within a bin, silo, or tank shall be tested for oxygen 
content unless there is continuous natural air movement or continuous 
forced-air ventilation before and during the period employees are 
inside. If the oxygen level is less than 19.5%, or if combustible gas or 
vapor is detected in excess of 10% of the lower flammable limit, or if 
toxic agents are present in excess of the ceiling values listed in 
subpart Z of 29 CFR part 1910, or if toxic agents are present in 
concentrations that will cause health effects which prevent employees 
from effecting self-rescue or communication to obtain assistance, the 
following provisions apply.
    (A) Ventilation shall be provided until the unsafe condition or 
conditions are eliminated, and the ventilation shall be continued as 
long as there is a possibility of recurrence of the unsafe condition 
while the bin, silo, or tank is occupied by employees.
    (B) If toxicity or oxygen deficiency cannot be eliminated by 
ventilation, employees entering the bin, silo, or tank shall wear an 
appropriate respirator. Respirator use shall be in accordance with the 
requirements of Sec. 1910.134.
    (iv) ``Walking down grain'' and similar practices where an employee 
walks on grain to make it flow within or out from a grain storage 
structure, or where an employee is on moving grain, are prohibited.
    (2) Whenever an employee enters a grain storage structure from a 
level at or above the level of the stored grain or grain products, or 
whenever an employee walks or stands on or in stored grain of a depth 
which poses an engulfment hazard, the employer shall equip the employee 
with a body harness with lifeline, or a boatswain's chair that meets the 
requirements of subpart D of this part. The lifeline shall be so 
positioned, and of sufficient length, to prevent the employee from 
sinking further than waist-deep in the grain. Exception: Where the 
employer can demonstrate that the protection required by this paragraph 
is not feasible or creates a greater hazard, the employer shall provide 
an alternative means of protection which is demonstrated to prevent the 
employee from sinking further than waist-deep in the grain.

    Note to paragraph (g)(2): When the employee is standing or walking 
on a surface which the employer demonstrates is free from engulfment 
hazards, the lifeline or alternative means may be disconnected or 
removed.

    (3) An observer, equipped to provide assistance, shall be stationed 
outside the bin, silo, or tank being entered by an employee. 
Communications (visual, voice, or signal line) shall be maintained 
between the observer and employee entering the bin, silo, or tank.
    (4) The employer shall provide equipment for rescue operations which 
is specifically suited for the bin, silo, or tank being entered.
    (5) The employee acting as observer shall be trained in rescue 
procedures, including notification methods for obtaining additional 
assistance.
    (6) Employees shall not enter bins, silos, or tanks underneath a 
bridging condition, or where a buildup of grain products on the sides 
could fall and bury them.
    (h) Entry into flat storage structures. For the purposes of this 
paragraph (h),

[[Page 818]]

the term ``grain'' means raw and processed grain and grain products in 
facilities within the scope of paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (1) Each employee who walks or stands on or in stored grain, where 
the depth of the grain poses an engulfment hazard, shall be equipped 
with a lifeline or alternative means which the employer demonstrates 
will prevent the employee from sinking further than waist-deep into the 
grain.

    Note to paragraph (h)(1): When the employee is standing or walking 
on a surface which the employer demonstrates is free from engulfment 
hazards, the lifeline or alternative means may be disconnected or 
removed.

    (2)(i) Whenever an employee walks or stands on or in stored grain or 
grain products of a depth which poses an engulfment hazard, all 
equipment which presents a danger to that employee (such as an auger or 
other grain transport equipment) shall be deenergized, and shall be 
disconnected, locked-out and tagged, blocked-off, or otherwise prevented 
from operating by other equally effective means or methods.
    (ii) ``Walking down grain'' and similar practices where an employee 
walks on grain to make it flow within or out from a grain storage 
structure, or where an employee is on moving grain, are prohibited.
    (3) No employee shall be permitted to be either underneath a 
bridging condition, or in any other location where an accumulation of 
grain on the sides or elsewhere could fall and engulf that employee.
    (i) Contractors. (1) The employer shall inform contractors 
performing work at the grain handling facility of known potential fire 
and explosion hazards related to the contractor's work and work area. 
The employer shall also inform contractors of the applicable safety 
rules of the facility.
    (2) The employer shall explain the applicable provisions of the 
emergency action plan to contractors.
    (j) Housekeeping. (1) The employer shall develop and implement a 
written housekeeping program that establishes the frequency and 
method(s) determined best to reduce accumulations of fugitive grain dust 
on ledges, floors, equipment, and other exposed surfaces.
    (2) In addition, the housekeeping program for grain elevators shall 
address fugitive grain dust accumulations at priority housekeeping 
areas.
    (i) Priority housekeeping areas shall include at least the 
following:
    (A) Floor areas within 35 feet (10.7 m) of inside bucket elevators;
    (B) Floors of enclosed areas containing grinding equipment;
    (C) Floors of enclosed areas containing grain dryers located inside 
the facility.
    (ii) The employer shall immediately remove any fugitive grain dust 
accumulations whenever they exceed \1/8\ inch (.32 cm) at priority 
housekeeping areas, pursuant to the housekeeping program, or shall 
demonstrate and assure, through the development and implementation of 
the housekeeping program, that equivalent protection is provided.
    (3) The use of compressed air to blow dust from ledges, walls, and 
other areas shall only be permitted when all machinery that presents an 
ignition source in the area is shut-down, and all other known potential 
ignition sources in the area are removed or controlled.
    (4) Grain and product spills shall not be considered fugitive grain 
dust accumulations. However, the housekeeping program shall address the 
procedures for removing such spills from the work area.
    (k) Grate openinqs. Receiving-pit feed openings, such as truck or 
railcar receiving-pits, shall be covered by grates. The width of 
openings in the grates shall be a maximum of 2\1/2\ inches (6.35 cm).
    (l) Filter collectors. (1) All fabric dust filter collectors which 
are a part of a pneumatic dust collection system shall be equipped with 
a monitoring device that will indicate a pressure drop across the 
surface of the filter.
    (2) Filter collectors installed after March 30, 1988 shall be:
    (i) Located outside the facility; or
    (ii) Located in an area inside the facility protected by an 
explosion suppression system; or
    (iii) Located in an area inside the facility that is separated from 
other areas of the facility by construction having at least a one hour 
fire-resistance rating, and which is adjacent to

[[Page 819]]

an exterior wall and vented to the outside. The vent and ductwork shall 
be designed to resist rupture due to deflagration.
    (m) Preventive maintenance. (1) The employer shall implement 
preventive maintenance procedures consisting of:
    (i) Regularly scheduled inspections of at least the mechanical and 
safety control equipment associated with dryers, grain stream processing 
equipment, dust collection equipment including filter collectors, and 
bucket elevators;
    (ii) Lubrication and other appropriate maintenance in accordance 
with manufacturers' recommendations, or as determined necessary by prior 
operating records.
    (2) The employer shall promptly correct dust collection systems 
which are malfunctioning or which are operating below designed 
efficiency. Additionally, the employer shall promptly correct, or remove 
from service, overheated bearings and slipping or misaligned belts 
associated with inside bucket elevators.
    (3) A certification record shall be maintained of each inspection, 
performed in accordance with this paragraph (m), containing the date of 
the inspection, the name of the person who performed the inspection and 
the serial number, or other identifier, of the equipment specified in 
paragraph (m)(1)(i) of this section that was inspected.
    (4) The employer shall implement procedures for the use of tags and 
locks which will prevent the inadvertent application of energy or motion 
to equipment being repaired, serviced, or adjusted, which could result 
in employee injury. Such locks and tags shall be removed in accordance 
with established procedures only by the employee installing them or, if 
unavailable, by his or her supervisor.
    (n) Grain stream processing equipment. The employer shall equip 
grain stream processing equipment (such as hammer mills, grinders, and 
pulverizers) with an effective means of removing ferrous material from 
the incoming grain stream.
    (o) Emergency escape. (1) The employer shall provide at least two 
means of emergency escape from galleries (bin decks).
    (2) The employer shall provide at least one means of emergency 
escape in tunnels of existing grain elevators. Tunnels in grain 
elevators constructed after the effective date of this standard shall be 
provided with at least two means of emergency escape.
    (p) Continuous-flow bulk raw grain dryers. (1) All direct-heat grain 
dryers shall be equipped with automatic controls that:
    (i) Will shut-off the fuel supply in case of power or flame failure 
or interruption of air movement through the exhaust fan; and,
    (ii) Will stop the grain from being fed into the dryer if excessive 
temperature occurs in the exhaust of the drying section.
    (2) Direct-heat grain dryers installed after March 30, 1988 shall 
be:
    (i) Located outside the grain elevator; or
    (ii) Located in an area inside the grain elevator protected by a 
fire or explosion suppression system; or
    (iii) Located in an area inside the grain elevator which is 
separated from other areas of the facility by construction having at 
least a one hour fire-resistance rating.
    (q) Inside bucket elevators. (1) Bucket elevators shall not be 
jogged to free a choked leg.
    (2) All belts and lagging purchased after March 30, 1988 shall be 
conductive. Such belts shall have a surface electrical resistance not to 
exceed 300 megohms.
    (3) All bucket elevators shall be equipped with a means of access to 
the head pulley section to allow inspection of the head pulley, lagging, 
belt, and discharge throat of the elevator head. The boot section shall 
also be provided with a means of access for clean-out of the boot and 
for inspection of the boot, pulley, and belt.
    (4) All the employer shall:
    (i) Mount bearings externally to the leg casing; or,
    (ii) Provide vibration monitoring, temperature monitoring, or other 
means to monitor the condition of those bearings mounted inside or 
partially-inside the leg casing.
    (5) All the employer shall equip bucket elevators with a motion 
detection device which will shut-down the bucket

[[Page 820]]

elevator when the belt speed is reduced by no more than 20% of the 
normal operating speed.
    (6) All the employer shall:
    (i) Equip bucket elevators with a belt alignment monitoring device 
which will initiate an alarm to employees when the belt is not tracking 
properly; or,
    (ii) Provide a means to keep the belt tracking properly, such as a 
system that provides constant alignment adjustment of belts.
    (7) Paragraphs (q)(5) and (q)(6) of this section do not apply to 
grain elevators having a permanent storage capacity of less than one 
million bushels, provided that daily visual inspection is made of bucket 
movement and tracking of the belt.
    (8) Paragraphs (q)(4), (q)(5), and (q)(6) of this section do not 
apply to the following:
    (i) Bucket elevators which are equipped with an operational fire and 
explosion suppression system capable of protecting at least the head and 
boot section of the bucket elevator; or,
    (ii) Bucket elevators which are equipped with pneumatic or other 
dust control systems or methods that keep the dust concentration inside 
the bucket elevator at least 25% below the lower explosive limit at all 
times during operations.

    Note: The following appendices to Sec. 1910.272 serve as 
nonmandatory guidelines to assist employers and employees in complying 
with the requirements of this section, as well as to provide other 
helpful information.
    No additional burdens are imposed through these appendices.

          Appendix A to Sec. 1910.272 Grain Handling Facilities

    Examples presented in this appendix may not be the only means of 
achieving the performance goals in the standard.

                        1. Scope and Application

    The provisions of this standard apply in addition to any other 
applicable requirements of this part 1910 (or part 1917 at marine 
terminals). The standard contains requirements for new and existing 
grain handling facilities. The standard does not apply to seed plants 
which handle and prepare seeds for planting of future crops, nor to on-
farm storage or feed lots.

                        2. Emergency Action Plan

    The standard requires the employer to develop and implement an 
emergency action plan. The emergency action plan (Sec. 1910.38(a)) 
covers those designated actions employers and employees are to take to 
ensure employee safety from fire and other emergencies. The plan 
specifies certain minimum elements which are to be addressed. These 
elements include the establishment of an employee alarm system, the 
development of evacuation procedures, and training employees in those 
actions they are to take during an emergency.
    The standard does not specify a particular method for notifying 
employees of an emergency. Public announcement systems, air horns, steam 
whistles, a standard fire alarm system, or other types of employee alarm 
may be used. However, employers should be aware that employees in a 
grain facility may have difficulty hearing an emergency alarm, or 
distinguishing an emergency alarm from other audible signals at the 
facility, or both. Therefore, it is important that the type of employee 
alarm used be distinguishable and distinct.
    The use of floor plans or workplace maps which clearly show the 
emergency escape routes should be included in the emergency action plan; 
color coding will aid employees in determining their route assignments. 
The employer should designate a safe area, outside the facility, where 
employees can congregate after evacuation, and implement procedures to 
account for all employees after emergency evacuation has been completed.
    It is also recommended that employers seek the assistance of the 
local fire department for the purpose of preplanning for emergencies. 
Preplanning is encouraged to facilitate coordination and cooperation 
between facility personnel and those who may be called upon for 
assistance during an emergency. It is important for emergency service 
units to be aware of the usual work locations of employees at the 
facility.

                               3. Training

    It is important that employees be trained in the recognition and 
prevention of hazards associated with grain facilities, especially those 
hazards associated with their own work tasks. Employees should 
understand the factors which are necessary to produce a fire or 
explosion, i.e., fuel (such as grain dust), oxygen, ignition source, and 
(in the case of explosions) confinement. Employees should be made aware 
that any efforts they make to keep these factors from occurring 
simultaneously will be an important step in reducing the potential for 
fires and explosions.
    The standard provides flexibility for the employer to design a 
training program which fulfills the needs of a facility. The type,

[[Page 821]]

amount, and frequency of training will need to reflect the tasks that 
employees are expected to perform. Although training is to be provided 
to employees at least annually, it is recommended that safety meetings 
or discussions and drills be conducted at more frequent intervals.
    The training program should include those topics applicable to the 
particular facility, as well as topics such as: Hot work procedures; 
lock-out/tag-out procedures; bin entry procedures; bin cleaning 
procedures; grain dust explosions; fire prevention; procedures for 
handling ``hot grain''; housekeeping procedures, including methods and 
frequency of dust removal; pesticide and fumigant usage; proper use and 
maintenance of personal protective equipment; and, preventive 
maintenance. The types of work clothing should also be considered in the 
program at least to caution against using polyester clothing that easily 
melts and increases the severity of burns, as compared to wool or fire 
retardant cotton.
    In implementing the training program, it is recommended that the 
employer utilize films, slide-tape presentations, pamphlets, and other 
information which can be obtained from such sources as the Grain 
Elevator and Processing Society, the Cooperative Extension Service of 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Kansas State University's Extension 
Grain Science and Industry, and other state agriculture schools, 
industry associations, union organizations, and insurance groups.

                           4. Hot Work Permit

    The implementation of a permit system for hot work is intended to 
assure that employers maintain control over operations involving hot 
work and to assure that employees are aware of and utilize appropriate 
safeguards when conducting these activities.
    Precautions for hot work operations are specified in 29 CFR 
1910.252(a), and include such safeguards as relocating the hot work 
operation to a safe location if possible, relocating or covering 
combustible material in the vicinity, providing fire extinguishers, and 
provisions for establishing a fire watch. Permits are not required for 
hot work operations conducted in the presence of the employer or the 
employer's authorized representative who would otherwise issue the 
permit, or in an employer authorized welding shop or when work is 
conducted outside and away from the facility.
    It should be noted that the permit is not a record, but is an 
authorization of the employer certifying that certain safety precautions 
have been implemented prior to the beginning of work operations.

                  5. Entry Into Bins, Silos, And Tanks

    In order to assure that employers maintain control over employee 
entry into bins, silos, and tanks, OSHA is requiring that the employer 
issue a permit for entry into bins, silos, and tanks unless the employer 
(or the employer's representative who would otherwise authorize the 
permit) is present at the entry and during the entire operation.
    Employees should have a thorough understanding of the hazards 
associated with entry into bins, silos, and tanks. Employees are not to 
be permitted to enter these spaces from the bottom when grain or other 
agricultural products are hung up or sticking to the sides which might 
fall and injure or kill an employee. Employees should be made aware that 
the atmosphere in bins, silos, and tanks can be oxygen deficient or 
toxic. Employees should be trained in the proper methods of testing the 
atmosphere, as well as in the appropriate procedures to be taken if the 
atmosphere is found to be oxygen deficient or toxic. When a fumigant has 
been recently applied in these areas and entry must be made, aeration 
fans should be running continuously to assure a safe atmosphere for 
those inside. Periodic monitoring of toxic levels shuld be done by 
direct reading instruments to measure the levels, and, if there is an 
increase in these readings, appropriate actions should be promptly 
taken.
    Employees have been buried and suffocated in grain or other 
agricultural products because they sank into the material. Therefore, it 
is suggested that employees not be permitted to walk or stand on the 
grain or other grain product where the depth is greater than waist high. 
In this regard, employees must use a full body harness or boatswain's 
chair with a lifeline when entering from the top. A winch system with 
mechanical advantage (either powered or manual) would allow better 
control of the employee than just using a hand held hoist line, and such 
a system would allow the observer to remove the employee easily without 
having to enter the space.
    It is important that employees be trained in the proper selection 
and use of any personal protective equipment which is to be worn. 
Equally important is the training of employees in the planned emergency 
rescue procedures. Employers should carefully read Sec. 1910.134(e)(3) 
and assure that their procedures follow these requirements. The employee 
acting as observer is to be equipped to provide assistance and is to 
know procedures for obtaining additional assistance. The observer should 
not enter a space until adequate assistance is available. It is 
recommended that an employee trained in CPR be readily available to 
provide assistance to those employees entering bins, silos, or tanks.

                             6. Contractors

    These provisions of the standard are intended to ensure that outside 
contractors are cognizant of the hazards associated with

[[Page 822]]

grain handling facilities, particularly in relation to the work they are 
to perform for the employer. Also, in the event of an emergency, 
contractors should be able to take appropriate action as a part of the 
overall facility emergency action plan. Contractors should also be aware 
of the employer's permit systems. Contractors should develop specified 
procedures for performing hot work and for entry into bins, silos, and 
tanks and these activities should be coordinated with the employer. 
Contractors are responsible for informing their own employees.
    This coordination will help to ensure that employers know what work 
is being performed at the facility by contractors; where it is being 
performed; and, that it is being performed in a manner that will not 
endanger employees.

                            7. Housekeeping.

    The housekeeping program is to be designed to keep dust 
accumulations and emissions under control inside grain facilities. The 
housekeeping program, which is to be written, is to specify the 
frequency and method(s) used to best reduce dust accumulations.
    Ship, barge, and rail loadout and receiving areas which are located 
outside the facility need not be addressed in the housekeeping program. 
Additionally, truck dumps which are open on two or more sides need not 
be addressed by the housekeeping program. Other truck dumps should be 
addressed in the housekeeping program to provide for regular cleaning 
during periods of receiving grain or agricultural products. The 
housekeeping program should provide coverage for all workspaces in the 
facility and include walls, beams, etc., especially in relation to the 
extent that dust could accumulate.

                           Dust Accumulations

    Almost all facilities will require some level of manual 
housekeeping. Manual housekeeping methods, such as vacuuming or sweeping 
with soft bristle brooms, should be used which will minimize the 
possibility of layered dust being suspended in the air when it is being 
removed.
    The housekeeping program should include a contingency plan to 
respond to situations where dust accumulates rapidly due to a failure of 
a dust enclosure hood, an unexpected breakdown of the dust control 
system, a dust-tight connection inadvertently knocked open, etc.
    The housekeeping program should also specify the manner of handling 
spills. Grain spills are not considered to be dust accumulations.
    A fully enclosed horizontal belt conveying system where the return 
belt is inside the enclosure should have inspection access such as 
sliding panels or doors to permit checking of equipment, checking for 
dust accumulations and facilitate cleaning if needed.

                             Dust Emissions

    Employers should analyze the entire stock handling system to 
determine the location of dust emissions and effective methods to 
control or to eliminate them. The employer should make sure that holes 
in spouting, casings of bucket elevators, pneumatic conveying pipes, 
screw augers, or drag conveyor casings, are patched or otherwise 
properly repaired to prevent leakage. Minimizing free falls of grain or 
grain products by using choke feeding techniques, and utilization of 
dust-tight enclosures at transfer points, can be effective in reducing 
dust emissions.
    Each housekeeping program should specify the schedules and control 
measures which will be used to control dust emitted from the stock 
handling system. The housekeeping program should address the schedules 
to be used for cleaning dust accumulations from motors, critical 
bearings and other potential ignition sources in the working areas. 
Also, the areas around bucket elevator legs, milling machinery and 
similar equipment should be given priority in the cleaning schedule. The 
method of disposal of the dust which is swept or vacuumed should also be 
planned.
    Dust may accumulate in somewhat inaccessible areas, such as those 
areas where ladders or scaffolds might be necessary to reach them. The 
employer may want to consider the use of compressed air and long lances 
to blow down these areas frequently. The employer may also want to 
consider the periodic use of water and hoselines to wash down these 
areas. If these methods are used, they are to be specified in the 
housekeeping program along with the appropriate safety precautions, 
including the use of personal protective equipment such as eyewear and 
dust respirators.
    Several methods have been effective in controlling dust emissions. A 
frequently used method of controlling dust emissions is a pneumatic dust 
collection system. However, the installation of a poorly designed 
pneumatic dust collection system has fostered a false sense of security 
and has often led to an inappropriate reduction in manual housekeeping. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the system be designed properly and 
installed by a competent contractor. Those employers who have a 
pneumatic dust control system that is not working according to 
expectations should request the engineering design firm, or the 
manufacturer of the filter and related equipment, to conduct an 
evaluation of the system to determine the corrections necessary for 
proper operation of the system. If the design firm or manufacturer of 
the equipment is not known, employers should contact their trade 
association for recommendations of competent designers of

[[Page 823]]

pneumatic dust control systems who could provide assistance.
    When installing a new or upgraded pneumatic control system, the 
employer should insist on an acceptance test period of 30 to 45 days of 
operation to ensure that the system is operating as intended and 
designed. The employer should also obtain maintenance, testing, and 
inspection information from the manufacturer to ensure that the system 
will continue to operate as designed.
    Aspiration of the leg, as part of a pneumatic dust collection 
system, is another effective method of controlling dust emissions. 
Aspiration of the leg consists of a flow of air across the entire boot, 
which entrains the liberated dust and carries it up the up-leg to take-
off points. With proper aspiration, dust concentrations in the leg can 
be lowered below the lower explosive limit. Where a prototype leg 
installation has been instrumented and shown to be effective in keeping 
the dust level 25% below the lower explosive limit during normal 
operations for the various products handled, then other legs of similar 
size, capacity and products being handled which have the same design 
criteria for the air aspiration would be acceptable to OSHA, provided 
the prototype test report is available on site.
    Another method of controlling dust emissions is enclosing the 
conveying system, pressurizing the general work area, and providing a 
lower pressure inside the enclosed conveying system. Although this 
method is effective in controlling dust emissions from the conveying 
system, adequate access to the inside of the enclosure is necessary to 
facilitate frequent removal of dust accumulations. This is also 
necessary for those systems called ``self-cleaning.''
    The use of edible oil sprayed on or into a moving stream of grain is 
another method which has been used to control dust emissions. Tests 
performed using this method have shown that the oil treatment can reduce 
dust emissions. Repeated handling of the grain may necessitate 
additional oil treatment to prevent liberation of dust. However, before 
using this method, operators of grain handling facilities should be 
aware that the Food and Drug Administration must approve the specific 
oil treatment used on products for food or feed.
    As a part of the housekeeping program, grain elevators are required 
to address accumulations of dust at priority areas using the action 
level. The standard specifies a maximum accumulation of \1/8\ inch dust, 
measurable by a ruler or other measuring device, anywhere within a 
priority area as the upper limit at which time employers must initiate 
action to remove the accumulations using designated means or methods. 
Any accumulation in excess of this amount and where no action has been 
initiated to implement cleaning would constitute a violation of the 
standard, unless the employer can demonstrate equivalent protection. 
Employers should make every effort to minimize dust accumulations on 
exposed surfaces since dust is the fuel for a fire or explosion, and it 
is recognized that a \1/8\ inch dust accumulation is more than enough to 
fuel such occurrences.

                          8. Filter Collectors

    Proper sizing of filter collectors for the pneumatic dust control 
system they serve is very important for the overall effectiveness of the 
system. The air to cloth ratio of the system should be in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations. If higher ratios are used, they 
can result in more maintenance on the filter, shorter bag or sock life, 
increased differential pressure resulting in higher energy costs, and an 
increase in operational problems.
    A photohelic gauge, magnehelic gauge, or manometer, may be used to 
indicate the pressure rise across the inlet and outlet of the filter. 
When the pressure exceeds the design value for the filter, the air 
volume will start to drop, and maintenance will be required. Any of 
these three monitoring devices is acceptable as meeting paragraph (l)(1) 
of the standard.
    The employer should establish a level or target reading on the 
instrument which is consistent with the manufacturer's recommendations 
that will indicate when the filter should be serviced. This target 
reading on the instrument and the accompanying procedures should be in 
the preventive maintenance program. These efforts would minimize the 
blinding of the filter and the subsequent failure of the pneumatic dust 
control system.
    There are other instruments that the employer may want to consider 
using to monitor the operation of the filter. One instrument is a zero 
motion switch for detecting a failure of motion by the rotary discharge 
valve on the hopper. If the rotary discharge valve stops turning, the 
dust released by the bag or sock will accumulate in the filter hopper 
until the filter becomes clogged. Another instrument is a level 
indicator which is installed in the hopper of the filter to detect the 
buildup of dust that would otherwise cause the filter hopper to be 
plugged. The installation of these instruments should be in accordance 
with manufacturer's recommendations.
    All of these monitoring devices and instruments are to be capable of 
being read at an accessible location and checked as frequently as 
specified in the preventive maintenance program.
    Filter collectors on portable vacuum cleaners, and those used where 
fans are not part of the system, are not covered by requirements of 
paragraph (l) of the standard.

[[Page 824]]

                        9. Preventive Maintenance

    The control of dust and the control of ignition sources are the most 
effective means for reducing explosion hazards. Preventive maintenance 
is related to ignition sources in the same manner as housekeeping is 
related to dust control and should be treated as a major function in a 
facility. Equipment such as critical bearings, belts, buckets, pulleys, 
and milling machinery are potential ignition sources, and periodic 
inspection and lubrication of such equipment through a scheduled 
preventive maintenance program is an effective method for keeping 
equipment functioning properly and safely. The use of vibration 
detection methods, heat sensitive tape or other heat detection methods 
that can be seen by the inspector or maintenance person will allow for a 
quick, accurate, and consistent evaluation of bearings and will help in 
the implementation of the program.
    The standard does not require a specific frequency for preventive 
maintenance. The employer is permitted flexibility in determining the 
appropriate interval for maintenance provided that the effectiveness of 
the maintenance program can be demonstrated. Scheduling of preventive 
maintenance should be based on manufacturer's recommendations for 
effective operation, as well as from the employer's previous experience 
with the equipment. However, the employer's schedule for preventive 
maintenance should be frequent enough to allow for both prompt 
identification and correction of any problems concerning the failure or 
malfunction of the mechanical and safety control equipment associated 
with bucket elevators, dryers, filter collectors and magnets. The 
pressure-drop monitoring device for a filter collector, and the 
condition of the lagging on the head pulley, are examples of items that 
require regularly scheduled inspections. A system of identifying the 
date, the equipment inspected and the maintenance performed, if any, 
will assist employers in continually refining their preventive 
maintenance schedules and identifying equipment problem areas. Open work 
orders where repair work or replacement is to be done at a designated 
future date as scheduled, would be an indication of an effective 
preventive maintenance program.
    It is imperative that the prearranged schedule of maintenance be 
adhered to regardless of other facility constraints. The employer should 
give priority to the maintenance or repair work associated with safety 
control equipment, such as that on dryers, magnets, alarm and shut-down 
systems on bucket elevators, bearings on bucket elevators, and the 
filter collectors in the dust control system. Benefits of a strict 
preventive maintenance program can be a reduction of unplanned downtime, 
improved equipment performance, planned use of resources, more efficient 
operations, and, most importantly, safer operations.
    The standard also requires the employer to develop and implement 
procedures consisting of locking out and tagging equipment to prevent 
the inadvertent application of energy or motion to equipment being 
repaired, serviced, or adjusted, which could result in employee injury. 
All employees who have responsibility for repairing or servicing 
equipment, as well as those who operate the equipment, are to be 
familiar with the employer's lock and tag procedures. A lock is to be 
used as the positive means to prevent operation of the disconnected 
equipment. Tags are to be used to inform employees why equipment is 
locked out. Tags are to meet requirements in Sec. 1910.145(f). Locks and 
tags may only be removed by employees that placed them, or by their 
supervisor, to ensure the safety of the operation.

                  10. Grain Stream Processing Equipment

    The standard requires an effective means of removing ferrous 
material from grain streams so that such material does not enter 
equipment such as hammer mills, grinders and pulverizers. Large foreign 
objects, such as stones, should have been removed at the receiving pit. 
Introduction of foreign objects and ferrous material into such equipment 
can produce sparks which can create an explosion hazard. Acceptable 
means for removal of ferrous materials include the use of permanent or 
electromagnets. Means used to separate foreign objects and ferrous 
material should be cleaned regularly and kept in good repair as part of 
the preventive maintenance program in order to maximize their 
effectiveness.

                          11. Emergency Escape

    The standard specifies that at least two means of escape must be 
provided from galleries (bin decks). Means of emergency escape may 
include any available means of egress (consisting of three components, 
exit access, exit, and exit discharge as defined in Sec. 1910.35), the 
use of controlled descent devices with landing velocities not to exceed 
15 ft/sec., or emergency escape ladders from galleries. Importantly, the 
means of emergency escape are to be addressed in the facility emergency 
action plan. Employees are to know the location of the nearest means of 
emergency escape and the action they must take during an emergency.

                               12. Dryers

    Liquefied petroleum gas fired dryers should have the vaporizers 
installed at least ten feet from the dryer. The gas piping system should 
be protected from mechanical damage. The employer should establish 
procedures for locating and repairing leaks

[[Page 825]]

when there is a strong odor of gas or other signs of a leak.

                       13. Inside Bucket Elevators

    Hazards associated with inside bucket elevator legs are the source 
of many grain elevator fires and explosions. Therefore, to mitigate 
these hazards, the standard requires the implementation of special 
safety precautions and procedures, as well as the installation of safety 
control devices. The standard provides for a phase-in period for many of 
the requirements to provide the employer time for planning the 
implementation of the requirements. Additionally, for elevators with a 
permanent storage capacity of less than one million bushels, daily 
visual inspection of belt alignment and bucket movement can be 
substituted for alignment monitoring devices and motion detection 
devices.
    The standard requires that belts (purchased after the effective date 
of the standard) have surface electrical resistance not to exceed 300 
megohms. Test methods available regarding electrical resistance of belts 
are: The American Society for Testing and Materials D257-76, ``Standard 
Test Methods for D-C Resistance or Conductance of Insulating 
Materials''; and, the International Standards Organization's 284, 
``Conveyor Belts-Electrical Conductivity-Specification and Method of 
Test.'' When an employer has a written certification from the 
manufacturer that a belt has been tested using one of the above test 
methods, and meets the 300 megohm criteria, the belt is acceptable as 
meeting this standard. When using conductive belts, the employer should 
make certain that the head pulley and shaft are grounded through the 
drive motor ground or by some other equally effective means. When V-type 
belts are used to transmit power to the head pulley assembly from the 
motor drive shaft, it will be necessary to provide electrical continuity 
from the head pulley assembly to ground, e.g., motor grounds.
    Employers should also consider purchasing new belts that are flame 
retardant or fire resistive. A flame resistance test for belts is 
contained in 30 CFR 18.65.

          Appendix B to Sec. 1910.272 Grain Handling Facilities

                      National Consensus Standards

    The following table contains a cross-reference listing of current 
national consensus standards which provide information that may be of 
assistance to grain handling operations. Employers who comply with 
provisions in these national consensus standards that provide equal or 
greater protection than those in Sec. 1910.272 will be considered in 
compliance with the corresponding requirements in Sec. 1910.272.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Subject                                        National consensus standards
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grain elevators and facilities handling bulk raw             ANSI/NFPA 61B
 agricultural commodities.
Feed mills.................................................  ANSI/NFPA 61C
Facilities handling agricultural commodities for human       ANSI/NFPA 61D
 consumption.
Pneumatic conveying systems for agricultural commodities...  ANSI/NFPA 66
Guide for explosion venting................................  ANSI/NFPA 68
Explosion prevention systems...............................  ANSI/NFPA 69
Dust removal and exhaust systems...........................  ANSI/NFPA 91
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

          Appendix C to Sec. 1910.272 Grain handling facilities

                   References for Further Information

    The following references provide information which can be helpful in 
understanding the requirements contained in various provisions of the 
standard, as well as provide other helpful information.
    1. Accident Prevention Manual for Industrial Operations; National 
Safety Council, 425 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611.
    2. Practical Guide to Elevator Design; National Grain and Feed 
Association, P.O. Box 28328, Washington, DC 20005.
    3. Dust Control for Grain Elevators; National Grain and Feed 
Association, P.O. Box 28328, Washington, DC 20005.
    4. Prevention of Grain Elevator and Mill Explosions; National 
Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC. (Available from National Technical 
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151.)
    5. Standard for the Prevention of Fires and Explosions in Grain 
Elevators and Facilities Handling Bulk Raw Agricultural Commodities, 
NFPA 61B; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, 
Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.
    6. Standard for the Prevention of Fire and Dust Explosions in Feed 
Mills, NFPA 61C; National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch 
Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.
    7. Standard for the Prevention of Fire and Dust Explosions in the 
Milling of Agricultural Commodities for Human Consumption, NFPA 61D; 
National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, 
Massachusetts 02269.

[[Page 826]]

    8. Standard for Pneumatic Conveying Systems for Handling Feed, 
Flour, Grain and Other Agricultural Dusts, NFPA 66; National Fire 
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.
    9. Guide for Explosion Venting, NFPA 68; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.
    10. Standard on Explosion Prevention Systems, NFPA 69; National Fire 
Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.
    11. Safety-Operations Plans; U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, DC 20250.
    12. Inplant Fire Prevention Control Programs; Mill Mutual Fire 
Prevention Mutual Fire Prevention Bureau, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 
West, Itasca, Illinois 60143-1269.
    13. Guidelines for Terminal Elevators; Mill Mutual Fire Prevention 
Bureau, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, Illinois 60143-1269.
    14. Standards for Preventing the Horizontal and Vertical Spread of 
Fires in Grain Handling Properties; Mill Mutual Fire Mutual Fire 
Prevention Bureau, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, Illinois 
60143-1269.
    15. Belt Conveyors for Bulk Materials, Part I and Part II, Data 
Sheet 570, Revision A; National Safety Council, 425 North Michigan 
Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611.
    16. Suggestions for Precautions and Safety Practices in Welding and 
Cutting; Mill Mutual Fire Prevention Bureau, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 
West, Itasca, Illinois 60143-1269.
    17. Food Bins and Tanks, Data Sheet 524; National Safety Council, 
425 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611.
    18. Pneumatic Dust Control in Grain Elevators; National Academy of 
Sciences, Washington, DC. (Available from National Technical Information 
Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151.)
    19. Dust Control Analysis and Layout Procedures for Grain Storage 
and Processing Plants; Mill Mutual Fire Prevention Bureau, 1 Pierce 
Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, Illinois 60143-1269.
    20. Standard for the Installation of Blower and Exhaust Systems for 
Dust, Stock and Vapor Removal, NFPA 91; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.
    21. Standards for the Installation of Direct Heat Grain Driers in 
Grain and Milling Properties; Mill Mutual Fire Prevention Bureau, 1 
Pierce Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, Illinois 60143-1269.
    22. Guidelines for Lubrication and Bearing Maintenance; Mill Mutual 
Fire Prevention Bureau, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, 
Illinois 60143-1269.
    23. Organized Maintenance in Grain and Milling Properties; Mill 
Mutual Fire Prevention Bureau, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, 
Illinois 60143-1269.
    24. Safe and Efficient Elevator Legs for Grain and Milling 
Properties; Mill Mutual Fire Prevention Bureau, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 
1260 West, Itasca, Illinois 60143-1269.
    25. Explosion Venting and Supression of Bucket Elevators; National 
Grain and Feed Association, P.O. Box 28328, Washington, DC 20005.
    26. Lightning Protection Code, NFPA 78; National Fire Protection 
Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.
    27. Occupational Safety in Grain Elevators, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication 
No. 83-126); National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 
Morgantown, West Virginia 26505.
    28. Retrofitting and Constructing Grain Elevators; National Grain 
and Feed Association, P.O. Box 28328, Washington, DC 20005.
    29. Grain Industry Safety and Health Center--Training Series 
(Preventing grain dust explosions, operations maintenance safety, 
transportation safety, occupational safety and health); Grain Elevator 
and Processing Society, P.O. Box 15026, Commerce Station, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota 55415-0026.
    30. Suggestions for Organized Maintenance; The Mill Mutuals Loss 
Control Department, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, Illinois 
60143-1269.
    31. Safety--The First Step to Success; The Mill Mutual Loss Control 
Department, 1 Pierce Place, Suite 1260 West, Itasca, Illinois 60143-
1269.
    32. Emergency Plan Notebook; Schoeff, Robert W. and James L. 
Balding, Kansas State University, Cooperative Extension Service, 
Extension Grain Science and Industry, Shellenberger Hall, Manhattan, 
Kansas 66506.
[52 FR 49625, Dec. 31, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 17696, May 18, 1988; 54 
FR 24334, June 7, 1989; 55 FR 25094, June 20, 1990; 61 FR 9242, Mar. 7, 
1996; 61 FR 9584, Mar. 8, 1996]


<R04>
                          Subpart S--Electrical

    Authority: Secs. 4, 6, 8, Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 
(29 U.S.C. 653, 655, 657; Secretary of Labor's Order No. 8-76 (41 FR 
25059) or 1-90 (55 FR 9033), as applicable; 29 CFR part 1911.

    Source: 46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981, unless otherwise noted.

                                 General


<R05>
Sec. 1910.301  Introduction.

    This subpart addresses electrical safety requirements that are 
necessary for the practical safeguarding of employees in their 
workplaces and is divided into four major divisions as follows:

[[Page 827]]

    (a) Design safety standards for electrical systems. These 
regulations are contained in Secs. 1910.302 through 1910.330. Sections 
1910.302 through 1910.308 contain design safety standards for electric 
utilization systems. Included in this category are all electric 
equipment and installations used to provide electric power and light for 
employee workplaces. Sections 1910.309 through 1910.330 are reserved for 
possible future design safety standards for other electrical systems.
    (b) Safety-related work practices. These regulations will be 
contained in Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.360.
    (c) Safety-related maintenance requirements. These regulations will 
be contained in Secs. 1910.361 through 1910.380.
    (d) Safety requirements for special equipment. These regulations 
will be contained in Secs. 1910.381 through 1910.398.
    (e) Definitions. Definitions applicable to each division are 
contained in Sec. 1910.399.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1982; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]

             Design Safety Standards for Electrical Systems


<R05>
Sec. 1910.302  Electric utilization systems.

    Sections 1910.302 through 1910.308 contain design safety standards 
for electric utilization systems.
    (a) Scope--(1) Covered. The provisions of Secs. 1910.302 through 
1910.308 of this subpart cover electrical installations and utilization 
equipment installed or used within or on buildings, structures, and 
other premises including:
    (i) Yards,
    (ii) Carnivals,
    (iii) Parking and other lots,
    (iv) Mobile homes,
    (v) Recreational vehicles,
    (vi) Industrial substations,
    (vii) Conductors that connect the installations to a supply of 
electricity, and
    (viii) Other outside conductors on the premises.
    (2) Not covered. The provisions of Secs. 1910.302 through 1910.308 
of this subpart do not cover:
    (i) Installations in ships, watercraft, railway rolling stock, 
aircraft, or automotive vehicles other than mobile homes and 
recreational vehicles.
    (ii) Installations underground in mines.
    (iii) Installations of railways for generation, transformation, 
transmission, or distribution of power used exclusively for operation of 
rolling stock or installations used exclusively for signaling and 
communication purposes.
    (iv) Installations of communication equipment under the exclusive 
control of communication utilities, located outdoors or in building 
spaces used exclusively for such installations.
    (v) Installations under the exclusive control of electric utilities 
for the purpose of communication or metering; or for the generation, 
control, transformation, transmission, and distribution of electric 
energy located in buildings used exclusively by utilities for such 
purposes or located outdoors on property owned or leased by the utility 
or on public highways, streets, roads, etc., or outdoors by established 
rights on private property.
    (b) Extent of application. (1) The requirements contained in the 
sections listed below shall apply to all electrical installations and 
utilization equipment, regardless of when they were designed or 
installed.
    Sections:

1910.303(b).............................  Examination, installation, and
                                           use of equipment.
1910.303(c).............................  Splices.
1910.303(d).............................  Arcing parts.
1910.303(e).............................  Marking.
1910.303(f).............................  Identification of
                                           disconnecting means.
1910.303(g)(2)..........................  Guarding of live parts.
1910.304(e)(l)(i).......................  Protection of conductors and
                                           equipment.
1910.304(e)(l)(iv)......................  Location in or on premises.
1910.304(e)(l)(v).......................  Arcing or suddenly moving
                                           parts.
1910.304(f)(l)(ii)......................  2-Wire DC systems to be
                                           grounded:
1910.304(f)(l)(iii) and                   AC Systems to be grounded.
 1910.304(f)(l)(iv).
1910.304(f)(l)(v).......................  AC Systems 50 to 1000 volts
                                           not required to be grounded.
1910.304(f)(3)..........................  Grounding connections.
1910.304(f)(4)..........................  Grounding path.
1910.304(f)(5)(iv)(a) through             Fixed equipment required to be
 1910.304(f)(5)(iv)(d).                    grounded.
1910.304(f)(5)(v).......................  Grounding of equipment
                                           connected by cord and plug.
1910.304(f)(5)(vi)......................  Grounding of nonelectrical
                                           equipment.
1910.304(f)(6)(i).......................  Methods of grounding fixed
                                           equipment.
1910.305(g)(l)(i) and 1910.305(g)(1)(ii)  Flexible cords and cables,
                                           uses.
1910.305(g)(l)(iii).....................  Flexible cords and cables
                                           prohibited.
1910.305(g)(2)(ii)......................  Flexible cords and cables,
                                           splices.

[[Page 828]]

1910.305(g)(2)(iii).....................  Pull at joints and terminals
                                           of flexible cords and cables.
1910.307................................  Hazardous (classified)
                                           locations.

    (2) Every electric utilization system and all utilization equipment 
installed after March 15, 1972, and every major replacement, 
modification, repair, or rehabilitation, after March 15, 1972, of any 
part of any electric utilization system or utilization equipment 
installed before March 15, 1972, shall comply with the provisions of 
Secs. 1910.302 through 1910.308.

    Note: ``Major replacements, modifications, repairs, or 
rehabilitations'' include work similar to that involved when a new 
building or facility is built, a new wing is added, or an entire floor 
is renovated.

    (3) The following provisions apply to electric utilization systems 
and utilization equipment installed after April 16, 1981:

Sec.  1910.303(h)(4) (i) and (ii).......  Entrance and access to
                                           workspace (over 600 volts).
Sec.  1910.304(e)(1)(vi)(b).............  Circuit breakers operated
                                           vertically.
Sec.  1910.304(e)(1)(vi)(c).............  Circuit breakers used as
                                           switches.
Sec.  1910.304(f)(7)(ii)................  Grounding of systems of 1000
                                           volts or more supplying
                                           portable or mobile equipment.
Sec.  1910.305(j)(6)(ii)(b).............  Switching series capacitors
                                           over 600 volts.
Sec.  1910.306(c)(2)....................  Warning signs for elevators
                                           and escalators.
Sec.  1910.306(i).......................  Electrically controlled
                                           irrigation machines.
Sec.  1910.306(j)(5)....................  Ground-fault circuit
                                           interrupters for fountains.
Sec.  1910.308(a)(1)(ii)................  Physical protection of
                                           conductors over 600 volts.
Sec.  1910.308(c)(2)....................  Marking of Class 2 and Class 3
                                           power supplies.
Sec.  1910.308(d).......................  Fire protective signaling
                                           circuits.

[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.303  General requirements.

    (a) Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by 
this subpart shall be acceptable only if approved.
    (b) Examination, installation, and use of equipment--(1) 
Examination. Electrical equipment shall be free from recognized hazards 
that are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to employees. 
Safety of equipment shall be determined using the following 
considerations:
    (i) Suitability for installation and use in conformity with the 
provisions of this subpart. Suitability of equipment for an identified 
purpose may be evidenced by listing or labeling for that identified 
purpose.
    (ii) Mechanical strength and durability, including, for parts 
designed to enclose and protect other equipment, the adequacy of the 
protection thus provided.
    (iii) Electrical insulation.
    (iv) Heating effects under conditions of use.
    (v) Arcing effects.
    (vi) Classification by type, size, voltage, current capacity, 
specific use.
    (vii) Other factors which contribute to the practical safeguarding 
of employees using or likely to come in contact with the equipment.
    (2) Installation and use. Listed or labeled equipment shall be used 
or installed in accordance with any instructions included in the listing 
or labeling.
    (c) Splices. Conductors shall be spliced or joined with splicing 
devices suitable for the use or by brazing, welding, or soldering with a 
fusible metal or alloy. Soldered splices shall first be so spliced or 
joined as to be mechanically and electrically secure without solder and 
then soldered. All splices and joints and the free ends of conductors 
shall be covered with an insulation equivalent to that of the conductors 
or with an insulating device suitable for the purpose.
    (d) Arcing parts. Parts of electric equipment which in ordinary 
operation produce arcs, sparks, flames, or molten metal shall be 
enclosed or separated and isolated from all combustible material.
    (e) Marking. Electrical equipment may not be used unless the 
manufacturer's name, trademark, or other descriptive marking by which 
the organization responsible for the product may be identified is placed 
on the equipment. Other markings shall be provided giving voltage, 
current, wattage, or other ratings as necessary. The marking shall be of 
sufficient durability to withstand the environment involved.
    (f) Identification of disconnecting means and circuits. Each 
disconnecting means required by this subpart for motors and appliances 
shall be legibly marked to indicate its purpose, unless located and 
arranged so the purpose is

[[Page 829]]

evident. Each service, feeder, and branch circuit, at its disconnecting 
means or overcurrent device, shall be legibly marked to indicate its 
purpose, unless located and arranged so the purpose is evident. These 
markings shall be of sufficient durability to withstand the environment 
involved.
    (g) 600 Volts, nominal, or less--(1) Working space about electric 
equipment. Sufficient access and working space shall be provided and 
maintained about all electric equipment to permit ready and safe 
operation and maintenance of such equipment.
    (i) Working clearances. Except as required or permitted elsewhere in 
this subpart, the dimension of the working space in the direction of 
access to live parts operating at 600 volts or less and likely to 
require examination, adjustment, servicing, or maintenance while alive 
may not be less than indicated in Table S-1. In addition to the 
dimensions shown in Table S-1, workspace may not be less than 30 inches 
wide in front of the electric equipment. Distances shall be measured 
from the live parts if they are exposed, or from the enclosure front or 
opening if the live parts are enclosed. Concrete, brick, or tile walls 
are considered to be grounded. Working space is not required in back of 
assemblies such as dead-front switchboards or motor control centers 
where there are no renewable or adjustable parts such as fuses or 
switches on the back and where all connections are accessible from 
locations other than the back.

                      Table S-1--Working Clearances
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Minimum clear distance
                                                 for condition\2\ (ft)
          Nominal voltage to ground           --------------------------
                                                 (a)      (b)      (c)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0-150........................................    \1\ 3    \1\ 3        3
151-600......................................    \1\ 3   3\1/2\        4
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Minimum clear distances may be 2 feet 6 inches for installations
  built prior to April 16, 1981.
\2\ Conditions (a), (b), and (c), are as follows: (a) Exposed live parts
  on one side and no live or grounded parts on the other side of the
  working space, or exposed live parts on both sides effectively guarded
  by suitable wood or other insulating material. Insulated wire or
  insulated busbars operating at not over 300 volts are not considered
  live parts. (b) Exposed live parts on one side and grounded parts on
  the other side. (c) Exposed live parts on both sides of the workspace
  [not guarded as provided in Condition (a)] with the operator between.

    (ii) Clear spaces. Working space required by this subpart may not be 
used for storage. When normally enclosed live parts are exposed for 
inspection or servicing, the working space, if in a passageway or 
general open space, shall be suitably guarded.
    (iii) Access and entrance to working space. At least one entrance of 
sufficient area shall be provided to give access to the working space 
about electric equipment.
    (iv) Front working space. Where there are live parts normally 
exposed on the front of switchboards or motor control centers, the 
working space in front of such equipment may not be less than 3 feet.
    (v) Illumination. Illumination shall be provided for all working 
spaces about service equipment, switchboards, panelboards, and motor 
control centers installed indoors.
    (vi) Headroom. The minimum headroom of working spaces about service 
equipment, switchboards, panel-boards, or motor control centers shall be 
6 feet 3 inches.

    Note: As used in this section a motor control center is an assembly 
of one or more enclosed sections having a common power bus and 
principally containing motor control units.

    (2) Guarding of live parts. (i) Except as required or permitted 
elsewhere in this subpart, live parts of electric equipment operating at 
50 volts or more shall be guarded against accidental contact by approved 
cabinets or other forms of approved enclosures, or by any of the 
following means:
    (A) By location in a room, vault, or similar enclosure that is 
accessible only to qualified persons.
    (B) By suitable permanent, substantial partitions or screens so 
arranged that only qualified persons will have access to the space 
within reach of the live parts. Any openings in such partitions or 
screens shall be so sized and located that persons are not likely to 
come into accidental contact with the live parts or to bring conducting 
objects into contact with them.
    (C) By location on a suitable balcony, gallery, or platform so 
elevated and arranged as to exclude unqualified persons.
    (D) By elevation of 8 feet or more above the floor or other working 
surface.

[[Page 830]]

    (ii) In locations where electric equipment would be exposed to 
physical damage, enclosures or guards shall be so arranged and of such 
strength as to prevent such damage.
    (iii) Entrances to rooms and other guarded locations containing 
exposed live parts shall be marked with conspicuous warning signs 
forbidding unqualified persons to enter.
    (h) Over 600 volts, nominal--(1) General. Conductors and equipment 
used on circuits exceeding 600 volts, nominal, shall comply with all 
applicable provisions of paragraphs (a) through (g) of this section and 
with the following provisions which supplement or modify those 
requirements. The provisions of paragraphs (h)(2), (h)(3), and (h)(4) of 
this section do not apply to equipment on the supply side of the service 
conductors.
    (2) Enclosure for electrical installations. Electrical installations 
in a vault, room, closet or in an area surrounded by a wall, screen, or 
fence, access to which is controlled by lock and key or other approved 
means, are considered to be accessible to qualified persons only. A 
wall, screen, or fence less than 8 feet in height is not considered to 
prevent access unless it has other features that provide a degree of 
isolation equivalent to an 8 foot fence. The entrances to all buildings, 
rooms, or enclosures containing exposed live parts or exposed conductors 
operating at over 600 volts, nominal, shall be kept locked or shall be 
under the observation of a qualified person at all times.
    (i) Installations accessible to qualified persons only. Electrical 
installations having exposed live parts shall be accessible to qualified 
persons only and shall comply with the applicable provisions of 
paragraph (h)(3) of this section.
    (ii) Installations accessible to unqualified persons. Electrical 
installations that are open to unqualified persons shall be made with 
metal-enclosed equipment or shall be enclosed in a vault or in an area, 
access to which is controlled by a lock. If metal-enclosed equipment is 
installed so that the bottom of the enclosure is less than 8 feet above 
the floor, the door or cover shall be kept locked. Metal-enclosed 
switchgear, unit substations, transformers, pull boxes, connection 
boxes, and other similar associated equipment shall be marked with 
appropriate caution signs. If equipment is exposed to physical damage 
from vehicular traffic, suitable guards shall be provided to prevent 
such damage. Ventilating or similar openings in metal-enclosed equipment 
shall be designed so that foreign objects inserted through these 
openings will be deflected from energized parts.
    (3) Workspace about equipment. Sufficient space shall be provided 
and maintained about electric equipment to permit ready and safe 
operation and maintenance of such equipment. Where energized parts are 
exposed, the minimum clear workspace may not be less than 6 feet 6 
inches high (measured vertically from the floor or platform), or less 
than 3 feet wide (measured parallel to the equipment). The depth shall 
be as required in Table S-2. The workspace shall be adequate to permit 
at least a 90-degree opening of doors or hinged panels.
    (i) Working space. The minimum clear working space in front of 
electric equipment such as switchboards, control panels, switches, 
circuit breakers, motor controllers, relays, and similar equipment may 
not be less than specified in Table S-2 unless otherwise specified in 
this subpart. Distances shall be measured from the live parts if they 
are exposed, or from the enclosure front or opening if the live parts 
are enclosed. However, working space is not required in back of 
equipment such as deadfront switchboards or control assemblies where 
there are no renewable or adjustable parts (such as fuses or switches) 
on the back and where all connections are accessible from locations 
other than the back. Where rear access is required to work on de-
energized parts on the back of enclosed equipment, a minimum working 
space of 30 inches horizontally shall be provided.

  Table S-2--Minimum Depth of Clear Working Space in Front of Electric
                                Equipment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Conditions  \2\ (ft)
          Nominal voltage to ground           --------------------------
                                                 (a)      (b)      (c)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
601 to 2,500.................................        3        4        5
2,501 to 9,000...............................        4        5        6

[[Page 831]]

9,001 to 25,000..............................        5        6        9
25,001 to 75kV  \1\..........................        6        8       10
Above 75kV  \1\..............................        8       10       12
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Minimum depth of clear working space in front of electric equipment
  with a nominal voltage to ground above 25,000 volts may be the same as
  for 25,000 volts under Conditions (a), (b), and (c) for installations
  built prior to April 16, 1981.
\2\ Conditions (a), (b), and (c) are as follows: (a) Exposed live parts
  on one side and no live or grounded parts on the other side of the
  working space, or exposed live parts on both sides effectively guarded
  by suitable wood or other insulating materials. Insulated wire or
  insulated busbars operating at not over 300 volts are not considered
  live parts. (b) Exposed live parts on one side and grounded parts on
  the other side. Concrete, brick, or tile walls will be considered as
  grounded surfaces. (c) Exposed live parts on both sides of the
  workspace not guarded as provided in Condition (a) with the operator
  between.

    (ii) Illumination. Adequate illumination shall be provided for all 
working spaces about electric equipment. The lighting outlets shall be 
so arranged that persons changing lamps or making repairs on the 
lighting system will not be endangered by live parts or other equipment. 
The points of control shall be so located that persons are not likely to 
come in contact with any live part or moving part of the equipment while 
turning on the lights.
    (iii) Elevation of unguarded live parts. Unguarded live parts above 
working space shall be maintained at elevations not less than specified 
in Table S-3.

  Table S-3--Elevation of Unguarded Energized Parts Above Working Space
------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Nominal voltage between phases              Minimum elevation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
601 to 7,500..............................  *8 feet 6 inches.
7,501 to 35,000...........................  9 feet.
Over 35kV.................................  9 feet + 0.37 inches per kV
                                             above 35kV.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Note.--Minimum elevation may be 8 feet 0 inches for installations built
  prior to April 16, 1981 if the nominal voltage between phases is in
  the range of 601-6600 volts.

    (4) Entrance and access to workspace. (See Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (i) At least one entrance not less than 24 inches wide and 6 feet 6 
inches high shall be provided to give access to the working space about 
electric equipment. On switchboard and control panels exceeding 48 
inches in width, there shall be one entrance at each end of such board 
where practicable. Where bare energized parts at any voltage or 
insulated energized parts above 600 volts are located adjacent to such 
entrance, they shall be suitably guarded.
    (ii) Permanent ladders or stairways shall be provided to give safe 
access to the working space around electric equipment installed on 
platforms, balconies, mezzanine floors, or in attic or roof rooms or 
spaces.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.304  Wiring design and protection.

    (a) Use and identification of grounded and grounding conductors. (1) 
Identification of conductors. A conductor used as a grounded conductor 
shall be identifiable and distinguishable from all other conductors. A 
conductor used as an equipment grounding conductor shall be identifiable 
and distinguishable from all other conductors.
    (2) Polarity of connections. No grounded conductor may be attached 
to any terminal or lead so as to reverse designated polarity.
    (3) Use of grounding terminals and devices. A grounding terminal or 
grounding-type device on a receptacle, cord connector, or attachment 
plug may not be used for purposes other than grounding.
    (b) Branch circuits--(1) [Reserved]
    (2) Outlet devices. Outlet devices shall have an ampere rating not 
less than the load to be served.
    (c) Outside conductors, 600 volts, nominal, or less. Paragraphs 
(c)(1), (c)(2), (c)(3), and (c)(4) of this section apply to branch 
circuit, feeder, and service conductors rated 600 volts, nominal, or 
less and run outdoors as open conductors. Paragraph (c)(5) applies to 
lamps installed under such conductors.
    (1) Conductors on poles. Conductors supported on poles shall provide 
a horizontal climbing space not less than the following:
    (i) Power conductors below communication conductors--30 inches.
    (ii) Power conductors alone or above communication conductors: 300 
volts or less--24 inches; more than 300 volts--30 inches.
    (iii) Communication conductors below power conductors with power 
conductors 300 volts or less--24 inches; more than 300 volts--30 inches.

[[Page 832]]

    (2) Clearance from ground. Open conductors shall conform to the 
following minimum clearances:
    (i) 10 feet--above finished grade, sidewalks, or from any platform 
or projection from which they might be reached.
    (ii) 12 feet--over areas subject to vehicular traffic other than 
truck traffic.
    (iii) 15 feet--over areas other than those specified in paragraph 
(c)(2)(iv) of this section that are subject to truck traffic.
    (iv) 18 feet--over public streets, alleys, roads, and driveways.
    (3) Clearance from building openings. Conductors shall have a 
clearance of at least 3 feet from windows, doors, porches, fire escapes, 
or similar locations. Conductors run above the top level of a window are 
considered to be out of reach from that window and, therefore, do not 
have to be 3 feet away.
    (4) Clearance over roofs. Conductors shall have a clearance of not 
less than 8 feet from the highest point of roofs over which they pass, 
except that:
    (i) Where the voltage between conductors is 300 volts or less and 
the roof has a slope of not less than 4 inches in 12, the clearance from 
roofs shall be at least 3 feet, or
    (ii) Where the voltage between conductors is 300 volts or less and 
the conductors do not pass over more than 4 feet of the overhang portion 
of the roof and they are terminated at a through-the-roof raceway or 
approved support, the clearance from roofs shall be at least 18 inches.
    (5) Location of outdoor lamps. Lamps for outdoor lighting shall be 
located below all live conductors, transformers, or other electric 
equipment, unless such equipment is controlled by a disconnecting means 
that can be locked in the open position or unless adequate clearances or 
other safeguards are provided for relamping operations.
    (d) Services--(1) Disconnecting means--(i) General. Means shall be 
provided to disconnect all conductors in a building or other structure 
from the service-entrance conductors. The disconnecting means shall 
plainly indicate whether it is in the open or closed position and shall 
be installed at a readily accessible location nearest the point of 
entrance of the service-entrance conductors.
    (ii) Simultaneous opening of poles. Each service disconnecting means 
shall simultaneously disconnect all ungrounded conductors.
    (2) Services over 600 volts, nominal. The following additional 
requirements apply to services over 600 volts, nominal.
    (i) Guarding. Service-entrance conductors installed as open wires 
shall be guarded to make them accessible only to qualified persons.
    (ii) Warning signs. Signs warning of high voltage shall be posted 
where other than qualified employees might come in contact with live 
parts.
    (e) Overcurrent protection. (1) 600 volts, nominal, or less. The 
following requirements apply to overcurrent protection of circuits rated 
600 volts, nominal, or less.
    (i) Protection of conductors and equipment. Conductors and equipment 
shall be protected from overcurrent in accordance with their ability to 
safely conduct current.
    (ii) Grounded conductors. Except for motor running overload 
protection, overcurrent devices may not interrupt the continuity of the 
grounded conductor unless all conductors of the circuit are opened 
simultaneously.
    (iii) Disconnection of fuses and thermal cutouts. Except for service 
fuses, all cartridge fuses which are accessible to other than qualified 
persons and all fuses and thermal cutouts on circuits over 150 volts to 
ground shall be provided with disconnecting means. This disconnecting 
means shall be installed so that the fuse or thermal cutout can be 
disconnected from its supply without disrupting service to equipment and 
circuits unrelated to those protected by the overcurrent device.
    (iv) Location in or on premises. Overcurrent devices shall be 
readily accessible to each employee or authorized building management 
personnel. These overcurrent devices may not be located where they will 
be exposed to physical damage nor in the vicinity of easily ignitible 
material.
    (v) Arcing or suddenly moving parts. Fuses and circuit breakers 
shall be so located or shielded that employees will not be burned or 
otherwise injured by their operation.

[[Page 833]]

    (vi) Circuit breakers. (A) Circuit breakers shall clearly indicate 
whether they are in the open (off) or closed (on) position.
    (B) Where circuit breaker handles on switchboards are operated 
vertically rather than horizontally or rotationally, the up position of 
the handle shall be the closed (on) position. (See Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (C) If used as switches in 120-volt, fluorescent lighting circuits, 
circuit breakers shall be approved for the purpose and marked ``SWD.'' 
(See Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (2) Over 600 volts, nominal. Feeders and branch circuits over 600 
volts, nominal, shall have short-circuit protection.
    (f) Grounding. Paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(7) of this section 
contain grounding requirements for systems, circuits, and equipment.
    (1) Systems to be grounded. The following systems which supply 
premises wiring shall be grounded:
    (i) All 3-wire DC systems shall have their neutral conductor 
grounded.
    (ii) Two-wire DC systems operating at over 50 volts through 300 
volts between conductors shall be grounded unless:
    (A) They supply only industrial equipment in limited areas and are 
equipped with a ground detector; or
    (B) They are rectifier-derived from an AC system complying with 
paragraphs (f)(1)(iii), (f)(1)(iv), and (f)(1)(v) of this section; or
    (C) They are fire-protective signaling circuits having a maximum 
current of 0.030 amperes.
    (iii) AC circuits of less than 50 volts shall be grounded if they 
are installed as overhead conductors outside of buildings or if they are 
supplied by transformers and the transformer primary supply system is 
ungrounded or exceeds 150 volts to ground.
    (iv) AC systems of 50 volts to 1000 volts shall be grounded under 
any of the following conditions, unless exempted by paragraph (f)(1)(v) 
of this section:
    (A) If the system can be so grounded that the maximum voltage to 
ground on the ungrounded conductors does not exceed 150 volts;
    (B) If the system is nominally rated 480Y/277 volt, 3-phase, 4-wire 
in which the neutral is used as a circuit conductor;
    (C) If the system is nominally rated 240/120 volt, 3-phase, 4-wire 
in which the midpoint of one phase is used as a circuit conductor; or
    (D) If a service conductor is uninsulated.
    (v) AC systems of 50 volts to 1000 volts are not required to be 
grounded under any of the following conditions:
    (A) If the system is used exclusively to supply industrial electric 
furnaces for melting, refining, tempering, and the like.
    (B) If the system is separately derived and is used exclusively for 
rectifiers supplying only adjustable speed industrial drives.
    (C) If the system is separately derived and is supplied by a 
transformer that has a primary voltage rating less than 1000 volts, 
provided all of the following conditions are met:
    (1) The system is used exclusively for control circuits,
    (2) The conditions of maintenance and supervision assure that only 
qualified persons will service the installation,
    (3) Continuity of control power is required, and
    (4) Ground detectors are installed on the control system.
    (D) If the system is an isolated power system that supplies circuits 
in health care facilities.
    (2) Conductors to be grounded. For AC premises wiring systems the 
identified conductor shall be grounded.
    (3) Grounding connections. (i) For a grounded system, a grounding 
electrode conductor shall be used to connect both the equipment 
grounding conductor and the grounded circuit conductor to the grounding 
electrode. Both the equipment grounding conductor and the grounding 
electrode conductor shall be connected to the grounded circuit conductor 
on the supply side of the service disconnecting means, or on the supply 
side of the system disconnecting means or overcurrent devices if the 
system is separately derived.
    (ii) For an ungrounded service-supplied system, the equipment 
grounding

[[Page 834]]

conductor shall be connected to the grounding electrode conductor at the 
service equipment. For an ungrounded separately derived system, the 
equipment grounding conductor shall be connected to the grounding 
electrode conductor at, or ahead of, the system disconnecting means or 
overcurrent devices.
    (iii) On extensions of existing branch circuits which do not have an 
equipment grounding conductor, grounding-type receptacles may be 
grounded to a grounded cold water pipe near the equipment.
    (4) Grounding path. The path to ground from circuits, equipment, and 
enclosures shall be permanent and continuous.
    (5) Supports, enclosures, and equipment to be grounded--(i) Supports 
and enclosures for conductors. Metal cable trays, metal raceways, and 
metal enclosures for conductors shall be grounded, except that:
    (A) Metal enclosures such as sleeves that are used to protect cable 
assemblies from physical damage need not be grounded; or
    (B) Metal enclosures for conductors added to existing installations 
of open wire, knob-and-tube wiring, and nonmetallic-sheathed cable need 
not be grounded if all of the following conditions are met: (1) Runs are 
less than 25 feet; (2) enclosures are free from probable contact with 
ground, grounded metal, metal laths, or other conductive materials; and 
(3) enclosures are guarded against employee contact.
    (ii) Service equipment enclosures. Metal enclosures for service 
equipment shall be grounded.
    (iii) Frames of ranges and clothes dryers. Frames of electric 
ranges, wall-mounted ovens, counter-mounted cooking units, clothes 
dryers, and metal outlet or junction boxes which are part of the circuit 
for these appliances shall be grounded.
    (iv) Fixed equipment. Exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of 
fixed equipment which may become energized shall be grounded under any 
of the following conditions:
    (A) If within 8 feet vertically or 5 feet horizontally of ground or 
grounded metal objects and subject to employee contact.
    (B) If located in a wet or damp location and not isolated.
    (C) If in electrical contact with metal.
    (D) If in a hazardous (classified) location.
    (E) If supplied by a metal-clad, metal-sheathed, or grounded metal 
raceway wiring method.
    (F) If equipment operates with any terminal at over 150 volts to 
ground; however, the following need not be grounded:
    (1) Enclosures for switches or circuit breakers used for other than 
service equipment and accessible to qualified persons only;
    (2) Metal frames of electrically heated appliances which are 
permanently and effectively insulated from ground; and
    (3) The cases of distribution apparatus such as transformers and 
capacitors mounted on wooden poles at a height exceeding 8 feet above 
ground or grade level.
    (v) Equipment connected by cord and plug. Under any of the 
conditions described in paragraphs (f)(5)(v)(A) through (f)(5)(v)(C) of 
this section, exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of cord- and 
plug-connected equipment which may become energized shall be grounded.
    (A) If in hazardous (classified) locations (see Sec. 1910.307).
    (B) If operated at over 150 volts to ground, except for guarded 
motors and metal frames of electrically heated appliances if the 
appliance frames are permanently and effectively insulated from ground.
    (C) If the equipment is of the following types:
    (1) Refrigerators, freezers, and air conditioners;
    (2) Clothes-washing, clothes-drying and dishwashing machines, sump 
pumps, and electrical aquarium equipment;
    (3) Hand-held motor-operated tools;
    (4) Motor-operated appliances of the following types: hedge 
clippers, lawn mowers, snow blowers, and wet scrubbers;
    (5) Cord- and plug-connected appliances used in damp or wet 
locations or by employees standing on the ground

[[Page 835]]

or on metal floors or working inside of metal tanks or boilers;
    (6) Portable and mobile X-ray and associated equipment;
    (7) Tools likely to be used in wet and conductive locations; and
    (8) Portable hand lamps.

Tools likely to be used in wet and conductive locations need not be 
grounded if supplied through an isolating transformer with an ungrounded 
secondary of not over 50 volts. Listed or labeled portable tools and 
appliances protected by an approved system of double insulation, or its 
equivalent, need not be grounded. If such a system is employed, the 
equipment shall be distinctively marked to indicate that the tool or 
appliance utilizes an approved system of double insulation.
    (vi) Nonelectrical equipment. The metal parts of the following 
nonelectrical equipment shall be grounded: frames and tracks of 
electrically operated cranes; frames of nonelectrically driven elevator 
cars to which electric conductors are attached; hand operated metal 
shifting ropes or cables of electric elevators, and metal partitions, 
grill work, and similar metal enclosures around equipment of over 750 
volts between conductors.
    (6) Methods of grounding fixed equipment. (i) Non-current-carrying 
metal parts of fixed equipment, if required to be grounded by this 
subpart, shall be grounded by an equipment grounding conductor which is 
contained within the same raceway, cable, or cord, or runs with or 
encloses the circuit conductors. For DC circuits only, the equipment 
grounding conductor may be run separately from the circuit conductors.
    (ii) Electric equipment is considered to be effectively grounded if 
it is secured to, and in electrical contact with, a metal rack or 
structure that is provided for its support and the metal rack or 
structure is grounded by the method specified for the non-current-
carrying metal parts of fixed equipment in paragraph (f)(6)(i) of this 
section. For installations made before April 16, 1981, only, electric 
equipment is also considered to be effectively grounded if it is secured 
to, and in metallic contact with, the grounded structural metal frame of 
a building. Metal car frames supported by metal hoisting cables attached 
to or running over metal sheaves or drums of grounded elevator machines 
are also considered to be effectively grounded.
    (7) Grounding of systems and circuits of 1000 volts and over (high 
voltage)--(i) General. If high voltage systems are grounded, they shall 
comply with all applicable provisions of paragraphs (f)(1) through 
(f)(6) of this section as supplemented and modified by this paragraph 
(f)(7).
    (ii) Grounding of systems supplying portable or mobile equipment. 
(See Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).) Systems supplying portable or mobile high 
voltage equipment, other than substations installed on a temporary 
basis, shall comply with the following:
    (A) Portable and mobile high voltage equipment shall be supplied 
from a system having its neutral grounded through an impedance. If a 
delta-connected high voltage system is used to supply the equipment, a 
system neutral shall be derived.
    (B) Exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of portable and mobile 
equipment shall be connected by an equipment grounding conductor to the 
point at which the system neutral impedance is grounded.
    (C) Ground-fault detection and relaying shall be provided to 
automatically de-energize any high voltage system component which has 
developed a ground fault. The continuity of the equipment grounding 
conductor shall be continuously monitored so as to de-energize 
automatically the high voltage feeder to the portable equipment upon 
loss of continuity of the equipment grounding conductor.
    (D) The grounding electrode to which the portable or mobile 
equipment system neutral impedance is connected shall be isolated from 
and separated in the ground by at least 20 feet from any other system or 
equipment grounding electrode, and there shall be no direct connection 
between the grounding electrodes, such as buried pipe, fence, etc.
    (iii) Grounding of equipment. All non-current-carrying metal parts 
of portable equipment and fixed equipment including their associated 
fences, housings, enclosures, and supporting

[[Page 836]]

structures shall be grounded. However, equipment which is guarded by 
location and isolated from ground need not be grounded. Additionally, 
pole-mounted distribution apparatus at a height exceeding 8 feet above 
ground or grade level need not be grounded.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981, as amended at 55 
FR 32015, Aug. 6, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.305  Wiring methods, components, and equipment for general use.

    (a) Wiring methods. The provisions of this section do not apply to 
the conductors that are an integral part of factory-assembled equipment.
    (1) General requirements--(i) Electrical continuity of metal 
raceways and enclosures. Metal raceways, cable armor, and other metal 
enclosures for conductors shall be metallically joined together into a 
continuous electric conductor and shall be so connected to all boxes, 
fittings, and cabinets as to provide effective electrical continuity.
    (ii) Wiring in ducts. No wiring systems of any type shall be 
installed in ducts used to transport dust, loose stock or flammable 
vapors. No wiring system of any type may be installed in any duct used 
for vapor removal or for ventilation of commercial-type cooking 
equipment, or in any shaft containing only such ducts.
    (2) Temporary wiring. Temporary electrical power and lighting wiring 
methods may be of a class less than would be required for a permanent 
installation. Except as specifically modified in this paragraph, all 
other requirements of this subpart for permanent wiring shall apply to 
temporary wiring installations.
    (i) Uses permitted, 600 volts, nominal, or less. Temporary 
electrical power and lighting installations 600 volts, nominal, or less 
may be used only:
    (A) During and for remodeling, maintenance, repair, or demolition of 
buildings, structures, or equipment, and similar activities;
    (B) For experimental or development work, and
    (C) For a period not to exceed 90 days for Christmas decorative 
lighting, carnivals, and similar purposes.
    (ii) Uses permitted, over 600 volts, nominal. Temporary wiring over 
600 volts, nominal, may be used only during periods of tests, 
experiments, or emergencies.
    (iii) General requirements for temporary wiring. (A) Feeders shall 
originate in an approved distribution center. The conductors shall be 
run as multiconductor cord or cable assemblies, or, where not subject to 
physical damage, they may be run as open conductors on insulators not 
more than 10 feet apart.
    (B) Branch circuits shall originate in an approved power outlet or 
panelboard. Conductors shall be multiconductor cord or cable assemblies 
or open conductors. If run as open conductors they shall be fastened at 
ceiling height every 10 feet. No branch-circuit conductor may be laid on 
the floor. Each branch circuit that supplies receptacles or fixed 
equipment shall contain a separate equipment grounding conductor if run 
as open conductors.
    (C) Receptacles shall be of the grounding type. Unless installed in 
a complete metallic raceway, each branch circuit shall contain a 
separate equipment grounding conductor and all receptacles shall be 
electrically connected to the grounding conductor.
    (D) No bare conductors nor earth returns may be used for the wiring 
of any temporary circuit.
    (E) Suitable disconnecting switches or plug connectors shall be 
installed to permit the disconnection of all ungrounded conductors of 
each temporary circuit.
    (F) Lamps for general illumination shall be protected from 
accidental contact or breakage. Protection shall be provided by 
elevation of at least 7 feet from normal working surface or by a 
suitable fixture or lampholder with a guard.
    (G) Flexible cords and cables shall be protected from accidental 
damage. Sharp corners and projections shall be avoided. Where passing 
through doorways or other pinch points, flexible cords and cables shall 
be provided with protection to avoid damage.
    (3) Cable trays--(i) Uses permitted. (a) Only the following may be 
installed in cable tray systems:
    (1) Mineral-insulated metal-sheathed cable (Type MI);
    (2) Armored cable (Type AC);
    (3) Metal-clad cable (Type MC);

[[Page 837]]

    (4) Power-limited tray cable (Type PLTC);
    (5) Nonmetallic-sheathed cable (Type NM or NMC);
    (6) Shielded nonmetallic-sheathed cable (Type SNM);
    (7) Multiconductor service-entrance cable (Type SE or USE);
    (8) Multiconductor underground feeder and branch-circuit cable (Type 
UF);
    (9) Power and control tray cable (Type TC);
    (10) Other factory-assembled, multiconductor control, signal, or 
power cables which are specifically approved for installation in cable 
trays; or
    (11) Any approved conduit or raceway with its contained conductors.
    (b) In industrial establishments only, where conditions of 
maintenance and supervision assure that only qualified persons will 
service the installed cable tray system, the following cables may also 
be installed in ladder, ventilated trough, or 4 inch ventilated channel-
type cable trays:
    (1) Single conductor cables which are 250 MCM or larger and are 
Types RHH, RHW, MV, USE, or THW, and other 250 MCM or larger single 
conductor cables if specifically approved for installation in cable 
trays. Where exposed to direct rays of the sun, cables shall be 
sunlight-resistant.
    (2) Type MV cables, where exposed to direct rays of the sun, shall 
be sunlight-resistant.
    (c) Cable trays in hazardous (classified) locations shall contain 
only the cable types permitted in such locations.
    (ii) Uses not permitted. Cable tray systems may not be used in 
hoistways or where subjected to severe physical damage.
    (4) Open wiring on insulators--(i) Uses permitted. Open wiring on 
insulators is only permitted on systems of 600 volts, nominal, or less 
for industrial or agricultural establishments and for services.
    (ii) Conductor supports. Conductors shall be rigidly supported on 
noncombustible, nonabsorbent insulating materials and may not contact 
any other objects.
    (iii) Flexible nonmetallic tubing. In dry locations where not 
exposed to severe physical damage, conductors may be separately enclosed 
in flexible nonmetallic tubing. The tubing shall be in continuous 
lengths not exceeding 15 feet and secured to the surface by straps at 
intervals not exceeding 4 feet 6 inches.
    (iv) Through walls, floors, wood cross members, etc. Open conductors 
shall be separated from contact with walls, floors, wood cross members, 
or partitions through which they pass by tubes or bushings of 
noncombustible, nonabsorbent insulating material. If the bushing is 
shorter than the hole, a waterproof sleeve of nonconductive material 
shall be inserted in the hole and an insulating bushing slipped into the 
sleeve at each end in such a manner as to keep the conductors absolutely 
out of contact with the sleeve. Each conductor shall be carried through 
a separate tube or sleeve.
    (v) Protection from physical damage. Conductors within 7 feet from 
the floor are considered exposed to physical damage. Where open 
conductors cross ceiling joints and wall studs and are exposed to 
physical damage, they shall be protected.
    (b) Cabinets, boxes, and fittings--(1) Conductors entering boxes, 
cabinets, or fittings. Conductors entering boxes, cabinets, or fittings 
shall also be protected from abrasion, and openings through which 
conductors enter shall be effectively closed. Unused openings in 
cabinets, boxes, and fittings shall be effectively closed.
    (2) Covers and canopies. All pull boxes, junction boxes, and 
fittings shall be provided with covers approved for the purpose. If 
metal covers are used they shall be grounded. In completed installations 
each outlet box shall have a cover, faceplate, or fixture canopy. Covers 
of outlet boxes having holes through which flexible cord pendants pass 
shall be provided with bushings designed for the purpose or shall have 
smooth, well-rounded surfaces on which the cords may bear.
    (3) Pull and junction boxes for systems over 600 volts, nominal. In 
addition to other requirements in this section for pull and junction 
boxes, the following shall apply to these boxes for systems over 600 
volts, nominal:

[[Page 838]]

    (i) Boxes shall provide a complete enclosure for the contained 
conductors or cables.
    (ii) Boxes shall be closed by suitable covers securely fastened in 
place. Underground box covers that weigh over 100 pounds meet this 
requirement. Covers for boxes shall be permanently marked ``HIGH 
VOLTAGE.'' The marking shall be on the outside of the box cover and 
shall be readily visible and legible.
    (c) Switches--(1) Knife switches. Single-throw knife switches shall 
be so connected that the blades are dead when the switch is in the open 
position. Single-throw knife switches shall be so placed that gravity 
will not tend to close them. Single-throw knife switches approved for 
use in the inverted position shall be provided with a locking device 
that will ensure that the blades remain in the open position when so 
set. Double-throw knife switches may be mounted so that the throw will 
be either vertical or horizontal. However, if the throw is vertical a 
locking device shall be provided to ensure that the blades remain in the 
open position when so set.
    (2) Faceplates for flush-mounted snap switches. Flush snap switches 
that are mounted in ungrounded metal boxes and located within reach of 
conducting floors or other conducting surfaces shall be provided with 
faceplates of nonconducting, noncombustible material.
    (d) Switchboards and panelboards. Switchboards that have any exposed 
live parts shall be located in permanently dry locations and accessible 
only to qualified persons. Panelboards shall be mounted in cabinets, 
cutout boxes, or enclosures approved for the purpose and shall be dead 
front. However, panelboards other than the dead front externally-
operable type are permitted where accessible only to qualified persons. 
Exposed blades of knife switches shall be dead when open.
    (e) Enclosures for damp or wet locations. (1) Cabinets, cutout 
boxes, fittings, boxes, and panelboard enclosures in damp or wet 
locations shall be installed so as to prevent moisture or water from 
entering and accumulating within the enclosures. In wet locations the 
enclosures shall be weatherproof.
    (2) Switches, circuit breakers, and switchboards installed in wet 
locations shall be enclosed in weatherproof enclosures.
    (f) Conductors for general wiring. All conductors used for general 
wiring shall be insulated unless otherwise permitted in this Subpart. 
The conductor insulation shall be of a type that is approved for the 
voltage, operating temperature, and location of use. Insulated 
conductors shall be distinguishable by appropriate color or other 
suitable means as being grounded conductors, ungrounded conductors, or 
equipment grounding conductors.
    (g) Flexible cords and cables--(1) Use of flexible cords and cables. 
(i) Flexible cords and cables shall be approved and suitable for 
conditions of use and location. Flexible cords and cables shall be used 
only for:
    (A) Pendants;
    (B) Wiring of fixtures;
    (C) Connection of portable lamps or appliances;
    (D) Elevator cables;
    (E) Wiring of cranes and hoists;
    (F) Connection of stationary equipment to facilitate their frequent 
interchange;
    (G) Prevention of the transmission of noise or vibration;
    (H) Appliances where the fastening means and mechanical connections 
are designed to permit removal for maintenance and repair; or
    (I) Data processing cables approved as a part of the data processing 
system.
    (ii) If used as permitted in paragraphs (g)(1)(i)(c), (g)(1)(i)(f), 
or (g)(1)(i)(h) of this section, the flexible cord shall be equipped 
with an attachment plug and shall be energized from an approved 
receptacle outlet.
    (iii) Unless specifically permitted in paragraph (g)(1)(i) of this 
section, flexible cords and cables may not be used:
    (A) As a substitute for the fixed wiring of a structure;
    (B) Where run through holes in walls, ceilings, or floors;
    (C) Where run through doorways, windows, or similar openings;
    (D) Where attached to building surfaces; or
    (E) Where concealed behind building walls, ceilings, or floors.

[[Page 839]]

    (iv) Flexible cords used in show windows and showcases shall be Type 
S, SO, SJ, SJO, ST, STO, SJT, SJTO, or AFS except for the wiring of 
chain-supported lighting fixtures and supply cords for portable lamps 
and other merchandise being displayed or exhibited.
    (2) Identification, splices, and terminations. (i) A conductor of a 
flexible cord or cable that is used as a grounded conductor or an 
equipment grounding conductor shall be distinguishable from other 
conductors. Types SJ, SJO, SJT, SJTO, S, SO, ST, and STO shall be 
durably marked on the surface with the type designation, size, and 
number of conductors.
    (ii) Flexible cords shall be used only in continuous lengths without 
splice or tap. Hard service flexible cords No. 12 or larger may be 
repaired if spliced so that the splice retains the insulation, outer 
sheath properties, and usage characteristics of the cord being spliced.
    (iii) Flexible cords shall be connected to devices and fittings so 
that strain relief is provided which will prevent pull from being 
directly transmitted to joints or terminal screws.
    (h) Portable cables over 600 volts, nominal. Multiconductor portable 
cable for use in supplying power to portable or mobile equipment at over 
600 volts, nominal, shall consist of No. 8 or larger conductors 
employing flexible stranding. Cables operated at over 2,000 volts shall 
be shielded for the purpose of confining the voltage stresses to the 
insulation. Grounding conductors shall be provided. Connectors for these 
cables shall be of a locking type with provisions to prevent their 
opening or closing while energized. Strain relief shall be provided at 
connections and terminations. Portable cables may not be operated with 
splices unless the splices are of the permanent molded, vulcanized, or 
other approved type. Termination enclosures shall be suitably marked 
with a high voltage hazard warning, and terminations shall be accessible 
only to authorized and qualified personnel.
    (i) Fixture wires--(1) General. Fixture wires shall be approved for 
the voltage, temperature, and location of use. A fixture wire which is 
used as a grounded conductor shall be identified.
    (2) Uses permitted. Fixture wires may be used:
    (i) For installation in lighting fixtures and in similar equipment 
where enclosed or protected and not subject to bending or twisting in 
use; or
    (ii) For connecting lighting fixtures to the branch-circuit 
conductors supplying the fixtures.
    (3) Uses not permitted. Fixture wires may not be used as branch-
circuit conductors except as permitted for Class 1 power limited 
circuits.
    (j) Equipment for general use--(1) Lighting fixtures, lampholders, 
lamps, and receptacles. (i) Fixtures, lampholders, lamps, rosettes, and 
receptacles may have no live parts normally exposed to employee contact. 
However, rosettes and cleat-type lampholders and receptacles located at 
least 8 feet above the floor may have exposed parts.
    (ii) Handlamps of the portable type supplied through flexible cords 
shall be equipped with a handle of molded composition or other material 
approved for the purpose, and a substantial guard shall be attached to 
the lampholder or the handle.
    (iii) Lampholders of the screw-shell type shall be installed for use 
as lampholders only. Lampholders installed in wet or damp locations 
shall be of the weatherproof type.
    (iv) Fixtures installed in wet or damp locations shall be approved 
for the purpose and shall be so constructed or installed that water 
cannot enter or accumulate in wireways, lampholders, or other electrical 
parts.
    (2) Receptacles, cord connectors, and attachment plugs (caps). (i) 
Receptacles, cord connectors, and attachment plugs shall be constructed 
so that no receptacle or cord connector will accept an attachment plug 
with a different voltage or current rating than that for which the 
device is intended. However, a 20-ampere T-slot receptacle or cord 
connector may accept a 15-ampere attachment plug of the same voltage 
rating.
    (ii) A receptacle installed in a wet or damp location shall be 
suitable for the location.

[[Page 840]]

    (3) Appliances. (i) Appliances, other than those in which the 
current-carrying parts at high temperatures are necessarily exposed, may 
have no live parts normally exposed to employee contact.
    (ii) A means shall be provided to disconnect each appliance.
    (iii) Each appliance shall be marked with its rating in volts and 
amperes or volts and watts.
    (4) Motors. This paragraph applies to motors, motor circuits, and 
controllers.
    (i) In sight from. If specified that one piece of equipment shall be 
``in sight from'' another piece of equipment, one shall be visible and 
not more than 50 feet from the other.
    (ii) Disconnecting means. (A) A disconnecting means shall be located 
in sight from the controller location. However, a single disconnecting 
means may be located adjacent to a group of coordinated controllers 
mounted adjacent to each other on a multi-motor continuous process 
machine. The controller disconnecting means for motor branch circuits 
over 600 volts, nominal, may be out of sight of the controller, if the 
controller is marked with a warning label giving the location and 
identification of the disconnecting means which is to be locked in the 
open position.
    (B) The disconnecting means shall disconnect the motor and the 
controller from all ungrounded supply conductors and shall be so 
designed that no pole can be operated independently.
    (C) If a motor and the driven machinery are not in sight from the 
controller location, the installation shall comply with one of the 
following conditions:
    (1) The controller disconnecting means shall be capable of being 
locked in the open position.
    (2) A manually operable switch that will disconnect the motor from 
its source of supply shall be placed in sight from the motor location.
    (D) The disconnecting means shall plainly indicate whether it is in 
the open (off) or closed (on) position.
    (E) The disconnecting means shall be readily accessible. If more 
than one disconnect is provided for the same equipment, only one need be 
readily accessible.
    (F) An individual disconnecting means shall be provided for each 
motor, but a single disconnecting means may be used for a group of 
motors under any one of the following conditions:
    (1) If a number of motors drive special parts of a single machine or 
piece of apparatus, such as a metal or woodworking machine, crane, or 
hoist;
    (2) If a group of motors is under the protection of one set of 
branch-circuit protective devices; or
    (3) If a group of motors is in a single room in sight from the 
location of the disconnecting means.
    (iii) Motor overload, short-circuit, and ground-fault protection. 
Motors, motor-control apparatus, and motor branch-circuit conductors 
shall be protected against overheating due to motor overloads or failure 
to start, and against short-circuits or ground faults. These provisions 
shall not require overload protection that will stop a motor where a 
shutdown is likely to introduce additional or increased hazards, as in 
the case of fire pumps, or where continued operation of a motor is 
necessary for a safe shutdown of equipment or process and motor overload 
sensing devices are connected to a supervised alarm.
    (iv) Protection of live parts--all voltages. (A) Stationary motors 
having commutators, collectors, and brush rigging located inside of 
motor end brackets and not conductively connected to supply circuits 
operating at more than 150 volts to ground need not have such parts 
guarded. Exposed live parts of motors and controllers operating at 50 
volts or more between terminals shall be guarded against accidental 
contact by any of the following:
    (1) By installation in a room or enclosure that is accessible only 
to qualified persons;
    (2) By installation on a suitable balcony, gallery, or platform, so 
elevated and arranged as to exclude unqualified persons; or
    (3) By elevation 8 feet or more above the floor.
    (B) Where live parts of motors or controllers operating at over 150 
volts to ground are guarded against accidental contact only by location, 
and where adjustment or other attendance may be

[[Page 841]]

necessary during the operation of the apparatus, suitable insulating 
mats or platforms shall be provided so that the attendant cannot readily 
touch live parts unless standing on the mats or platforms.
    (5) Transformers. (i) The following paragraphs cover the 
installation of all transformers except the following:
    (A) Current transformers;
    (B) Dry-type transformers installed as a component part of other 
apparatus;
    (C) Transformers which are an integral part of an X-ray, high 
frequency, or electrostatic-coating apparatus;
    (D) Transformers used with Class 2 and Class 3 circuits, sign and 
outline lighting, electric discharge lighting, and power-limited fire-
protective signalling circuits; and
    (E) Liquid-filled or dry-type transformers used for research, 
development, or testing, where effective safeguard arrangements are 
provided.
    (ii) The operating voltage of exposed live parts of transformer 
installations shall be indicated by warning signs or visible markings on 
the equipment or structure.
    (iii) Dry-type, high fire point liquid-insulated, and askarel-
insulated transformers installed indoors and rated over 35kV shall be in 
a vault.
    (iv) If they present a fire hazard to employees, oil-insulated 
transformers installed indoors shall be in a vault.
    (v) Combustible material, combustible buildings and parts of 
buildings, fire escapes, and door and window openings shall be 
safeguarded from fires which may originate in oil-insulated transformers 
attached to or adjacent to a building or combustible material.
    (vi) Transformer vaults shall be constructed so as to contain fire 
and combustible liquids within the vault and to prevent unauthorized 
access. Locks and latches shall be so arranged that a vault door can be 
readily opened from the inside.
    (vii) Any pipe or duct system foreign to the vault installation may 
not enter or pass through a transformer vault.
    (viii) Materials may not be stored in transformer vaults.
    (6) Capacitors. (i) All capacitors, except surge capacitors or 
capacitors included as a component part of other apparatus, shall be 
provided with an automatic means of draining the stored charge after the 
capacitor is disconnected from its source of supply.
    (ii) Capacitors rated over 600 volts, nominal, shall comply with the 
following additional requirements:
    (A) Isolating or disconnecting switches (with no interrupting 
rating) shall be interlocked with the load interrupting device or shall 
be provided with prominently displayed caution signs to prevent 
switching load current.
    (B) For series capacitors (see Sec. 1910.302(b)(3)), the proper 
switching shall be assured by use of at least one of the following:
    (1) Mechanically sequenced isolating and bypass switches,
    (2) Interlocks, or
    (3) Switching procedure prominently displayed at the switching 
location.
    (7) Storage batteries. Provisions shall be made for sufficient 
diffusion and ventilation of gases from storage batteries to prevent the 
accumulation of explosive mixtures.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.306  Specific purpose equipment and installations.

    (a) Electric signs and outline lighting--(1) Disconnecting means. 
Signs operated by electronic or electromechanical controllers located 
outside the sign shall have a disconnecting means located inside the 
controller enclosure or within sight of the controller location, and it 
shall be capable of being locked in the open position. Such 
disconnecting means shall have no pole that can be operated 
independently, and it shall open all ungrounded conductors that supply 
the controller and sign. All other signs, except the portable type, and 
all outline lighting installations shall have an externally operable 
disconnecting means which can open all ungrounded conductors and is 
within the sight of the sign or outline lighting it controls.
    (2) Doors or covers giving access to uninsulated parts of indoor 
signs or outline lighting exceeding 600 volts and accessible to other 
than qualified persons shall either be provided with interlock switches 
to disconnect the

[[Page 842]]

primary circuit or shall be so fastened that the use of other than 
ordinary tools will be necessary to open them.
    (b) Cranes and hoists. This paragraph applies to the installation of 
electric equipment and wiring used in connection with cranes, monorail 
hoists, hoists, and all runways.
    (1) Disconnecting means. A readily accessible disconnecting means 
(i) shall be provided between the runway contact conductors and the 
power supply.
    (ii) Another disconnecting means, capable of being locked in the 
open position, shall be provided in the leads from the runway contact 
conductors or other power supply on any crane or monorail hoist.
    (A) If this additional disconnecting means is not readily accessible 
from the crane or monorail hoist operating station, means shall be 
provided at the operating station to open the power circuit to all 
motors of the crane or monorail hoist.
    (B) The additional disconnect may be omitted if a monorail hoist or 
hand-propelled crane bridge installation meets all of the following:
    (1) The unit is floor controlled;
    (2) The unit is within view of the power supply disconnecting means; 
and
    (3) No fixed work platform has been provided for servicing the unit.
    (2) Control. A limit switch or other device shall be provided to 
prevent the load block from passing the safe upper limit of travel of 
any hoisting mechanism.
    (3) Clearance. The dimension of the working space in the direction 
of access to live parts which may require examination, adjustment, 
servicing, or maintenance while alive shall be a minimum of 2 feet 6 
inches. Where controls are enclosed in cabinets, the door(s) shall 
either open at least 90 degrees or be removable.
    (c) Elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, and moving walks--(1) 
Disconnecting means. Elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, and moving 
walks shall have a single means for disconnecting all ungrounded main 
power supply conductors for each unit.
    (2) Warning signs. If interconnections between control panels are 
necessary for operation of the system on a multicar installation that 
remains energized from a source other than the disconnecting means, a 
warning sign shall be mounted on or adjacent to the disconnecting means. 
The sign shall be clearly legible and shall read ``Warning--Parts of the 
control panel are not de-energized by this switch.'' (See 
Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (3) Control panels. If control panels are not located in the same 
space as the drive machine, they shall be located in cabinets with doors 
or panels capable of being locked closed.
    (d) Electric welders--disconnecting means. (1) A disconnecting means 
shall be provided in the supply circuit for each motor-generator arc 
welder, and for each AC transformer and DC rectifier arc welder which is 
not equipped with a disconnect mounted as an intergral part of the 
welder.
    (2) A switch or circuit breaker shall be provided by which each 
resistance welder and its control equipment can be isolated from the 
supply circuit. The ampere rating of this disconnecting means may not be 
less than the supply conductor ampacity.
    (e) Data processing systems--disconnecting means. A disconnecting 
means shall be provided to disconnect the power to all electronic 
equipment in data processing or computer rooms. This disconnecting means 
shall be controlled from locations readily accessible to the operator at 
the principal exit doors. There shall also be a similar disconnecting 
means to disconnect the air conditioning system serving this area.
    (f) X-Ray equipment. This paragraph applies to X-ray equipment for 
other than medical or dental use.
    (1) Disconnecting means. (i) A disconnecting means shall be provided 
in the supply circuit. The disconnecting means shall be operable from a 
location readily accessible from the X-ray control. For equipment 
connected to a 120-volt branch circuit of 30 amperes or less, a 
grounding-type attachment plug cap and receptacle of proper rating may 
serve as a disconnecting means.
    (ii) If more than one piece of equipment is operated from the same 
high-voltage circuit, each piece or each group of equipment as a unit 
shall be provided with a high-voltage switch or equivalent disconnecting 
means. This

[[Page 843]]

disconnecting means shall be constructed, enclosed, or located so as to 
avoid contact by employees with its live parts.
    (2) Control--(i) Radiographic and fluoroscopic types. Radiographic 
and fluoroscopic-type equipment shall be effectively enclosed or shall 
have interlocks that de-energize the equipment automatically to prevent 
ready access to live current-carrying parts.
    (ii) Diffraction and irradiation types. Diffraction- and 
irradiation-type equipment shall be provided with a means to indicate 
when it is energized unless the equipment or installation is effectively 
enclosed or is provided with interlocks to prevent access to live 
current-carrying parts during operation.
    (g) Induction and dielectric heating equipment--(1) Scope. 
Paragraphs (g)(2) and (g)(3) of this section cover induction and 
dielectric heating equipment and accessories for industrial and 
scientific applications, but not for medical or dental applications or 
for appliances.
    (2) Guarding and grounding. (i) Enclosures. The converting apparatus 
(including the DC line) and high-frequency electric circuits (excluding 
the output circuits and remote-control circuits) shall be completely 
contained within enclosures of noncombustible material.
    (ii) Panel controls. All panel controls shall be of dead-front 
construction.
    (iii) Access to internal equipment. Where doors are used for access 
to voltages from 500 to 1000 volts AC or DC, either door locks or 
interlocks shall be provided. Where doors are used for access to 
voltages of over 1000 volts AC or DC, either mechanical lockouts with a 
disconnecting means to prevent access until voltage is removed from the 
cubicle, or both door interlocking and mechanical door locks, shall be 
provided.
    (iv) Warning labels. ``Danger'' labels shall be attached on the 
equipment and shall be plainly visible even when doors are open or 
panels are removed from compartments containing voltages of over 250 
volts AC or DC.
    (v) Work applicator shielding. Protective cages or adequate 
shielding shall be used to guard work applicators other than induction 
heating coils. Induction heating coils shall be protected by insulation 
and/or refractory materials. Interlock switches shall be used on all 
hinged access doors, sliding panels, or other such means of access to 
the applicator. Interlock switches shall be connected in such a manner 
as to remove all power from the applicator when any one of the access 
doors or panels is open. Interlocks on access doors or panels are not 
required if the applicator is an induction heating coil at DC ground 
potential or operating at less than 150 volts AC.
    (vi) Disconnecting means. A readily accessible disconnecting means 
shall be provided by which each unit of heating equipment can be 
isolated from its supply circuit.
    (3) Remote control. If remote controls are used for applying power, 
a selector switch shall be provided and interlocked to provide power 
from only one control point at a time. Switches operated by foot 
pressure shall be provided with a shield over the contact button to 
avoid accidental closing of the switch.
    (h) Electrolytic cells. (1) Scope. These provisions for electrolytic 
cells apply to the installation of the electrical components and 
accessory equipment of electrolytic cells, electrolytic cell lines, and 
process power supply for the production of aluminum, cadmium, chlorine, 
copper, fluorine, hydrogen peroxide, magnesium, sodium, sodium chlorate, 
and zinc. Cells used as a source of electric energy and for 
electroplating processes and cells used for production of hydrogen are 
not covered by these provisions.
    (2) Definitions applicable to this paragraph.
    Cell line: An assembly of electrically interconnected electrolytic 
cells supplied by a source of direct-current power.
    Cell line attachments and auxiliary equipment: Cell line attachments 
and auxiliary equipment include, but are not limited to: auxiliary 
tanks; process piping; duct work; structural supports; exposed cell line 
conductors; conduits and other raceways; pumps; positioning equipment 
and cell cutout or by-pass electrical devices. Auxiliary equipment also 
includes tools, welding machines,

[[Page 844]]

crucibles, and other portable equipment used for operation and 
maintenance within the electrolytic cell line working zone. In the cell 
line working zone, auxiliary equipment includes the exposed conductive 
surfaces of ungrounded cranes and crane-mounted cell-servicing 
equipment.
    Cell line working zone: The cell line working zone is the space 
envelope wherein operation or maintenance is normally performed on or in 
the vicinity of exposed energized surfaces of cell lines or their 
attachments.
    Electrolytic Cells: A receptacle or vessel in which electrochemical 
reactions are caused by applying energy for the purpose of refining or 
producing usable materials.
    (3) Application. Installations covered by paragraph (h) of this 
section shall comply with all applicable provisions of this subpart, 
except as follows:
    (i) Overcurrent protection of electrolytic cell DC process power 
circuits need not comply with the requirements of Sec. 1910.304(e).
    (ii) Equipment located or used within the cell line working zone or 
associated with the cell line DC power circuits need not comply with the 
provisions of Sec. 1910.304(f).
    (iii) Electrolytic cells, cell line conductors, cell line 
attachments, and the wiring of auxiliary equipment and devices within 
the cell line working zone need not comply with the provisions of 
Secs. 1910.303, and 1910.304 (b) and (c).
    (4) Disconnecting means. (i) If more than one DC cell line process 
power supply serves the same cell line, a disconnecting means shall be 
provided on the cell line circuit side of each power supply to 
disconnect it from the cell line circuit.
    (ii) Removable links or removable conductors may be used as the 
disconnecting means.
    (5) Portable electric equipment. (i) The frames and enclosures of 
portable electric equipment used within the cell line working zone may 
not be grounded. However, these frames and enclosures may be grounded if 
the cell line circuit voltage does not exceed 200 volts DC or if the 
frames are guarded.
    (ii) Ungrounded portable electric equipment shall be distinctively 
marked and may not be interchangeable with grounded portable electric 
equipment.
    (6) Power supply circuits and receptacles for portable electric 
equipment. (i) Circuits supplying power to ungrounded receptacles for 
hand-held, cord- and plug-connected equipment shall be electrically 
isolated from any distribution system supplying areas other than the 
cell line working zone and shall be ungrounded. Power for these circuits 
shall be supplied through isolating transformers.
    (ii) Receptacles and their mating plugs for ungrounded equipment may 
not have provision for a grounding conductor and shall be of a 
configuration which prevents their use for equipment required to be 
grounded.
    (iii) Receptacles on circuits supplied by an isolating transformer 
with an ungrounded secondary shall have a distinctive configuration, 
shall be distinctively marked, and may not be used in any other location 
in the plant.
    (7) Fixed and portable electric equipment. (i) AC systems supplying 
fixed and portable electric equipment within the cell line working zone 
need not be grounded.
    (ii) Exposed conductive surfaces, such as electric equipment 
housings, cabinets, boxes, motors, raceways and the like that are within 
the cell line working zone need not be grounded.
    (iii) Auxiliary electrical devices, such as motors, transducers, 
sensors, control devices, and alarms, mounted on an electrolytic cell or 
other energized surface, shall be connected by any of the following 
means:
    (A) Multiconductor hard usage or extra hard usage flexible cord;
    (B) Wire or cable in suitable raceways; or
    (C) Exposed metal conduit, cable tray, armored cable, or similar 
metallic systems installed with insulating breaks such that they will 
not cause a potentially hazardous electrical condition.
    (iv) Fixed electric equipment may be bonded to the energized 
conductive surfaces of the cell line, its attachments, or auxiliaries. 
If fixed electric equipment is mounted on an energized conductive 
surface, it shall be bonded to that surface.

[[Page 845]]

    (8) Auxiliary nonelectric connections. Auxiliary nonelectric 
connections, such as air hoses, water hoses, and the like, to an 
electrolytic cell, its attachments, or auxiliary equipment may not have 
continuous conductive reinforcing wire, armor, braids, and the like. 
Hoses shall be of a nonconductive material.
    (9) Cranes and hoists. (i) The conductive surfaces of cranes and 
hoists that enter the cell line working zone need not be grounded. The 
portion of an overhead crane or hoist which contacts an energized 
electrolytic cell or energized attachments shall be insulated from 
ground.
    (ii) Remote crane or hoist controls which may introduce hazardous 
electrical conditions into the cell line working zone shall employ one 
or more of the following systems:
    (A) Insulated and ungrounded control circuit;
    (B) Nonconductive rope operator;
    (C) Pendant pushbutton with nonconductive supporting means and 
having nonconductive surfaces or ungrounded exposed conductive surfaces; 
or
    (D) Radio.
    (i) Electrically driven or controlled irrigation machines. (See 
Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (1) Lightning protection. If an electrically driven or controlled 
irrigation machine has a stationary point, a driven ground rod shall be 
connected to the machine at the stationary point for lightning 
protection.
    (2) Disconnecting means. The main disconnecting means for a center 
pivot irrigation machine shall be located at the point of connection of 
electrical power to the machine and shall be readily accessible and 
capable of being locked in the open position. A disconnecting means 
shall be provided for each motor and controller.
    (j) Swimming pools, fountains, and similar installations--(1) Scope. 
Paragraphs (j)(2) through (j)(5) of this section apply to electric 
wiring for and equipment in or adjacent to all swimming, wading, 
therapeutic, and decorative pools and fountains, whether permanently 
installed or storable, and to metallic auxiliary equipment, such as 
pumps, filters, and similar equipment. Therapeutic pools in health care 
facilities are exempt from these provisions.
    (2) Lighting and receptacles--(i) Receptacles. A single receptacle 
of the locking and grounding type that provides power for a permanently 
installed swimming pool recirculating pump motor may be located not less 
than 5 feet from the inside walls of a pool. All other receptacles on 
the property shall be located at least 10 feet from the inside walls of 
a pool. Receptacles which are located within 15 feet of the inside walls 
of the pool shall be protected by ground-fault circuit interrupters.

    Note: In determining these dimensions, the distance to be measured 
is the shortest path the supply cord of an appliance connected to the 
receptacle would follow without piercing a floor, wall, or ceiling of a 
building or other effective permanent barrier.

    (ii) Lighting fixtures and lighting outlets. (A) Unless they are 12 
feet above the maximum water level, lighting fixtures and lighting 
outlets may not be installed over a pool or over the area extending 5 
feet horizontally from the inside walls of a pool. However, a lighting 
fixture or lighting outlet which has been installed before April 16, 
1981, may be located less than 5 feet measured horizontally from the 
inside walls of a pool if it is at least 5 feet above the surface of the 
maximum water level and shall be rigidly attached to the existing 
structure. It shall also be protected by a ground-fault circuit 
interrupter installed in the branch circuit supplying the fixture.
    (B) Unless installed 5 feet above the maximum water level and 
rigidly attached to the structure adjacent to or enclosing the pool, 
lighting fixtures and lighting outlets installed in the area extending 
between 5 feet and 10 feet horizontally from the inside walls of a pool 
shall be protected by a ground-fault circuit interrupter.
    (3) Cord- and plug-connected equipment. Flexible cords used with the 
following equipment may not exceed 3 feet in length and shall have a 
copper equipment grounding conductor with a grounding-type attachment 
plug.
    (i) Cord- and plug-connected lighting fixtures installed within 16 
feet of the water surface of permanently installed pools.

[[Page 846]]

    (ii) Other cord- and plug-connected, fixed or stationary equipment 
used with permanently installed pools.
    (4) Underwater equipment. (i) A ground-fault circuit interrupter 
shall be installed in the branch circuit supplying underwater fixtures 
operating at more than 15 volts. Equipment installed underwater shall be 
approved for the purpose.
    (ii) No underwater lighting fixtures may be installed for operation 
at over 150 volts between conductors.
    (5) Fountains. All electric equipment operating at more than 15 
volts, including power supply cords, used with fountains shall be 
protected by ground-fault circuit interrupters. (See 
Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.307  Hazardous (classified) locations.

    (a) Scope. This section covers the requirements for electric 
equipment and wiring in locations which are classified depending on the 
properties of the flammable vapors, liquids or gases, or combustible 
dusts or fibers which may be present therein and the likelihood that a 
flammable or combustible concentration or quantity is present. Hazardous 
(classified) locations may be found in occupancies such as, but not 
limited to, the following: aircraft hangars, gasoline dispensing and 
service stations, bulk storage plants for gasoline or other volatile 
flammable liquids, paint-finishing process plants, health care 
facilities, agricultural or other facilities where excessive combustible 
dusts may be present, marinas, boat yards, and petroleum and chemical 
processing plants. Each room, section or area shall be considered 
individually in determining its classification. These hazardous 
(classified) locations are assigned six designations as follows:

Class I, Division 1
Class I, Division 2
Class II, Division 1
Class II, Division 2
Class III, Division 1
Class III, Division 2

For definitions of these locations see Sec. 1910.399(a). All applicable 
requirements in this subpart shall apply to hazardous (classified) 
locations, unless modified by provisions of this section.
    (b) Electrical installations. Equipment, wiring methods, and 
installations of equipment in hazardous (classified) locations shall be 
intrinsically safe, approved for the hazardous (classified) location, or 
safe or for the hazardous (classified) location. Requirements for each 
of these options are as follows:
    (1) Intrinsically safe. Equipment and associated wiring approved as 
intrinsically safe shall be permitted in any hazardous (classified) 
location for which it is approved.
    (2) Approved for the hazardous (classified) location. (i) Equipment 
shall be approved not only for the class of location but also for the 
ignitible or combustible properties of the specific gas, vapor, dust, or 
fiber that will be present.

    Note: NFPA 70, the National Electrical Code, lists or defines 
hazardous gases, vapors, and dusts by ``Groups'' characterized by their 
ignitible or combustible properties.

    (ii) Equipment shall be marked to show the class, group, and 
operating temperature or temperature range, based on operation in a 40 
degrees C ambient, for which it is approved. The temperature marking may 
not exceed the ignition temperature of the specific gas or vapor to be 
encountered. However, the following provisions modify this marking 
requirement for specific equipment:
    (A) Equipment of the non-heat-producing type, such as junction 
boxes, conduit, and fittings, and equipment of the heat-producing type 
having a maximum temperature not more than 100 degrees C (212 degrees F) 
need not have a marked operating temperature or temperature range.
    (B) Fixed lighting fixtures marked for use in Class I, Division 2 
locations only, need not be marked to indicate the group.
    (C) Fixed general-purpose equipment in Class I locations, other than 
lighting fixtures, which is acceptable for use in Class I, Division 2 
locations need not be marked with the class, group, division, or 
operating temperature.
    (D) Fixed dust-tight equipment, other than lighting fixtures, which 
is acceptable for use in Class II, Division

[[Page 847]]

2 and Class III locations need not be marked with the class, group, 
division, or operating temperature.
    (3) Safe for the hazardous (classified) location. Equipment which is 
safe for the location shall be of a type and design which the employer 
demonstrates will provide protection from the hazards arising from the 
combustibility and flammability of vapors, liquids, gases, dusts, or 
fibers.

    Note: The National Electrical Code, NFPA 70, contains guidelines for 
determining the type and design of equipment and installations which 
will meet this requirement. The guidelines of this document address 
electric wiring, equipment, and systems installed in hazardous 
(classified) locations and contain specific provisions for the 
following: wiring methods, wiring connections; conductor insulation, 
flexible cords, sealing and drainage, transformers, capacitors, 
switches, circuit breakers, fuses, motor controllers, receptacles, 
attachment plugs, meters, relays, instruments, resistors, generators, 
motors, lighting fixtures, storage battery charging equipment, electric 
cranes, electric hoists and similar equipment, utilization equipment, 
signaling systems, alarm systems, remote control systems, local loud 
speaker and communication systems, ventilation piping, live parts, 
lightning surge protection, and grounding. Compliance with these 
guidelines will constitute one means, but not the only means, of 
compliance with this paragraph.

    (c) Conduits. All conduits shall be threaded and shall be made 
wrench-tight. Where it is impractical to make a threaded joint tight, a 
bonding jumper shall be utilized.
    (d) Equipment in Division 2 locations. Equipment that has been 
approved for a Division 1 location may be installed in a Division 2 
location of the same class and group. General-purpose equipment or 
equipment in general-purpose enclosures may be installed in Division 2 
locations if the equipment does not constitute a source of ignition 
under normal operating conditions.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.308  Special systems.

    (a) Systems over 600 volts, nominal. Paragraphs (a) (1) through (4) 
of this section cover the general requirements for all circuits and 
equipment operated at over 600 volts.
    (1) Wiring methods for fixed installations. (i) Above-ground 
conductors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, in intermediate 
metal conduit, in cable trays, in cablebus, in other suitable raceways, 
or as open runs of metal-clad cable suitable for the use and purpose. 
However, open runs of non-metallic-sheathed cable or of bare conductors 
or busbars may be installed in locations accessible only to qualified 
persons. Metallic shielding components, such as tapes, wires, or braids 
for conductors, shall be grounded. Open runs of insulated wires and 
cables having a bare lead sheath or a braided outer covering shall be 
supported in a manner designed to prevent physical damage to the braid 
or sheath.
    (ii) Conductors emerging from the ground shall be enclosed in 
approved raceways. (See Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (2) Interrupting and isolating devices. (i) Circuit breaker 
installations located indoors shall consist of metal-enclosed units or 
fire-resistant cell-mounted units. In locations accessible only to 
qualified personnel, open mounting of circuit breakers is permitted. A 
means of indicating the open and closed position of circuit breakers 
shall be provided.
    (ii) Fused cutouts installed in buildings or tranformer vaults shall 
be of a type approved for the purpose. They shall be readily accessible 
for fuse replacement.
    (iii) A means shall be provided to completely isolate equipment for 
inspection and repairs. Isolating means which are not designed to 
interrupt the load curent of the circuit shall be either interlocked 
with an approved circuit interrupter or provided with a sign warning 
against opening them under load.
    (3) Mobile and portable equipment. (i) Power cable connections to 
mobile machines. A metallic enclosure shall be provided on the mobile 
machine for enclosing the terminals of the power cable. The enclosure 
shall include provisions for a solid connection for the ground wire(s) 
terminal to effectively ground the machine frame. The method of cable 
termination used shall prevent any strain or pull on the cable from 
stressing the electrical connections. The enclosure shall have provision 
for

[[Page 848]]

locking so only authorized qualified persons may open it and shall be 
marked with a sign warning of the presence of energized parts.
    (ii) Guarding live parts. All energized switching and control parts 
shall be enclosed in effectively grounded metal cabinets or enclosures. 
Circuit breakers and protective equipment shall have the operating means 
projecting through the metal cabinet or enclosure so these units can be 
reset without locked doors being opened. Enclosures and metal cabinets 
shall be locked so that only authorized qualified persons have access 
and shall be marked with a sign warning of the presence of energized 
parts. Collector ring assemblies on revolving-type machines (shovels, 
draglines, etc.) shall be guarded.
    (4) Tunnel installation--(i) Application. The provisions of this 
paragraph apply to installation and use of high-voltage power 
distribution and utilization equipment which is portable and/or mobile, 
such as substations, trailers, cars, mobile shovels, draglines, hoists, 
drills, dredges, compressors, pumps, conveyors, and underground 
excavators.
    (ii) Conductors. Conductors in tunnels shall be installed in one or 
more of the following:
    (A) Metal conduit or other metal raceway,
    (B) Type MC cable, or
    (C) Other approved multiconductor cable.

Conductors shall also be so located or guarded as to protect them from 
physical damage. Multiconductor portable cable may supply mobile 
equipment. An equipment grounding conductor shall be run with circuit 
conductors inside the metal raceway or inside the multiconductor cable 
jacket. The equipment grounding conductor may be insulated or bare.
    (iii) Guarding live parts. Bare terminals of transformers, switches, 
motor controllers, and other equipment shall be enclosed to prevent 
accidental contact with energized parts. Enclosures for use in tunnels 
shall be drip-proof, weatherproof, or submersible as required by the 
environmental conditions.
    (iv) Disconnecting means. A disconnecting means that simultaneously 
opens all ungrounded conductors shall be installed at each transformer 
or motor location.
    (v) Grounding and bonding. All nonenergized metal parts of electric 
equipment and metal raceways and cable sheaths shall be effectively 
grounded and bonded to all metal pipes and rails at the portal and at 
intervals not exceeding 1000 feet throughout the tunnel.
    (b) Emergency power systems--(1) Scope. The provisions for emergency 
systems apply to circuits, systems, and equipment intended to supply 
power for illumination and special loads, in the event of failure of the 
normal supply.
    (2) Wiring methods. Emergency circuit wiring shall be kept entirely 
independent of all other wiring and equipment and may not enter the same 
raceway, cable, box, or cabinet or other wiring except either where 
common circuit elements suitable for the purpose are required, or for 
transferring power from the normal to the emergency source.
    (3) Emergency illumination. Where emergency lighting is necessary, 
the system shall be so arranged that the failure of any individual 
lighting element, such as the burning out of a light bulb, cannot leave 
any space in total darkness.
    (c) Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 remote control, signaling, and 
power-limited circuits--(1) Classification. Class 1, Class 2, or Class 3 
remote control, signaling, or power-limited circuits are characterized 
by their usage and electrical power limitation which differentiates them 
from light and power circuits. These circuits are classified in 
accordance with their respective voltage and power limitations as 
summarized in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through (c)(1)(iii) of this section.
    (i) Class 1 circuits. (A) A Class 1 power-limited circuit is 
supplied from a source having a rated output of not more than 30 volts 
and 1000 volt-amperes.
    (B) A Class 1 remote control circuit or a Class 1 signaling circuit 
has a voltage which does not exceed 600 volts; however, the power output 
of the source need not be limited.
    (ii) Class 2 and Class 3 circuits. (A) Power for Class 2 and Class 3 
circuits is

[[Page 849]]

limited either inherently (in which no overcurrent protection is 
required) or by a combination of a power source and overcurrent 
protection.
    (B) The maximum circuit voltage is 150 volts AC or DC for a Class 2 
inherently limited power source, and 100 volts AC or DC for a Class 3 
inherently limited power source.
    (C) The maximum circuit voltage is 30 volts AC and 60 volts DC for a 
Class 2 power source limited by overcurrent protection, and 150 volts AC 
or DC for a Class 3 power source limited by overcurrent protection.
    (iii) The maximum circuit voltages in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) and 
(c)(1)(ii) of this section apply to sinusoidal AC or continuous DC power 
sources, and where wet contact occurence is not likely.
    (2) Marking. A Class 2 or Class 3 power supply unit shall be durably 
marked where plainly visible to indicate the class of supply and its 
electrical rating. (See Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (d) Fire protective signaling systems. (See Sec. 1910.302(b)(3).)
    (1) Classifications. Fire protective signaling circuits shall be 
classified either as non-power limited or power limited.
    (2) Power sources. The power sources for use with fire protective 
signaling circuits shall be either power limited or nonlimited as 
follows:
    (i) The power supply of non-power-limited fire protective signaling 
circuits shall have an output voltage not in excess of 600 volts.
    (ii) The power for power-limited fire protective signaling circuits 
shall be either inherently limited, in which no overcurrent protection 
is required, or limited by a combination of a power source and 
overcurrent protection.
    (3) Non-power-limited conductor location. Non-power-limited fire 
protective signaling circuits and Class 1 circuits may occupy the same 
enclosure, cable, or raceway provided all conductors are insulated for 
maximum voltage of any conductor within the enclosure, cable, or 
raceway. Power supply and fire protective signaling circuit conductors 
are permitted in the same enclosure, cable, or raceway only if connected 
to the same equipment.
    (4) Power-limited conductor location. Where open conductors are 
installed, power-limited fire protective signaling circuits shall be 
separated at least 2 inches from conductors of any light, power, Class 
1, and non-power-limited fire protective signaling circuits unless a 
special and equally protective method of conductor separation is 
employed. Cables and conductors of two or more power-limited fire 
protective signaling circuits or Class 3 circuits are permitted in the 
same cable, enclosure, or raceway. Conductors of one or more Class 2 
circuits are permitted within the same cable, enclosure, or raceway with 
conductors of power-limited fire protective signaling circuits provided 
that the insulation of Class 2 circuit conductors in the cable, 
enclosure, or raceway is at least that needed for the power-limited fire 
protective signaling circuits.
    (5) Identification. Fire protective signaling circuits shall be 
identified at terminal and junction locations in a manner which will 
prevent unintentional interference with the signaling circuit during 
testing and servicing. Power-limited fire protective signaling circuits 
shall be durably marked as such where plainly visible at terminations.
    (e) Communications systems--(1) Scope. These provisions for 
communication systems apply to such systems as central-station-connected 
and non-central-station-connected telephone circuits, radio and 
television receiving and transmitting equipment, including community 
antenna television and radio distribution systems, telegraph, district 
messenger, and outside wiring for fire and burglar alarm, and similar 
central station systems. These installations need not comply with the 
provisions of Secs. 1910.303 through 1910.308(d), except 
Sec. 1910.304(c)(1) and Sec. 1910.307(b).
    (2) Protective devices. (i) Communication circuits so located as to 
be exposed to accidental contact with light or power conductors 
operating at over 300 volts shall have each circuit so exposed provided 
with a protector approved for the purpose.
    (ii) Each conductor of a lead-in from an outdoor antenna shall be 
provided with an antenna discharge unit or other suitable means that 
will drain static charges from the antenna system.

[[Page 850]]

    (3) Conductor location--(i) Outside of buildings. (a) Receiving 
distribution lead-in or aerial-drop cables attached to buildings and 
lead-in conductors to radio transmitters shall be so installed as to 
avoid the possibility of accidental contact with electric light or power 
conductors.
    (b) The clearance between lead-in conductors and any lightning 
protection conductors may not be less than 6 feet.
    (ii) On poles. Where practicable, communication conductors on poles 
shall be located below the light or power conductors. Communications 
conductors may not be attached to a crossarm that carries light or power 
conductors.
    (iii) Inside of buildings. Indoor antennas, lead-ins, and other 
communication conductors attached as open conductors to the inside of 
buildings shall be located at least 2 inches from conductors of any 
light or power or Class 1 circuits unless a special and equally 
protective method of conductor separation, approved for the purpose, is 
employed.
    (4) Equipment location. Outdoor metal structures supporting 
antennas, as well as self-supporting antennas such as vertical rods or 
dipole structures, shall be located as far away from overhead conductors 
of electric light and power circuits of over 150 volts to ground as 
necessary to avoid the possibility of the antenna or structure falling 
into or making accidental contact with such circuits.
    (5) Grounding--(i) Lead-in conductors. If exposed to contact with 
electric light and power conductors, the metal sheath of aerial cables 
entering buildings shall be grounded or shall be interrupted close to 
the entrance to the building by an insulating joint or equivalent 
device. Where protective devices are used, they shall be grounded in an 
approved manner.
    (ii) Antenna structures. Masts and metal structures supporting 
antennas shall be permanently and effectively grounded without splice or 
connection in the grounding conductor.
    (iii) Equipment enclosures. Transmitters shall be enclosed in a 
metal frame or grill or separated from the operating space by a barrier, 
all metallic parts of which are effectively connected to ground. All 
external metal handles and controls accessible to the operating 
personnel shall be effectively grounded. Unpowered equipment and 
enclosures shall be considered grounded where connected to an attached 
coaxial cable with an effectively grounded metallic shield.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]


<R05>
Secs. 1910.309--1910.330    [Reserved]

                      Safety-Related Work Practices


<R05>
Sec. 1910.331  Scope.

    (a) Covered work by both qualified and unqualified persons. The 
provisions of Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.335 cover electrical safety-
related work practices for both qualified persons (those who have 
training in avoiding the electrical hazards of working on or near 
exposed energized parts) and unqualified persons (those with little or 
no such training) working on, near, or with the following installations:
    (1) Premises wiring. Installations of electric conductors and 
equipment within or on buildings or other structures, and on other 
premises such as yards, carnival, parking, and other lots, and 
industrial substations;
    (2) Wiring for connection to supply. Installations of conductors 
that connect to the supply of electricity; and
    (3) Other wiring. Installations of other outside conductors on the 
premises.
    (4) Optical fiber cable. Installations of optical fiber cable where 
such installations are made along with electric conductors.

    Note: See Sec. 1910.399 for the definition of ``qualified person.'' 
See Sec. 1910.332 for training requirements that apply to qualified and 
unqualified persons.

    (b) Other covered work by unqualified persons. The provisions of 
Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.335 also cover work performed by unqualified 
persons on, near, or with the installations listed in paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (c)(4) of this section.
    (c) Excluded work by qualified persons. The provisions of 
Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.335 do not apply to work performed by 
qualified persons on or directly associated with the following 
installations:

[[Page 851]]

    (1) Generation, transmission, and distribution installations. 
Installations for the generation, control, transformation, transmission, 
and distribution of electric energy (including communication and 
metering) located in buildings used for such purposes or located 
outdoors.

    Note 1: Work on or directly associated with installations of 
utilization equipment used for purposes other than generating, 
transmitting, or distributing electric energy (such as installations 
which are in office buildings, warehouses, garages, machine shops, or 
recreational buildings, or other utilization installations which are not 
an integral part of a generating installation, substation, or control 
center) is covered under paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

    Note 2: For work on or directly associated with utilization 
installations, an employer who complies with the work practices of 
Sec. 1910.269 (electric power generation, transmission, and 
distribution) will be deemed to be in compliance with Sec. 1910.333(c) 
and Sec. 1910.335. However, the requirements of Sec. 1910.332, 
Sec. 1910.333(a), Sec. 1910.333(b), and Sec. 1910.334 apply to all work 
on or directly associated with utilization installations, regardless of 
whether the work is performed by qualified or unqualified persons.

    Note 3: Work on or directly associated with generation, 
transmission, or distribution installations includes:
    (1) Work performed directly on such installations, such as repairing 
overhead or underground distribution lines or repairing a feed-water 
pump for the boiler in a generating plant.
    (2) Work directly associated with such installations, such as line-
clearance tree trimming and replacing utility poles.
    (3) Work on electric utilization circuits in a generating plant 
provided that:
    (A) Such circuits are commingled with installations of power 
generation equipment or circuits, and
    (B) The generation equipment or circuits present greater electrical 
hazards than those posed by the utilization equipment or circuits (such 
as exposure to higher voltages or lack of overcurrent protection).

    This work is covered by Sec. 1910.269 of this Part.

    (2) Communications installations. Installations of communication 
equipment to the extent that the work is covered under Sec. 1910.268.
    (3) Installations in vehicles. Installations in ships, watercraft, 
railway rolling stock, aircraft, or automotive vehicles other than 
mobile homes and recreational vehicles.
    (4) Railway installations. Installations of railways for generation, 
transformation, transmission, or distribution of power used exclusively 
for operation of rolling stock or installations of railways used 
exclusively for signaling and communication purposes.
[55 FR 32016, Aug. 6, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 4476, Jan. 31, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.332  Training.

    (a) Scope. The training requirements contained in this section apply 
to employees who face a risk of electric shock that is not reduced to a 
safe level by the electrical installation requirements of Secs. 1910.303 
through 1910.308.

    Note: Employees in occupations listed in Table S-4 face such a risk 
and are required to be trained. Other employees who also may reasonably 
be expected to face a comparable risk of injury due to electric shock or 
other electrical hazards must also be trained.

    (b) Content of training. (1) Practices addressed in this standard. 
Employees shall be trained in and familiar with the safety-related work 
practices required by Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.335 that pertain to 
their respective job assignments.
    (2) Additional requirements for unqualified persons. Employees who 
are covered by paragraph (a) of this section but who are not qualified 
persons shall also be trained in and familiar with any electrically 
related safety practices not specifically addressed by Secs. 1910.331 
through 1910.335 but which are necessary for their safety.
    (3) Additional requirements for qualified persons. Qualified persons 
(i.e., those permitted to work on or near exposed energized parts) 
shall, at a minimum, be trained in and familiar with the following:
    (i) The skills and techniques necessary to distinguish exposed live 
parts from other parts of electric equipment,
    (ii) The skills and techniques necessary to determine the nominal 
voltage of exposed live parts, and
    (iii) The clearance distances specified in Sec. 1910.333(c) and the 
corresponding voltages to which the qualified person will be exposed.

    Note 1: For the purposes of Secs. 1910.331 through 1910.335, a 
person must have the training required by paragraph (b)(3) of this

[[Page 852]]

section in order to be considered a qualified person.

    Note 2: Qualified persons whose work on energized equipment involves 
either direct contact or contact by means of tools or materials must 
also have the training needed to meet Sec. 1910.333(c)(2).

    (c) Type of training. The training required by this section shall be 
of the classroom or on-the-job type. The degree of training provided 
shall be determined by the risk to the employee.

Table S-4.--Typical Occupational Categories of Employees Facing a Higher
                 Than Normal Risk of Electrical Accident
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Occupation
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blue collar supervisors.\1\
Electrical and electronic engineers.\1\
Electrical and electronic equipment assemblers.\1\
Electrical and electronic technicians.\1\
Electricians.
Industrial machine operators.\1\
Material handling equipment operators.\1\
Mechanics and repairers.\1\
Painters.\1\
Riggers and roustabouts.\1\
Stationary engineers.\1\
Welders.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Workers in these groups do not need to be trained if their work or
  the work of those they supervise does not bring them or the employees
  they supervise close enough to exposed parts of electric circuits
  operating at 50 volts or more to ground for a hazard to exist.

[55 FR 32016, Aug. 6, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.333  Selection and use of work practices.

    (a) General. Safety-related work practices shall be employed to 
prevent electric shock or other injuries resulting from either direct or 
indirect electrical contacts, when work is performed near or on 
equipment or circuits which are or may be energized. The specific 
safety-related work practices shall be consistent with the nature and 
extent of the associated electrical hazards.
    (1) Deenergized parts. Live parts to which an employee may be 
exposed shall be deenergized before the employee works on or near them, 
unless the employer can demonstrate that deenergizing introduces 
additional or increased hazards or is infeasible due to equipment design 
or operational limitations. Live parts that operate at less than 50 
volts to ground need not be deenergized if there will be no increased 
exposure to electrical burns or to explosion due to electric arcs.

    Note 1: Examples of increased or additional hazards include 
interruption of life support equipment, deactivation of emergency alarm 
systems, shutdown of hazardous location ventilation equipment, or 
removal of illumination for an area.

    Note 2: Examples of work that may be performed on or near energized 
circuit parts because of infeasibility due to equipment design or 
operational limitations include testing of electric circuits that can 
only be performed with the circuit energized and work on circuits that 
form an integral part of a continuous industrial process in a chemical 
plant that would otherwise need to be completely shut down in order to 
permit work on one circuit or piece of equipment.

    Note 3: Work on or near deenergized parts is covered by paragraph 
(b) of this section.

    (2) Energized parts. If the exposed live parts are not deenergized 
(i.e., for reasons of increased or additional hazards or infeasibility), 
other safety-related work practices shall be used to protect employees 
who may be exposed to the electrical hazards involved. Such work 
practices shall protect employees against contact with energized circuit 
parts directly with any part of their body or indirectly through some 
other conductive object. The work practices that are used shall be 
suitable for the conditions under which the work is to be performed and 
for the voltage level of the exposed electric conductors or circuit 
parts. Specific work practice requirements are detailed in paragraph (c) 
of this section.
    (b) Working on or near exposed deenergized parts--(1) Application. 
This paragraph applies to work on exposed deenergized parts or near 
enough to them to expose the employee to any electrical hazard they 
present. Conductors and parts of electric equipment that have been 
deenergized but have not been locked out or tagged in accordance with 
paragraph (b) of this section shall be treated as energized parts, and 
paragraph (c) of this section applies to work on or near them.
    (2) Lockout and tagging. While any employee is exposed to contact 
with parts of fixed electric equipment or circuits which have been 
deenergized, the circuits energizing the parts shall be locked out or 
tagged or both in accordance with the requirements of this paragraph. 
The requirements shall be followed in the order in which they are

[[Page 853]]

presented (i.e., paragraph (b)(2)(i) first, then paragraph (b)(2)(ii), 
etc.).


    Note 1: As used in this section, fixed equipment refers to equipment 
fastened in place or connected by permanent wiring methods.

    Note 2: Lockout and tagging procedures that comply with paragraphs 
(c) through (f) of Sec. 1910.147 will also be deemed to comply with 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section provided that:
    (1) The procedures address the electrical safety hazards covered by 
this Subpart; and
    (2) The procedures also incorporate the requirements of paragraphs 
(b)(2)(iii)(D) and (b)(2)(iv)(B) of this section.

    (i) Procedures. The employer shall maintain a written copy of the 
procedures outlined in paragraph (b)(2) and shall make it available for 
inspection by employees and by the Assistant Secretary of Labor and his 
or her authorized representatives.

    Note: The written procedures may be in the form of a copy of 
paragraph (b) of this section.

    (ii) Deenergizing equipment. (A) Safe procedures for deenergizing 
circuits and equipment shall be determined before circuits or equipment 
are deenergized.
    (B) The circuits and equipment to be worked on shall be disconnected 
from all electric energy sources. Control circuit devices, such as push 
buttons, selector switches, and interlocks, may not be used as the sole 
means for deenergizing circuits or equipment. Interlocks for electric 
equipment may not be used as a substitute for lockout and tagging 
procedures.
    (C) Stored electric energy which might endanger personnel shall be 
released. Capacitors shall be discharged and high capacitance elements 
shall be short-circuited and grounded, if the stored electric energy 
might endanger personnel.

    Note: If the capacitors or associated equipment are handled in 
meeting this requirement, they shall be treated as energized.

    (D) Stored non-electrical energy in devices that could reenergize 
electric circuit parts shall be blocked or relieved to the extent that 
the circuit parts could not be accidentally energized by the device.
    (iii) Application of locks and tags. (A) A lock and a tag shall be 
placed on each disconnecting means used to deenergize circuits and 
equipment on which work is to be performed, except as provided in 
paragraphs (b)(2)(iii)(C) and (b)(2)(iii)(E) of this section. The lock 
shall be attached so as to prevent persons from operating the 
disconnecting means unless they resort to undue force or the use of 
tools.
    (B) Each tag shall contain a statement prohibiting unauthorized 
operation of the disconnecting means and removal of the tag.
    (C) If a lock cannot be applied, or if the employer can demonstrate 
that tagging procedures will provide a level of safety equivalent to 
that obtained by the use of a lock, a tag may be used without a lock.
    (D) A tag used without a lock, as permitted by paragraph 
(b)(2)(iii)(C) of this section, shall be supplemented by at least one 
additional safety measure that provides a level of safety equivalent to 
that obtained by the use of a lock. Examples of additional safety 
measures include the removal of an isolating circuit element, blocking 
of a controlling switch, or opening of an extra disconnecting device.
    (E) A lock may be placed without a tag only under the following 
conditions:
    (1) Only one circuit or piece of equipment is deenergized, and
    (2) The lockout period does not extend beyond the work shift, and
    (3) Employees exposed to the hazards associated with reenergizing 
the circuit or equipment are familiar with this procedure.
    (iv) Verification of deenergized condition. The requirements of this 
paragraph shall be met before any circuits or equipment can be 
considered and worked as deenergized.
    (A) A qualified person shall operate the equipment operating 
controls or otherwise verify that the equipment cannot be restarted.
    (B) A qualified person shall use test equipment to test the circuit 
elements and electrical parts of equipment to which employees will be 
exposed and shall verify that the circuit elements and equipment parts 
are deenergized. The test shall also determine if any energized 
condition exists as a result of inadvertently induced voltage or 
unrelated voltage backfeed even though

[[Page 854]]

specific parts of the circuit have been deenergized and presumed to be 
safe. If the circuit to be tested is over 600 volts, nominal, the test 
equipment shall be checked for proper operation immediately before and 
immediately after this test.
    (v) Reenergizing equipment. These requirements shall be met, in the 
order given, before circuits or equipment are reenergized, even 
temporarily.
    (A) A qualified person shall conduct tests and visual inspections, 
as necessary, to verify that all tools, electrical jumpers, shorts, 
grounds, and other such devices have been removed, so that the circuits 
and equipment can be safely energized.
    (B) Employees exposed to the hazards associated with reenergizing 
the circuit or equipment shall be warned to stay clear of circuits and 
equipment.
    (C) Each lock and tag shall be removed by the employee who applied 
it or under his or her direct supervision. However, if this employee is 
absent from the workplace, then the lock or tag may be removed by a 
qualified person designated to perform this task provided that:
    (1) The employer ensures that the employee who applied the lock or 
tag is not available at the workplace, and
    (2) The employer ensures that the employee is aware that the lock or 
tag has been removed before he or she resumes work at that workplace.
    (D) There shall be a visual determination that all employees are 
clear of the circuits and equipment.
    (c) Working on or near exposed energized parts--(1) Application. 
This paragraph applies to work performed on exposed live parts 
(involving either direct contact or contact by means of tools or 
materials) or near enough to them for employees to be exposed to any 
hazard they present.
    (2) Work on energized equipment. Only qualified persons may work on 
electric circuit parts or equipment that have not been deenergized under 
the procedures of paragraph (b) of this section. Such persons shall be 
capable of working safely on energized circuits and shall be familiar 
with the proper use of special precautionary techniques, personal 
protective equipment, insulating and shielding materials, and insulated 
tools.
    (3) Overhead lines. If work is to be performed near overhead lines, 
the lines shall be deenergized and grounded, or other protective 
measures shall be provided before work is started. If the lines are to 
be deenergized, arrangements shall be made with the person or 
organization that operates or controls the electric circuits involved to 
deenergize and ground them. If protective measures, such as guarding, 
isolating, or insulating are provided, these precautions shall prevent 
employees from contacting such lines directly with any part of their 
body or indirectly through conductive materials, tools, or equipment.

    Note: The work practices used by qualified persons installing 
insulating devices on overhead power transmission or distribution lines 
are covered by Sec. 1910.269 of this Part, not by Sec. Sec. 1910.332 
through 1910.335 of this Part. Under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, 
unqualified persons are prohibited from performing this type of work.

    (i) Unqualified persons. (A) When an unqualified person is working 
in an elevated position near overhead lines, the location shall be such 
that the person and the longest conductive object he or she may contact 
cannot come closer to any unguarded, energized overhead line than the 
following distances:
    (1) For voltages to ground 50kV or below--10 ft. (305 cm);
    (2) For voltages to ground over 50kV--10 ft. (305 cm) plus 4 in. (10 
cm) for every 10kV over 50kV.
    (B) When an unqualified person is working on the ground in the 
vicinity of overhead lines, the person may not bring any conductive 
object closer to unguarded, energized overhead lines than the distances 
given in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(A) of this section.

    Note: For voltages normally encountered with overhead power lines, 
objects which do not have an insulating rating for the voltage involved 
are considered to be conductive.

    (ii) Qualified persons. When a qualified person is working in the 
vicinity of overhead lines, whether in an elevated position or on the 
ground, the person

[[Page 855]]

may not approach or take any conductive object without an approved 
insulating handle closer to exposed energized parts than shown in Table 
S-5 unless:
    (A) The person is insulated from the energized part (gloves, with 
sleeves if necessary, rated for the voltage involved are considered to 
be insulation of the person from the energized part on which work is 
performed), or
    (B) The energized part is insulated both from all other conductive 
objects at a different potential and from the person, or
    (C) The person is insulated from all conductive objects at a 
potential different from that of the energized part.

   Table S-5.--Approach Distances for Qualified Employees--Alternating
                                 Current
------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Voltage range (phase to phase)          Minimum approach distance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
300V and less.............................  Avoid contact.
Over 300V, not over 750V..................  1 ft. 0 in. (30.5 cm).
Over 750V, not over 2kV...................  l ft. 6 in. (46 cm).
Over 2kV, not over 15kV...................  2 ft. 0 in. (61 cm).
Over 15kV, not over 37kV..................  3 ft. 0 in. (91 cm).
Over 37kV, not over 87.5kV................  3 ft. 6 in. (107 cm).
Over 87.5kV, not over 121kV...............  4 ft. 0 in. (122 cm).
Over 121kV, not over 140kV................  4 ft. 6 in. (137 cm).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Vehicular and mechanical equipment. (A) Any vehicle or 
mechanical equipment capable of having parts of its structure elevated 
near energized overhead lines shall be operated so that a clearance of 
10 ft. (305 cm) is maintained. If the voltage is higher than 50kV, the 
clearance shall be increased 4 in. (10 cm) for every 10kV over that 
voltage. However, under any of the following conditions, the clearance 
may be reduced:
    (1) If the vehicle is in transit with its structure lowered, the 
clearance may be reduced to 4 ft. (122 cm). If the voltage is higher 
than 50kV, the clearance shall be increased 4 in. (10 cm) for every 10kV 
over that voltage.
    (2) If insulating barriers are installed to prevent contact with the 
lines, and if the barriers are rated for the voltage of the line being 
guarded and are not a part of or an attachment to the vehicle or its 
raised structure, the clearance may be reduced to a distance within the 
designed working dimensions of the insulating barrier.
    (3) If the equipment is an aerial lift insulated for the voltage 
involved, and if the work is performed by a qualified person, the 
clearance (between the uninsulated portion of the aerial lift and the 
power line) may be reduced to the distance given in Table S-5.
    (B) Employees standing on the ground may not contact the vehicle or 
mechanical equipment or any of its attachments, unless:
    (1) The employee is using protective equipment rated for the 
voltage; or
    (2) The equipment is located so that no uninsulated part of its 
structure (that portion of the structure that provides a conductive path 
to employees on the ground) can come closer to the line than permitted 
in paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (C) If any vehicle or mechanical equipment capable of having parts 
of its structure elevated near energized overhead lines is intentionally 
grounded, employees working on the ground near the point of grounding 
may not stand at the grounding location whenever there is a possibility 
of overhead line contact. Additional precautions, such as the use of 
barricades or insulation, shall be taken to protect employees from 
hazardous ground potentials, depending on earth resistivity and fault 
currents, which can develop within the first few feet or more outward 
from the grounding point.
    (4) Illumination. (i) Employees may not enter spaces containing 
exposed energized parts, unless illumination is provided that enables 
the employees to perform the work safely.
    (ii) Where lack of illumination or an obstruction precludes 
observation of the work to be performed, employees may not perform tasks 
near exposed energized parts. Employees may not reach blindly into areas 
which may contain energized parts.
    (5) Confined or enclosed work spaces. When an employee works in a 
confined or enclosed space (such as a manhole or vault) that contains 
exposed energized parts, the employer shall provide, and the employee 
shall use, protective shields, protective barriers, or insulating 
materials as necessary to avoid inadvertent contact with these parts. 
Doors, hinged panels, and the like shall be secured to prevent their 
swinging

[[Page 856]]

into an employee and causing the employee to contact exposed energized 
parts.
    (6) Conductive materials and equipment. Conductive materials and 
equipment that are in contact with any part of an employee's body shall 
be handled in a manner that will prevent them from contacting exposed 
energized conductors or circuit parts. If an employee must handle long 
dimensional conductive objects (such as ducts and pipes) in areas with 
exposed live parts, the employer shall institute work practices (such as 
the use of insulation, guarding, and material handling techniques) which 
will minimize the hazard.
    (7) Portable ladders. Portable ladders shall have nonconductive 
siderails if they are used where the employee or the ladder could 
contact exposed energized parts.
    (8) Conductive apparel. Conductive articles of jewelry and clothing 
(such as watch bands, bracelets, rings, key chains, necklaces, metalized 
aprons, cloth with conductive thread, or metal headgear) may not be worn 
if they might contact exposed energized parts. However, such articles 
may be worn if they are rendered nonconductive by covering, wrapping, or 
other insulating means.
    (9) Housekeeping duties. Where live parts present an electrical 
contact hazard, employees may not perform housekeeping duties at such 
close distances to the parts that there is a possibility of contact, 
unless adequate safeguards (such as insulating equipment or barriers) 
are provided. Electrically conductive cleaning materials (including 
conductive solids such as steel wool, metalized cloth, and silicon 
carbide, as well as conductive liquid solutions) may not be used in 
proximity to energized parts unless procedures are followed which will 
prevent electrical contact.
    (10) Interlocks. Only a qualified person following the requirements 
of paragraph (c) of this section may defeat an electrical safety 
interlock, and then only temporarily while he or she is working on the 
equipment. The interlock system shall be returned to its operable 
condition when this work is completed.
[55 FR 32016, Aug. 6, 1990; 55 FR 42053, Nov. 1, 1990, as amended at 59 
FR 4476, Jan. 31, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.334  Use of equipment.

    (a) Portable electric equipment. This paragraph applies to the use 
of cord- and plug-connected equipment, including flexible cord sets 
(extension cords).
    (1) Handling. Portable equipment shall be handled in a manner which 
will not cause damage. Flexible electric cords connected to equipment 
may not be used for raising or lowering the equipment. Flexible cords 
may not be fastened with staples or otherwise hung in such a fashion as 
could damage the outer jacket or insulation.
    (2) Visual inspection. (i) Portable cord- and plug-connected 
equipment and flexible cord sets (extension cords) shall be visually 
inspected before use on any shift for external defects (such as loose 
parts, deformed and missing pins, or damage to outer jacket or 
insulation) and for evidence of possible internal damage (such as 
pinched or crushed outer jacket). Cord- and plug-connected equipment and 
flexible cord sets (extension cords) which remain connected once they 
are put in place and are not exposed to damage need not be visually 
inspected until they are relocated.
    (ii) If there is a defect or evidence of damage that might expose an 
employee to injury, the defective or damaged item shall be removed from 
service, and no employee may use it until repairs and tests necessary to 
render the equipment safe have been made.
    (iii) When an attachment plug is to be connected to a receptacle 
(including any on a cord set), the relationship of the plug and 
receptacle contacts shall first be checked to ensure that they are of 
proper mating configurations.
    (3) Grounding-type equipment. (i) A flexible cord used with 
grounding-type equipment shall contain an equipment grounding conductor.
    (ii) Attachment plugs and receptacles may not be connected or 
altered in a manner which would prevent proper continuity of the 
equipment grounding conductor at the point where plugs are attached to 
receptacles. Additionally, these devices may not be altered to

[[Page 857]]

allow the grounding pole of a plug to be inserted into slots intended 
for connection to the current-carrying conductors.
    (iii) Adapters which interrupt the continuity of the equipment 
grounding connection may not be used.
    (4) Conductive work locations. Portable electric equipment and 
flexible cords used in highly conductive work locations (such as those 
inundated with water or other conductive liquids), or in job locations 
where employees are likely to contact water or conductive liquids, shall 
be approved for those locations.
    (5) Connecting attachment plugs. (i) Employees' hands may not be wet 
when plugging and unplugging flexible cords and cord- and plug-connected 
equipment, if energized equipment is involved.
    (ii) Energized plug and receptacle connections may be handled only 
with insulating protective equipment if the condition of the connection 
could provide a conducting path to the employee's hand (if, for example, 
a cord connector is wet from being immersed in water).
    (iii) Locking-type connectors shall be properly secured after 
connection.
    (b) Electric power and lighting circuits. (1) Routine opening and 
closing of circuits. Load rated switches, circuit breakers, or other 
devices specifically designed as disconnecting means shall be used for 
the opening, reversing, or closing of circuits under load conditions. 
Cable connectors not of the load-break type, fuses, terminal lugs, and 
cable splice connections may not be used for such purposes, except in an 
emergency.
    (2) Reclosing circuits after protective device operation. After a 
circuit is deenergized by a circuit protective device, the circuit may 
not be manually reenergized until it has been determined that the 
equipment and circuit can be safely energized. The repetitive manual 
reclosing of circuit breakers or reenergizing circuits through replaced 
fuses is prohibited.

    Note: When it can be determined from the design of the circuit and 
the overcurrent devices involved that the automatic operation of a 
device was caused by an overload rather than a fault condition, no 
examination of the circuit or connected equipment is needed before the 
circuit is reenergized.

    (3) Overcurrent protection modification. Overcurrent protection of 
circuits and conductors may not be modified, even on a temporary basis, 
beyond that allowed by Sec. 1910.304(e), the installation safety 
requirements for overcurrent protection.
    (c) Test instruments and equipment. (1) Use. Only qualified persons 
may perform testing work on electric circuits or equipment.
    (2) Visual inspection. Test instruments and equipment and all 
associated test leads, cables, power cords, probes, and connectors shall 
be visually inspected for external defects and damage before the 
equipment is used. If there is a defect or evidence of damage that might 
expose an employee to injury, the defective or damaged item shall be 
removed from service, and no employee may use it until repairs and tests 
necessary to render the equipment safe have been made.
    (3) Rating of equipment. Test instruments and equipment and their 
accessories shall be rated for the circuits and equipment to which they 
will be connected and shall be designed for the environment in which 
they will be used.
    (d) Occasional use of flammable or ignitible materials. Where 
flammable materials are present only occasionally, electric equipment 
capable of igniting them shall not be used, unless measures are taken to 
prevent hazardous conditions from developing. Such materials include, 
but are not limited to: flammable gases, vapors, or liquids; combustible 
dust; and ignitible fibers or flyings.

    Note: Electrical installation requirements for locations where 
flammable materials are present on a regular basis are contained in 
Sec. 1910.307.

[55 FR 32019, Aug. 6, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.335  Safeguards for personnel protection.

    (a) Use of protective equipment--(1) Personal protective equipment. 
(i) Employees working in areas where there are potential electrical 
hazards shall be provided with, and

[[Page 858]]

shall use, electrical protective equipment that is appropriate for the 
specific parts of the body to be protected and for the work to be 
performed.

    Note: Personal protective equipment requirements are contained in 
subpart I of this part.

    (ii) Protective equipment shall be maintained in a safe, reliable 
condition and shall be periodically inspected or tested, as required by 
Sec. 1910.137.
    (iii) If the insulating capability of protective equipment may be 
subject to damage during use, the insulating material shall be 
protected. (For example, an outer covering of leather is sometimes used 
for the protection of rubber insulating material.)
    (iv) Employees shall wear nonconductive head protection wherever 
there is a danger of head injury from electric shock or burns due to 
contact with exposed energized parts.
    (v) Employees shall wear protective equipment for the eyes or face 
wherever there is danger of injury to the eyes or face from electric 
arcs or flashes or from flying objects resulting from electrical 
explosion.
    (2) General protective equipment and tools. (i) When working near 
exposed energized conductors or circuit parts, each employee shall use 
insulated tools or handling equipment if the tools or handling equipment 
might make contact with such conductors or parts. If the insulating 
capability of insulated tools or handling equipment is subject to 
damage, the insulating material shall be protected.
    (A) Fuse handling equipment, insulated for the circuit voltage, 
shall be used to remove or install fuses when the fuse terminals are 
energized.
    (B) Ropes and handlines used near exposed energized parts shall be 
nonconductive.
    (ii) Protective shields, protective barriers, or insulating 
materials shall be used to protect each employee from shock, burns, or 
other electrically related injuries while that employee is working near 
exposed energized parts which might be accidentally contacted or where 
dangerous electric heating or arcing might occur. When normally enclosed 
live parts are exposed for maintenance or repair, they shall be guarded 
to protect unqualified persons from contact with the live parts.
    (b) Alerting techniques. The following alerting techniques shall be 
used to warn and protect employees from hazards which could cause injury 
due to electric shock, burns, or failure of electric equipment parts:
    (1) Safety signs and tags. Safety signs, safety symbols, or accident 
prevention tags shall be used where necessary to warn employees about 
electrical hazards which may endanger them, as required by 
Sec. 1910.145.
    (2) Barricades. Barricades shall be used in conjunction with safety 
signs where it is necessary to prevent or limit employee access to work 
areas exposing employees to uninsulated energized conductors or circuit 
parts. Conductive barricades may not be used where they might cause an 
electrical contact hazard.
    (3) Attendants. If signs and barricades do not provide sufficient 
warning and protection from electrical hazards, an attendant shall be 
stationed to warn and protect employees.
[55 FR 32020, Aug. 6, 1990]


<R05>
Secs. 1910.336--1910.360    [Reserved]

                 Safety-Related Maintenance Requirements


<R05>
Secs. 1910.361--1910.380    [Reserved]

                Safety Requirements for Special Equipment


<R05>
Secs. 1910.381--1910.398    [Reserved]

                               Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 1910.399  Definitions applicable to this subpart.

    Acceptable. An installation or equipment is acceptable to the 
Assistant Secretary of Labor, and approved within the meaning of this 
Subpart S:
    (i) If it is accepted, or certified, or listed, or labeled, or 
otherwise determined to be safe by a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory; or
    (ii) With respect to an installation or equipment of a kind which no 
nationally recognized testing laboratory accepts, certifies, lists, 
labels, or determines to be safe, if it is inspected or tested by 
another Federal agency, or

[[Page 859]]

by a State, municipal, or other local authority responsible for 
enforcing occupational safety provisions of the National Electrical Code 
and found in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical 
Code as applied in this subpart; or
    (iii) With respect to custom-made equipment or related installations 
which are designed, fabricated for, and intended for use by a particular 
customer, if it is determined to be safe for its intended use by its 
manufacturer on the basis of test data which the employer keeps and 
makes available for inspection to the Assistant Secretary and his 
authorized representatives. Refer to Sec. 1910.7 for definition of 
nationally recognized testing laboratory.
    Accepted. An installation is ``accepted'' if it has been inspected 
and found by a nationally recognized testing laboratory to conform to 
specified plans or to procedures of applicable codes.
    Accessible. (As applied to wiring methods.) Capable of being removed 
or exposed without damaging the building structure or finish, or not 
permanently closed in by the structure or finish of the building. (See 
``concealed'' and ``exposed.'')
    Accessible. (As applied to equipment.) Admitting close approach; not 
guarded by locked doors, elevation, or other effective means. (See 
``Readily accessible.'')
    Ampacity. Current-carrying capacity of electric conductors expressed 
in amperes.
    Appliances. Utilization equipment, generally other than industrial, 
normally built in standardized sizes or types, which is installed or 
connected as a unit to perform one or more functions such as clothes 
washing, air conditioning, food mixing, deep frying, etc.
    Approved. Acceptable to the authority enforcing this subpart. The 
authority enforcing this subpart is the Assistant Secretary of Labor for 
Occupational Safety and Health. The definition of ``acceptable'' 
indicates what is acceptable to the Assistant Secretary of Labor, and 
therefore approved within the meaning of this Subpart.
    Approved for the purpose. Approved for a specific purpose, 
environment, or application described in a particular standard 
requirement.
    Suitability of equipment or materials for a specific purpose, 
environment or application may be determined by a nationally recognized 
testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned 
with product evaluation as part of its listing and labeling program. 
(See ``Labeled'' or ``Listed.'')
    Armored cable. Type AC armored cable is a fabricated assembly of 
insulated conductors in a flexible metallic enclosure.
    Askarel. A generic term for a group of nonflammable synthetic 
chlorinated hydrocarbons used as electrical insulating media. Askarels 
of various compositional types are used. Under arcing conditions the 
gases produced, while consisting predominantly of noncombustible 
hydrogen chloride, can include varying amounts of combustible gases 
depending upon the askarel type.
    Attachment plug (Plug cap) (Cap). A device which, by insertion in a 
receptacle, establishes connection between the conductors of the 
attached flexible cord and the conductors connected permanently to the 
receptacle.
    Automatic. Self-acting, operating by its own mechanism when actuated 
by some impersonal influence, as, for example, a change in current 
strength, pressure, temperature, or mechanical configuration.
    Bare conductor. See ``Conductor.''
    Bonding. The permanent joining of metallic parts to form an 
electrically conductive path which will assure electrical continuity and 
the capacity to conduct safely any current likely to be imposed.
    Bonding jumper. A reliable conductor to assure the required 
electrical conductivity between metal parts required to be electrically 
connected.
    Branch circuit. The circuit conductors between the final overcurrent 
device protecting the circuit and the outlet(s).
    Building. A structure which stands alone or which is cut off from 
adjoining structures by fire walls with all openings therein protected 
by approved fire doors.
    Cabinet. An enclosure designed either for surface or flush mounting, 
and provided with a frame, mat, or trim in

[[Page 860]]

which a swinging door or doors are or may be hung.
    Cable tray system. A cable tray system is a unit or assembly of 
units or sections, and associated fittings, made of metal or other 
noncombustible materials forming a rigid structural system used to 
support cables. Cable tray systems include ladders, troughs, channels, 
solid bottom trays, and other similar structures.
    Cablebus. Cablebus is an approved assembly of insulated conductors 
with fittings and conductor terminations in a completely enclosed, 
ventilated, protective metal housing.
    Center pivot irrigation machine. A center pivot irrigation machine 
is a multi-motored irrigation machine which revolves around a central 
pivot and employs alignment switches or similar devices to control 
individual motors.
    Certified. Equipment is ``certified'' if it (a) has been tested and 
found by a nationally recognized testing laboratory to meet nationally 
recognized standards or to be safe for use in a specified manner, or (b) 
is of a kind whose production is periodically inspected by a nationally 
recognized testing laboratory, and (c) it bears a label, tag, or other 
record of certification.
    Circuit breaker. (i) (600 volts nominal, or less). A device designed 
to open and close a circuit by nonautomatic means and to open the 
circuit automatically on a predetermined overcurrent without injury to 
itself when properly applied within its rating.
    (ii) (Over 600 volts, nominal). A switching device capable of 
making, carrying, and breaking currents under normal circuit conditions, 
and also making, carrying for a specified time, and breaking currents 
under specified abnormal circuit conditions, such as those of short 
circuit.
    Class I locations. Class I locations are those in which flammable 
gases or vapors are or may be present in the air in quantities 
sufficient to produce explosive or ignitible mixtures. Class I locations 
include the following:
    (i) Class I, Division 1. A Class I, Division 1 location is a 
location: (a) in which hazardous concentrations of flammable gases or 
vapors may exist under normal operating conditions; or (b) in which 
hazardous concentrations of such gases or vapors may exist frequently 
because of repair or maintenance operations or because of leakage; or 
(c) in which breakdown or faulty operation of equipment or processes 
might release hazardous concentrations of flammable gases or vapors, and 
might also cause simultaneous failure of electric equipment.

    Note: This classification usually includes locations where volatile 
flammable liquids or liquefied flammable gases are transferred from one 
container to another; interiors of spray booths and areas in the 
vicinity of spraying and painting operations where volatile flammable 
solvents are used; locations containing open tanks or vats of volatile 
flammable liquids; drying rooms or compartments for the evaporation of 
flammable solvents; locations containing fat and oil extraction 
equipment using volatile flammable solvents; portions of cleaning and 
dyeing plants where flammable liquids are used; gas generator rooms and 
other portions of gas manufacturing plants where flammable gas may 
escape; inadequately ventilated pump rooms for flammable gas or for 
volatile flammable liquids; the interiors of refrigerators and freezers 
in which volatile flammable materials are stored in open, lightly 
stoppered, or easily ruptured containers; and all other locations where 
ignitible concentrations of flammable vapors or gases are likely to 
occur in the course of normal operations.

    (ii) Class I, Division 2. A Class I, Division 2 location is a 
location: (a) in which volatile flammable liquids or flammable gases are 
handled, processed, or used, but in which the hazardous liquids, vapors, 
or gases will normally be confined within closed containers or closed 
systems from which they can escape only in case of accidental rupture or 
breakdown of such containers or systems, or in case of abnormal 
operation of equipment; or (b) in which hazardous concentrations of 
gases or vapors are normally prevented by positive mechanical 
ventilation, and which might become hazardous through failure or 
abnormal operations of the ventilating equipment; or (c) that is 
adjacent to a Class I, Division 1 location, and to which hazardous 
concentrations of gases or vapors might occasionally be communicated 
unless such communication is prevented by adequate positive-pressure 
ventilation from a source of clean air, and effective

[[Page 861]]

safeguards against ventilation failure are provided.

    Note: This classification usually includes locations where volatile 
flammable liquids or flammable gases or vapors are used, but which would 
become hazardous only in case of an accident or of some unusual 
operating condition. The quantity of flammable material that might 
escape in case of accident, the adequacy of ventilating equipment, the 
total area involved, and the record of the industry or business with 
respect to explosions or fires are all factors that merit consideration 
in determining the classification and extent of each location.
    Piping without valves, checks, meters, and similar devices would not 
ordinarily introduce a hazardous condition even though used for 
flammable liquids or gases. Locations used for the storage of flammable 
liquids or a liquefied or compressed gases in sealed containers would 
not normally be considered hazardous unless also subject to other 
hazardous conditions.
    Electrical conduits and their associated enclosures separated from 
process fluids by a single seal or barrier are classed as a Division 2 
location if the outside of the conduit and enclosures is a nonhazardous 
location.

    Class II locations. Class II locations are those that are hazardous 
because of the presence of combustible dust. Class II locations include 
the following:
    (i) Class II, Division 1. A Class II, Division 1 location is a 
location: (a) In which combustible dust is or may be in suspension in 
the air under normal operating conditions, in quantities sufficient to 
produce explosive or ignitible mixtures; or (b) where mechanical failure 
or abnormal operation of machinery or equipment might cause such 
explosive or ignitible mixtures to be produced, and might also provide a 
source of ignition through simultaneous failure of electric equipment, 
operation of protection devices, or from other causes, or (c) in which 
combustible dusts of an electrically conductive nature may be present.

    Note: This classification may include areas of grain handling and 
processing plants, starch plants, sugar-pulverizing plants, malting 
plants, hay-grinding plants, coal pulverizing plants, areas where metal 
dusts and powders are produced or processed, and other similar locations 
which contain dust producing machinery and equipment (except where the 
equipment is dust-tight or vented to the outside). These areas would 
have combustible dust in the air, under normal operating conditions, in 
quantities sufficient to produce explosive or ignitible mixtures. 
Combustible dusts which are electrically nonconductive include dusts 
produced in the handling and processing of grain and grain products, 
pulverized sugar and cocoa, dried egg and milk powders, pulverized 
spices, starch and pastes, potato and woodflour, oil meal from beans and 
seed, dried hay, and other organic materials which may produce 
combustible dusts when processed or handled. Dusts containing magnesium 
or aluminum are particularly hazardous and the use of extreme caution is 
necessary to avoid ignition and explosion.

    (ii) Class II, Division 2. A Class II, Division 2 location is a 
location in which: (a) combustible dust will not normally be in 
suspension in the air in quantities sufficient to produce explosive or 
ignitible mixtures, and dust accumulations are normally insufficient to 
interfere with the normal operation of electrical equipment or other 
apparatus; or (b) dust may be in suspension in the air as a result of 
infrequent malfunctioning of handling or processing equipment, and dust 
accumulations resulting therefrom may be ignitible by abnormal operation 
or failure of electrical equipment or other apparatus.

    Note: This classification includes locations where dangerous 
concentrations of suspended dust would not be likely but where dust 
accumulations might form on or in the vicinity of electric equipment. 
These areas may contain equipment from which appreciable quantities of 
dust would escape under abnormal operating conditions or be adjacent to 
a Class II Division 1 location, as described above, into which an 
explosive or ignitible concentration of dust may be put into suspension 
under abnormal operating conditions.

    Class III locations. Class III locations are those that are 
hazardous because of the presence of easily ignitible fibers or flyings 
but in which such fibers or flyings are not likely to be in suspension 
in the air in quantities sufficient to produce ignitible mixtures. Class 
III locations include the following:
    (i) Class III, Division 1. A Class III, Division 1 location is a 
location in which easily ignitible fibers or materials producing 
combustible flyings are handled, manufactured, or used.

    Note: Such locations usually include some parts of rayon, cotton, 
and other textile mills; combustible fiber manufacturing and processing 
plants; cotton gins and cotton-seed mills; flax-processing plants; 
clothing

[[Page 862]]

manufacturing plants; woodworking plants, and establishments; and 
industries involving similar hazardous processes or conditions.
    Easily ignitible fibers and flyings include rayon, cotton (including 
cotton linters and cotton waste), sisal or henequen, istle, jute, hemp, 
tow, cocoa fiber, oakum, baled waste kapok, Spanish moss, excelsior, and 
other materials of similar nature.

    (ii) Class III, Division 2. A Class III, Division 2 location is a 
location in which easily ignitible fibers are stored or handled, except 
in process of manufacture.
    Collector ring. A collector ring is an assembly of slip rings for 
transferring electrical energy from a stationary to a rotating member.
    Concealed. Rendered inaccessible by the structure or finish of the 
building. Wires in concealed raceways are considered concealed, even 
though they may become accessible by withdrawing them. [See Accessible. 
(As applied to wiring methods.)]
    Conductor. (i) Bare. A conductor having no covering or electrical 
insulation whatsoever.
    (ii) Covered. A conductor encased within material of composition or 
thickness that is not recognized as electrical insulation.
    (iii) Insulated. A conductor encased within material of composition 
and thickness that is recognized as electrical insulation.
    Conduit body. A separate portion of a conduit or tubing system that 
provides access through a removable cover(s) to the interior of the 
system at a junction of two or more sections of the system or at a 
terminal point of the system. Boxes such as FS and FD or larger cast or 
sheet metal boxes are not classified as conduit bodies.
    Controller. A device or group of devices that serves to govern, in 
some predetermined manner, the electric power delivered to the apparatus 
to which it is connected.
    Cooking unit, counter-mounted. A cooking appliance designed for 
mounting in or on a counter and consisting of one or more heating 
elements, internal wiring, and built-in or separately mountable 
controls. (See Oven, wall-mounted.)
    Covered conductor. See Conductor.
    Cutout. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) An assembly of a fuse support 
with either a fuseholder, fuse carrier, or disconnecting blade. The 
fuseholder or fuse carrier may include a conducting element (fuse link), 
or may act as the disconnecting blade by the inclusion of a nonfusible 
member.
    Cutout box. An enclosure designed for surface mounting and having 
swinging doors or covers secured directly to and telescoping with the 
walls of the box proper. (See Cabinet.)
    Damp location. See Location.
    Dead front. Without live parts exposed to a person on the operating 
side of the equipment.
    Device. A unit of an electrical system which is intended to carry 
but not utilize electric energy.
    Dielectric heating. Dielectric heating is the heating of a nominally 
insulating material due to its own dielectric losses when the material 
is placed in a varying electric field.
    Disconnecting means. A device, or group of devices, or other means 
by which the conductors of a circuit can be disconnected from their 
source of supply.
    Disconnecting (or Isolating) switch. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) A 
mechanical switching device used for isolating a circuit or equipment 
from a source of power.
    Dry location. See Location.
    Electric sign. A fixed, stationary, or portable self-contained, 
electrically illuminated utilization equipment with words or symbols 
designed to convey information or attract attention.
    Enclosed. Surrounded by a case, housing, fence or walls which will 
prevent persons from accidentally contacting energized parts.
    Enclosure. The case or housing of apparatus, or the fence or walls 
surrounding an installation to prevent personnel from accidentally 
contacting energized parts, or to protect the equipment from physical 
damage.
    Equipment. A general term including material, fittings, devices, 
appliances, fixtures, apparatus, and the like, used as a part of, or in 
connection with, an electrical installation.
    Equipment grounding conductor. See Grounding conductor, equipment.
    Explosion-proof apparatus. Apparatus enclosed in a case that is 
capable of

[[Page 863]]

withstanding an explosion of a specified gas or vapor which may occur 
within it and of preventing the ignition of a specified gas or vapor 
surrounding the enclosure by sparks, flashes, or explosion of the gas or 
vapor within, and which operates at such an external temperature that it 
will not ignite a surrounding flammable atmosphere.
    Exposed. (As applied to live parts.) Capable of being inadvertently 
touched or approached nearer than a safe distance by a person. It is 
applied to parts not suitably guarded, isolated, or insulated. (See 
Accessible. and Concealed.)
    Exposed. (As applied to wiring methods.) On or attached to the 
surface or behind panels designed to allow access. [See Accessible. (As 
applied to wiring methods.)]
    Exposed. (For the purposes of Sec. 1910.308(e), Communications 
systems.) Where the circuit is in such a position that in case of 
failure of supports or insulation, contact with another circuit may 
result.
    Externally operable. Capable of being operated without exposing the 
operator to contact with live parts.
    Feeder. All circuit conductors between the service equipment, or the 
generator switchboard of an isolated plant, and the final branch-circuit 
overcurrent device.
    Fitting. An accessory such as a locknut, bushing, or other part of a 
wiring system that is intended primarily to perform a mechanical rather 
than an electrical function.
    Fuse. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) An overcurrent protective device 
with a circuit opening fusible part that is heated and severed by the 
passage of overcurrent through it. A fuse comprises all the parts that 
form a unit capable of performing the prescribed functions. It may or 
may not be the complete device necessary to connect it into an 
electrical circuit.
    Ground. A conducting connection, whether intentional or accidental, 
between an electrical circuit or equipment and the earth, or to some 
conducting body that serves in place of the earth.
    Grounded. Connected to earth or to some conducting body that serves 
in place of the earth.
    Grounded, effectively. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) Permanently 
connected to earth through a ground connection of sufficiently low 
impedance and having sufficient ampacity that ground fault current which 
may occur cannot build up to voltages dangerous to personnel.
    Grounded conductor. A system or circuit conductor that is 
intentionally grounded.
    Grounding conductor. A conductor used to connect equipment or the 
grounded circuit of a wiring system to a grounding electrode or 
electrodes.
    Grounding conductor, equipment. The conductor used to connect the 
non-current-carrying metal parts of equipment, raceways, and other 
enclosures to the system grounded conductor and/or the grounding 
electrode conductor at the service equipment or at the source of a 
separately derived system.
    Grounding electrode conductor. The conductor used to connect the 
grounding electrode to the equipment grounding conductor and/or to the 
grounded conductor of the circuit at the service equipment or at the 
source of a separately derived system.
    Ground-fault circuit-interrupter. A device whose function is to 
interrupt the electric circuit to the load when a fault current to 
ground exceeds some predetermined value that is less than that required 
to operate the overcurrent protective device of the supply circuit.
    Guarded. Covered, shielded, fenced, enclosed, or otherwise protected 
by means of suitable covers, casings, barriers, rails, screens, mats, or 
platforms to remove the likelihood of approach to a point of danger or 
contact by persons or objects.
    Health care facilities. Buildings or portions of buildings and 
mobile homes that contain, but are not limited to, hospitals, nursing 
homes, extended care facilities, clinics, and medical and dental 
offices, whether fixed or mobile.
    Heating equipment. For the purposes of Sec. 1910.306(g), the term 
heating equipment includes any equipment used for heating purposes if 
heat is generated by induction or dielectric methods.
    Hoistway. Any shaftway, hatchway, well hole, or other vertical 
opening or space in which an elevator or dumbwaiter is designed to 
operate.

[[Page 864]]

    Identified. Identified, as used in reference to a conductor or its 
terminal, means that such conductor or terminal can be readily 
recognized as grounded.
    Induction heating. Induction heating is the heating of a nominally 
conductive material due to its own I\2\R losses when the material is 
placed in a varying electromagnetic field.
    Insulated conductor. See Conductor.
    Interrupter switch. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) A switch capable of 
making, carrying, and interrupting specified currents.
    Irrigation machine. An irrigation machine is an electrically driven 
or controlled machine, with one or more motors, not hand portable, and 
used primarily to transport and distribute water for agricultural 
purposes.
    Isolated. Not readily accessible to persons unless special means for 
access are used.
    Isolated power system. A system comprising an isolating transformer 
or its equivalent, a line isolation monitor, and its ungrounded circuit 
conductors.
    Labeled. Equipment is labeled if there is attached to it a label, 
symbol, or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing 
laboratory which, (a) makes periodic inspections of the production of 
such equipment, and (b) whose labeling indicates compliance with 
nationally recognized standards or tests to determine safe use in a 
specified manner.
    Lighting outlet. An outlet intended for the direct connection of a 
lampholder, a lighting fixture, or a pendant cord terminating in a 
lampholder.
    Line-clearance tree trimming. The pruning, trimming, repairing, 
maintaining, removing, or clearing of trees or cutting of brush that is 
within 10 feet (305 cm) of electric supply lines and equipment.
    Listed. Equipment is listed if it is of a kind mentioned in a list 
which, (a) is published by a nationally recognized laboratory which 
makes periodic inspection of the production of such equipment, and (b) 
states such equipment meets nationally recognized standards or has been 
tested and found safe for use in a specified manner.
    Location--(i) Damp location. Partially protected locations under 
canopies, marquees, roofed open porches, and like locations, and 
interior locations subject to moderate degrees of moisture, such as some 
basements, some barns, and some cold-storage warehouses.
    (ii) Dry location. A location not normally subject to dampness or 
wetness. A location classified as dry may be temporarily subject to 
dampness or wetness, as in the case of a building under construction.
    (iii) Wet location. Installations underground or in concrete slabs 
or masonry in direct contact with the earth, and locations subject to 
saturation with water or other liquids, such as vehicle-washing areas, 
and locations exposed to weather and unprotected.
    May. If a discretionary right, privilege, or power is conferred, the 
word ``may'' is used. If a right, privilege, or power is abridged or if 
an obligation to abstain from acting is imposed, the word ``may'' is 
used with a restrictive ``no,'' ``not,'' or ``only.'' (E.g., no employer 
may . . . ; an employer may not . . . ; only qualified persons may. . . 
.)
    Medium voltage cable. Type MV medium voltage cable is a single or 
multiconductor solid dielectric insulated cable rated 2000 volts or 
higher.
    Metal-clad cable. Type MC cable is a factory assembly of one or more 
conductors, each individually insulated and enclosed in a metallic 
sheath of interlocking tape, or a smooth or corrugated tube.
    Mineral-insulated metal-sheathed cable. Type MI mineral-insulated 
metal-sheathed cable is a factory assembly of one or more conductors 
insulated with a highly compressed refractory mineral insulation and 
enclosed in a liquidtight and gastight continuous copper sheath.
    Mobile X-ray. X-ray equipment mounted on a permanent base with 
wheels and/or casters for moving while completely assembled.
    Nonmetallic-sheathed cable. Nonmetallic-sheathed cable is a factory 
assembly of two or more insulated conductors having an outer sheath of 
moisture resistant, flame-retardant, nonmetallic material. Nonmetallic 
sheathed cable is manufactured in the following types:
    (i) Type NM. The overall covering has a flame-retardant and 
moisture-resistant finish.

[[Page 865]]

    (ii) Type NMC. The overall covering is flame-retardant, moisture-
resistant, fungus-resistant, and corrosion-resistant.
    Oil (filled) cutout. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) A cutout in which 
all or part of the fuse support and its fuse link or disconnecting blade 
are mounted in oil with complete immersion of the contacts and the 
fusible portion of the conducting element (fuse link), so that arc 
interruption by severing of the fuse link or by opening of the contacts 
will occur under oil.
    Open wiring on insulators. Open wiring on insulators is an exposed 
wiring method using cleats, knobs, tubes, and flexible tubing for the 
protection and support of single insulated conductors run in or on 
buildings, and not concealed by the building structure.
    Outlet. A point on the wiring system at which current is taken to 
supply utilization equipment.
    Outline lighting. An arrangement of incandescent lamps or electric 
discharge tubing to outline or call attention to certain features such 
as the shape of a building or the decoration of a window.
    Oven, wall-mounted. An oven for cooking purposes designed for 
mounting in or on a wall or other surface and consisting of one of more 
heating elements, internal wiring, and built-in or separately mountable 
controls. (See Cooking unit, counter-mounted.)
    Overcurrent. Any current in excess of the rated current of equipment 
or the ampacity of a conductor. It may result from overload (see 
definition), short circuit, or ground fault. A current in excess of 
rating may be accommodated by certain equipment and conductors for a 
given set of conditions. Hence the rules for overcurrent protection are 
specific for particular situations.
    Overload. Operation of equipment in excess of normal, full load 
rating, or of a conductor in excess of rated ampacity which, when it 
persists for a sufficient length of time, would cause damage or 
dangerous overheating. A fault, such as a short circuit or ground fault, 
is not an overload. (See Overcurrent.)
    Panelboard. A single panel or group of panel units designed for 
assembly in the form of a single panel; including buses, automatic 
overcurrent devices, and with or without switches for the control of 
light, heat, or power circuits; designed to be placed in a cabinet or 
cutout box placed in or against a wall or partition and accessible only 
from the front. (See Switchboard.)
    Permanently installed decorative fountains and reflection pools. 
Those that are constructed in the ground, on the ground, or in a 
building in such a manner that the pool cannot be readily disassembled 
for storage and are served by electrical circuits of any nature. These 
units are primarily constructed for their aesthetic value and not 
intended for swimming or wading.
    Permanently installed swimming pools, wading and therapeutic pools. 
Those that are constructed in the ground, on the ground, or in a 
building in such a manner that the pool cannot be readily disassembled 
for storage whether or not served by electrical circuits of any nature.
    Portable X-ray. X-ray equipment designed to be hand-carried.
    Power and control tray cable. Type TC power and control tray cable 
is a factory assembly of two or more insulated conductors, with or 
without associated bare or covered grounding conductors under a 
nonmetallic sheath, approved for installation in cable trays, in 
raceways, or where supported by a messenger wire.
    Power fuse. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) See Fuse.
    Power-limited tray cable. Type PLTC nonmetallic-sheathed power 
limited tray cable is a factory assembly of two or more insulated 
conductors under a nonmetallic jacket.
    Power outlet. An enclosed assembly which may include receptacles, 
circuit breakers, fuseholders, fused switches, buses and watt-hour meter 
mounting means; intended to supply and control power to mobile homes, 
recreational vehicles or boats, or to serve as a means for distributing 
power required to operate mobile or temporarily installed equipment.
    Premises wiring system. That interior and exterior wiring, including 
power, lighting, control, and signal circuit

[[Page 866]]

wiring together with all of its associated hardware, fittings, and 
wiring devices, both permanently and temporarily installed, which 
extends from the load end of the service drop, or load end of the 
service lateral conductors to the outlet(s). Such wiring does not 
include wiring internal to appliances, fixtures, motors, controllers, 
motor control centers, and similar equipment.
    Qualified person. One familiar with the construction and operation 
of the equipment and the hazards involved.

    Note 1: Whether an employee is considered to be a ``qualified 
person'' will depend upon various circumstances in the workplace. It is 
possible and, in fact, likely for an individual to be considered 
``qualified'' with regard to certain equipment in the workplace, but 
``unqualified'' as to other equipment. (See Sec. 1910.332(b)(3) for 
training requirements that specifically apply to qualified persons.)

    Note 2: An employee who is undergoing on-the-job training and who, 
in the course of such training, has demonstrated an ability to perform 
duties safely at his or her level of training and who is under the 
direct supervision of a qualified person is considered to be a qualified 
person for the performance of those duties.

    Raceway. A channel designed expressly for holding wires, cables, or 
busbars, with additional functions as permitted in this subpart. 
Raceways may be of metal or insulating material, and the term includes 
rigid metal conduit, rigid nonmetallic conduit, intermediate metal 
conduit, liquidtight flexible metal conduit, flexible metallic tubing, 
flexible metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, underfloor raceways, 
cellular concrete floor raceways, cellular metal floor raceways, surface 
raceways, wireways, and busways.
    Readily accessible. Capable of being reached quickly for operation, 
renewal, or inspections, without requiring those to whom ready access is 
requisite to climb over or remove obstacles or to resort to portable 
ladders, chairs, etc. (See Accessible.)
    Receptacle. A receptacle is a contact device installed at the outlet 
for the connection of a single attachment plug. A single receptacle is a 
single contact device with no other contact device on the same yoke. A 
multiple receptacle is a single device containing two or more 
receptacles.
    Receptacle outlet. An outlet where one or more receptacles are 
installed.
    Remote-control circuit. Any electric circuit that controls any other 
circuit through a relay or an equivalent device.
    Sealable equipment. Equipment enclosed in a case or cabinet that is 
provided with a means of sealing or locking so that live parts cannot be 
made accessible without opening the enclosure. The equipment may or may 
not be operable without opening the enclosure.
    Separately derived system. A premises wiring system whose power is 
derived from generator, transformer, or converter winding and has no 
direct electrical connection, including a solidly connected grounded 
circuit conductor, to supply conductors originating in another system.
    Service. The conductors and equipment for delivering energy from the 
electricity supply system to the wiring system of the premises served.
    Service cable. Service conductors made up in the form of a cable.
    Service conductors. The supply conductors that extend from the 
street main or from transformers to the service equipment of the 
premises supplied.
    Service drop. The overhead service conductors from the last pole or 
other aerial support to and including the splices, if any, connecting to 
the service-entrance conductors at the building or other structure.
    Service-entrance cable. Service-entrance cable is a single conductor 
or multiconductor assembly provided with or without an overall covering, 
primarily used for services and of the following types:
    (i) Type SE, having a flame-retardant, moisture-resistant covering, 
but not required to have inherent protection against mechanical abuse.
    (ii) Type USE, recognized for underground use, having a moisture-
resistant covering, but not required to have a flame-retardant covering 
or inherent protection against mechanical abuse. Single-conductor cables 
having an insulation specifically approved for the purpose do not 
require an outer covering.
    Service-entrance conductors, overhead system. The service conductors 
between

[[Page 867]]

the terminals of the service equipment and a point usually outside the 
building, clear of building walls, where joined by tap or splice to the 
service drop.
    Service entrance conductors, underground system. The service 
conductors between the terminals of the service equipment and the point 
of connection to the service lateral. Where service equipment is located 
outside the building walls, there may be no service-entrance conductors, 
or they may be entirely outside the building.
    Service equipment. The necessary equipment, usually consisting of a 
circuit breaker or switch and fuses, and their accessories, located near 
the point of entrance of supply conductors to a building or other 
structure, or an otherwise defined area, and intended to consititute the 
main control and means of cutoff of the supply.
    Service raceway. The raceway that encloses the service-entrance 
conductors.
    Shielded nonmetallic-sheathed cable. Type SNM, shielded nonmetallic-
sheathed cable is a factory assembly of two or more insulated conductors 
in an extruded core of moisture-resistant, flame-resistant nonmetallic 
material, covered with an overlapping spiral metal tape and wire shield 
and jacketed with an extruded moisture-, flame-, oil-, corrosion-, 
fungus-, and sunlight-resistant nonmetallic material.
    Show window. Any window used or designed to be used for the display 
of goods or advertising material, whether it is fully or partly enclosed 
or entirely open at the rear and whether or not it has a platform raised 
higher than the street floor level.
    Sign. See Electric sign.
    Signaling circuit. Any electric circuit that energizes signaling 
equipment.
    Special permission. The written consent of the authority having 
jurisdiction.
    Storable swimming or wading pool. A pool with a maximum dimension of 
15 feet and a maximum wall height of 3 feet and is so constructed that 
it may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its 
original integrity.
    Switchboard. A large single panel, frame, or assembly of panels 
which have switches, buses, instruments, overcurrent and other 
protective devices mounted on the face or back or both. Switchboards are 
generally accessible from the rear as well as from the front and are not 
intended to be installed in cabinets. (See Panelboard.)
    Switches.
    (i) General-use switch. A switch intended for use in general 
distribution and branch circuits. It is rated in amperes, and it is 
capable of interrupting its rated current at its rated voltage.
    (ii) General-use snap switch. A form of general-use switch so 
constructed that it can be installed in flush device boxes or on outlet 
box covers, or otherwise used in conjunction with wiring systems 
recognized by this subpart.
    (iii) Isolating switch. A switch intended for isolating an electric 
circuit from the source of power. It has no interrupting rating, and it 
is intended to be operated only after the circuit has been opened by 
some other means.
    (iv) Motor-circuit switch. A switch, rated in horsepower, capable of 
interrupting the maximum operating overload current of a motor of the 
same horsepower rating as the switch at the rated voltage.
    Switching devices. (Over 600 volts, nominal.) Devices designed to 
close and/or open one or more electric circuits. Included in this 
category are circuit breakers, cutouts, disconnecting (or isolating) 
switches, disconnecting means, interrupter switches, and oil (filled) 
cutouts.
    Transportable X-ray. X-ray equipment installed in a vehicle or that 
may readily be disassembled for transport in a vehicle.
    Utilization equipment. Utilization equipment means equipment which 
utilizes electric energy for mechanical, chemical, heating, lighting, or 
similar useful purpose.
    Utilization system. A utilization system is a system which provides 
electric power and light for employee workplaces, and includes the 
premises wiring system and utilization equipment.
    Ventilated. Provided with a means to permit circulation of air 
sufficient to remove an excess of heat, fumes, or vapors.

[[Page 868]]

    Volatile flammable liquid. A flammable liquid having a flash point 
below 38 degrees C (100 degrees F) or whose temperature is above its 
flash point.
    Voltage (of a circuit). The greatest root-mean-square (effective) 
difference of potential between any two conductors of the circuit 
concerned.
    Voltage, nominal. A nominal value assigned to a circuit or system 
for the purpose of conveniently designating its voltage class (as 120/
240, 480Y/277, 600, etc.). The actual voltage at which a circuit 
operates can vary from the nominal within a range that permits 
satisfactory operation of equipment.
    Voltage to ground. For grounded circuits, the voltage between the 
given conductor and that point or conductor of the circuit that is 
grounded; for ungrounded circuits, the greatest voltage between the 
given conductor and any other conductor of the circuit.
    Watertight. So constructed that moisture will not enter the 
enclosure.
    Weatherproof. So constructed or protected that exposure to the 
weather will not interfere with successful operation. Rainproof, 
raintight, or watertight equipment can fulfill the requirements for 
weatherproof where varying weather conditions other than wetness, such 
as snow, ice, dust, or temperature extremes, are not a factor.
    Wet location. See Location.
    Wireways. Wireways are sheet-metal troughs with hinged or removable 
covers for housing and protecting electric wires and cable and in which 
conductors are laid in place after the wireway has been installed as a 
complete system.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981, as amended at 53 
FR 12123, Apr. 12, 1988; 55 FR 32020, Aug. 6, 1990; 55 FR 46054, Nov. 1, 
1990]

        Appendix A to Subpart S to Part 1910--Reference Documents

    The following references provide information which can be helpful in 
understanding and complying with the requirements contained in Subpart 
S:
ANSI A17.1-71  Safety Code for Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators and 
          Moving Walks.
ANSI B9.1-71  Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration.
ANSI B30.2-76  Safety Code for Overhead and Gantry Cranes.
ANSI B30.3-75  Hammerhead Tower Cranes.
ANSI B30.4-73  Safety Code for Portal, Tower, and Pillar Cranes.
ANSI B30.5-68  Safety Code for Crawler, Locomotive, and Truck Cranes.
ANSI B30.6-77  Derricks.
ANSI B30.7-77  Base Mounted Drum Hoists.
ANSI B30.8-71  Safety Code for Floating Cranes and Floating Derricks.
ANSI B30.11-73  Monorail Systems and Underhung Cranes.
ANSI B30.12-75  Handling Loads Suspended from Rotorcraft.
ANSI B30.13-77  Controlled Mechanical Storage Cranes.
ANSI B30.15-73  Safety Code for Mobile Hydraulic Cranes.
ANSI B30.16-73  Overhead Hoists.
ANSI C2-81  National Electrical Safety Code.
ANSI C33.27-74  Safety Standard for Outlet Boxes and Fittings for Use in 
          Hazardous Locations, Class I, Groups A, B, C, and D, and Class 
          II, Groups E, F, and G.
ANSI K61.1-72  Safety Requirements for the Storage and Handling of 
          Anhydrous Ammonia.
ASTM D2155-66  Test Method for Autoignition Temperature of Liquid 
          Petroleum Products.
ASTM D3176-74  Method for Ultimate Analysis of Coal and Coke.
ASTM D3180-74  Method for Calculating Coal and Coke Analyses from As 
          Determined to Different Bases.
IEEE 463-77  Standard for Electrical Safety Practices in Electrolytic 
          Cell Line Working Zones.
NFPA 20-76  Standard for the Installation of Centrifugal Fire Pumps.
NFPA 30-78  Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code.
NFPA 32-74  Standard for Drycleaning Plants.
NFPA 33-73  Standard for Spray Application Using Flammable and 
          Combustible Materials.
NFPA 34-74  Standard for Dip Tanks Containing Flammable or Combustible 
          Liquids.
NFPA 35-76  Standard for the Manufacture of Organic Coatings.
NFPA 36-74  Standard for Solvent Extraction Plants.
NFPA 40-74  Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate 
          Motion Picture Film.
NFPA 56A-73  Standard for the Use of Inhalation Anesthetics (Flammable 
          and Nonflammable).
NFPA 56F-74  Standard for Nonflammable Medical Gas Systems.
NFPA 58-76  Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum 
          Gases.
NFPA 59-76  Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum 
          Gases at Utility Gas Plants.

[[Page 869]]

NFPA 70-78  National Electrical Code.
NFPA 70C-74  Hazardous Locations Classification.
NFPA 70E  Standard for the Electrical Safety Requirements for Employee 
          Workplaces.
NFPA 71-77  Standard for the Installation, Maintenance, and Use of 
          Central Station Signaling Systems.
NFPA 72A-75  Standard for the Installation, Maintenance, and Use of 
          Local Protective Signaling Systems for Watchman, Fire Alarm, 
          and Supervisory Service.
NFPA 72B-75  Standard for the Installation, Maintenance, and Use of 
          Auxiliary Protective Signaling Systems for Fire Alarm Service.
NFPA 72C-75  Standard for the Installation, Maintenance, and Use of 
          Remote Station Protective Signaling Systems.
NFPA 72D-75  Standard for the Installation, Maintenance, and Use of 
          Proprietary Protective Signaling Systems for Watchman, Fire 
          Alarm, and Supervisory Service.
NFPA 72E-74  Standard for Automatic Fire Detectors.
NFPA 74-75  Standard for Installation, Maintenance, and Use of Household 
          Fire Warning Equipment.
NFPA 76A-73  Standard for Essential Electrical Systems for Health Care 
          Facilities.
NFPA 77-72  Recommended Practice on Static Electricity.
NFPA 80-77  Standard for Fire Doors and Windows.
NFPA 86A-73  Standard for Ovens and Furnaces; Design, Location and 
          Equipment.
NFPA 88A-73  Standard for Parking Structures.
NFPA 88B-73  Standard for Repair Garages.
NFPA 91-73  Standard for the Installation of Blower and Exhaust Systems 
          for Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal, or Conveying.
NFPA 101-78  Code for Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and 
          Structures. (Life Safety Code.)
NFPA 325M-69  Fire-Hazard Properties of Flammable Liquids, Gases, and 
          Volatile Solids.
NFPA 493-75  Standard for Intrinsically Safe Apparatus for Use in Class 
          I Hazardous Locations and Its Associated Apparatus.
NFPA 496-74  Standard for Purged and Pressurized Enclosures for 
          Electrical Equipment in Hazardous Locations.
NFPA 497-75  Recommended Practice for Classification of Class I 
          Hazardous Locations for Electrical Installations in Chemical 
          Plants.
NFPA 505-75  Fire Safety Standard for Powered Industrial Trucks 
          Including Type Designations and Areas of Use.
NMAB 353-1-79  Matrix of Combustion-Relevant Properties and 
          Classification of Gases, Vapors, and Selected Solids.
NMAB 353-2-79  Test Equipment for Use in Determining Classifications of 
          Combustible Dusts.
NMAB 353-3-80  Classification of Combustible Dusts in Accordance with 
          the National Electrical Code.
[46 FR 4056, Jan. 16, 1981; 46 FR 40185, Aug. 7, 1981]

    Appendix B to Subpart S to Part 1910--Explanatory Data [Reserved]

    Appendix C to Subpart S to Part 1910--Tables, Notes, and Charts 
                               [Reserved]


<R04>
                 Subpart T--Commercial Diving Operations

    Authority: Sections 4, 6, and 8 of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 653, 655, and 657); sec. 107, Contract 
Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (the Construction Safety Act) (40 
U.S.C. 333); sec. 41, Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act (33 
U.S.C. 941); Secretary of Labor's Order No. 8-76 (41 FR 25059), 9-83 (48 
FR 35736), or 1-90 (55 FR 9033), as applicable; 29 CFR part 1911.

    Source: 42 FR 37668, July 22, 1977, unless otherwise noted.

                                 General


<R05>
Sec. 1910.401  Scope and application.

    (a) Scope. (1) This subpart (standard) applies to every place of 
employment within the waters of the United States, or within any State, 
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
Islands, American Samoa, Guam, the Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, Wake Island, Johnston Island, the Canal Zone, or within the 
Outer Continental Shelf lands as defined in the Outer Continental Shelf 
Lands Act (67 Stat. 462, 43 U.S.C. 1331), where diving and related 
support operations are performed.
    (2) This standard applies to diving and related support operations 
conducted in connection with all types of work and employments, 
including general industry, construction, ship repairing, shipbuilding, 
shipbreaking and longshoring. However, this standard does not apply to 
any diving operation:

[[Page 870]]

    (i) Performed solely for instructional purposes, using open-circuit, 
compressed-air SCUBA and conducted within the no-decompression limits;
    (ii) Performed solely for search, rescue, or related public safety 
purposes by or under the control of a governmental agency; or
    (iii) Governed by 45 CFR part 46 (Protection of Human Subjects, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services) or equivalent rules or 
regulations established by another federal agency, which regulate 
research, development, or related purposes involving human subjects.
    (iv) Defined as scientific diving and which is under the direction 
and control of a diving program containing at least the following 
elements:
    (A) Diving safety manual which includes at a minimum: Procedures 
covering all diving operations specific to the program; procedures for 
emergency care, including recompression and evacuation; and criteria for 
diver training and certification.
    (B) Diving control (safety) board, with the majority of its members 
being active divers, which shall at a minimum have the authority to: 
Approve and monitor diving projects; review and revise the diving safety 
manual; assure compliance with the manual; certify the depths to which a 
diver has been trained; take disciplinary action for unsafe practices; 
and, assure adherence to the buddy system (a diver is accompanied by and 
is in continuous contact with another diver in the water) for SCUBA 
diving.
    (b) Application in emergencies. An employer may deviate from the 
requirements of this standard to the extent necessary to prevent or 
minimize a situation which is likely to cause death, serious physical 
harm, or major environmental damage, provided that the employer:
    (1) Notifies the Area Director, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration within 48 hours of the onset of the emergency situation 
indicating the nature of the emergency and extent of the deviation from 
the prescribed regulations; and
    (2) Upon request from the Area Director, submits such information in 
writing.
    (c) Employer obligation. The employer shall be responsible for 
compliance with:
    (1) All provisions of this standard of general applicability; and
    (2) All requirements pertaining to specific diving modes to the 
extent diving operations in such modes are conducted.
[42 FR 37668, July 22, 1977, as amended at 47 FR 53365, Nov. 26, 1982; 
58 FR 35310, June 30, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.402  Definitions.

    As used in this standard, the listed terms are defined as follows:
    Acfm: Actual cubic feet per minute.
    ASME Code or equivalent: ASME (American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers) Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, or an 
equivalent code which the employer can demonstrate to be equally 
effective.
    ATA: Atmosphere absolute.
    Bell: An enclosed compartment, pressurized (closed bell) or 
unpressurized (open bell), which allows the diver to be transported to 
and from the underwater work area and which may be used as a temporary 
refuge during diving operations.
    Bottom time: The total elasped time measured in minutes from the 
time when the diver leaves the surface in descent to the time that the 
diver begins ascent.
    Bursting pressure: The pressure at which a pressure containment 
device would fail structurally.
    Cylinder: A pressure vessel for the storage of gases.
    Decompression chamber: A pressure vessel for human occupancy such as 
a surface decompression chamber, closed bell, or deep diving system used 
to decompress divers and to treat decompression sickness.
    Decompression sickness: A condition with a variety of symptoms which 
may result from gas or bubbles in the tissues of divers after pressure 
reduction.
    Decompression table: A profile or set of profiles of depth-time 
relationships for ascent rates and breathing mixtures to be followed 
after a specific depth-time exposure or exposures.
    Dive location: A surface or vessel from which a diving operation is 
conducted.

[[Page 871]]

    Dive-location reserve breathing gas: A supply system of air or 
mixed-gas (as appropriate) at the dive location which is independent of 
the primary supply system and sufficient to support divers during the 
planned decompression.
    Dive team: Divers and support employees involved in a diving 
operation, including the designated person-in-charge.
    Diver: An employee working in water using underwater apparatus which 
supplies compressed breathing gas at the ambient pressure.
    Diver-carried reserve breathing gas: A diver-carried supply of air 
or mixed gas (as appropriate) sufficient under standard operating 
conditions to allow the diver to reach the surface, or another source of 
breathing gas, or to be reached by a standby diver.
    Diving mode: A type of diving requiring specific equipment, 
procedures and techniques (SCUBA, surface-supplied air, or mixed gas).
    Fsw: Feet of seawater (or equivalent static pressure head).
    Heavy gear: Diver-worn deep-sea dress including helmet, breastplate, 
dry suit, and weighted shoes.
    Hyperbaric conditions: Pressure conditions in excess of surface 
pressure.
    Inwater stage: A suspended underwater platform which supports a 
diver in the water.
    Liveboating: The practice of supporting a surfaced-supplied air or 
mixed gas diver from a vessel which is underway.
    Mixed-gas diving: A diving mode in which the diver is supplied in 
the water with a breathing gas other than air.
    No-decompression limits: The depth-time limits of the ``no-
decompression limits and repetitive dive group designation table for no-
decompression air dives'', U.S. Navy Diving Manual or equivalent limits 
which the employer can demonstrate to be equally effective.
    Psi(g): Pounds per square inch (gauge).
    Scientific diving means diving performed solely as a necessary part 
of a scientific, research, or educational activity by employees whose 
sole purpose for diving is to perform scientific research tasks. 
Scientific diving does not include performing any tasks usually 
associated with commercial diving such as: Placing or removing heavy 
objects underwater; inspection of pipelines and similar objects; 
construction; demolition; cutting or welding; or the use of explosives.
    SCUBA diving: A diving mode independent of surface supply in which 
the diver uses open circuit self-contained underwater breathing 
apparatus.
    Standby diver: A diver at the dive location available to assist a 
diver in the water.
    Surface-supplied air diving: A diving mode in which the diver in the 
water is supplied from the dive location with compressed air for 
breathing.
    Treatment table: A depth-time and breathing gas profile designed to 
treat decompression sickness.
    Umbilical: The composite hose bundle between a dive location and a 
diver or bell, or between a diver and a bell, which supplies the diver 
or bell with breathing gas, communications, power, or heat as 
appropriate to the diving mode or conditions, and includes a safety line 
between the diver and the dive location.
    Volume tank: A pressure vessel connected to the outlet of a 
compressor and used as an air reservoir.
    Working pressure: The maximum pressure to which a pressure 
containment device may be exposed under standard operating conditions.
[42 FR 37668, July 22, 1977, as amended at 47 FR 53365, Nov. 26, 1982]

                         Personnel Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 1910.410  Qualifications of dive team.

    (a) General. (1) Each dive team member shall have the experience or 
training necessary to perform assigned tasks in a safe and healthful 
manner.
    (2) Each dive team member shall have experience or training in the 
following:
    (i) The use of tools, equipment and systems relevant to assigned 
tasks;
    (ii) Techniques of the assigned diving mode: and
    (iii) Diving operations and emergency procedures.
    (3) All dive team members shall be trained in cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation and first aid (American Red Cross standard course or 
equivalent).

[[Page 872]]

    (4) Dive team members who are exposed to or control the exposure of 
others to hyperbaric conditions shall be trained in diving-related 
physics and physiology.
    (b) Assignments. (1) Each dive team member shall be assigned tasks 
in accordance with the employee's experience or training, except that 
limited additional tasks may be assigned to an employee undergoing 
training provided that these tasks are performed under the direct 
supervision of an experienced dive team member.
    (2) The employer shall not require a dive team member to be exposed 
to hyperbaric conditions against the employee's will, except when 
necessary to complete decompression or treatment procedures.
    (3) The employer shall not permit a dive team member to dive or be 
otherwise exposed to hyperbaric conditions for the duration of any 
temporary physical impairment or condition which is known to the 
employer and is likely to affect adversely the safety or health of a 
dive team member.
    (c) Designated person-in-charge. (1) The employer or an employee 
designated by the employer shall be at the dive location in charge of 
all aspects of the diving operation affecting the safety and health of 
dive team members.
    (2) The designated person-in-charge shall have experience and 
training in the conduct of the assigned diving operation.

                      General Operations Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 1910.420  Safe practices manual.

    (a) General. The employer shall develop and maintain a safe 
practices manual which shall be made available at the dive location to 
each dive team member.
    (b) Contents. (1) The safe practices manual shall contain a copy of 
this standard and the employer's policies for implementing the 
requirements of this standard.
    (2) For each diving mode engaged in, the safe practices manual shall 
include:
    (i) Safety procedures and checklists for diving operations;
    (ii) Assignments and responsibilities of the dive team members;
    (iii) Equipment procedures and checklists; and
    (iv) Emergency procedures for fire, equipment failure, adverse 
environmental conditions, and medical illness and injury.
[42 FR 37668, July 22, 1977, as amended at 49 FR 18295, Apr. 30, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.421  Pre-dive procedures.

    (a) General. The employer shall comply with the following 
requirements prior to each diving operation, unless otherwise specified.
    (b) Emergency aid. A list shall be kept at the dive location of the 
telephone or call numbers of the following:
    (1) An operational decompression chamber (if not at the dive 
location);
    (2) Accessible hospitals;
    (3) Available physicians;
    (4) Available means of transportation; and
    (5) The nearest U.S. Coast Guard Rescue Coordination Center.
    (c) First aid supplies. (1) A first aid kit appropriate for the 
diving operation and approved by a physician shall be available at the 
dive location.
    (2) When used in a decompression chamber or bell, the first aid kit 
shall be suitable for use under hyperbaric conditions.
    (3) In addition to any other first aid supplies, an American Red 
Cross standard first aid handbook or equivalent, and a bag-type manual 
resuscitator with transparent mask and tubing shall be available at the 
dive location.
    (d) Planning and assessment. Planning of a diving operation shall 
include an assessment of the safety and health aspects of the following:
    (1) Diving mode;
    (2) Surface and underwater conditions and hazards;
    (3) Breathing gas supply (including reserves);
    (4) Thermal protection;
    (5) Diving equipment and systems;
    (6) Dive team assignments and physical fitness of dive team members 
(including any impairment known to the employer);
    (7) Repetitive dive designation or residual inert gas status of dive 
team members;

[[Page 873]]

    (8) Decompression and treatment procedures (including altitude 
corrections); and
    (9) Emergency procedures.
    (e) Hazardous activities. To minimize hazards to the dive team, 
diving operations shall be coordinated with other activities in the 
vicinity which are likely to interfere with the diving operation.
    (f) Employee briefing. (1) Dive team members shall be briefed on:
    (i) The tasks to be undertaken;
    (ii) Safety procedures for the diving mode;
    (iii) Any unusual hazards or environmental conditions likely to 
affect the safety of the diving operation; and
    (iv) Any modifications to operating procedures necessitated by the 
specific diving operation.
    (2) Prior to making individual dive team member assignments, the 
employer shall inquire into the dive team member's current state of 
physical fitness, and indicate to the dive team member the procedure for 
reporting physical problems or adverse physiological effects during and 
after the dive.
    (g) Equipment inspection. The breathing gas supply system including 
reserve breathing gas supplies, masks, helmets, thermal protection, and 
bell handling mechanism (when appropriate) shall be inspected prior to 
each dive.
    (h) Warning signal. When diving from surfaces other than vessels in 
areas capable of supporting marine traffic, a rigid replica of the 
international code flag ``A'' at least one meter in height shall be 
displayed at the dive location in a manner which allows all-round 
visibility, and shall be illuminated during night diving operations.
[42 FR 37668, July 22, 1977, as amended at 47 FR 14706, Apr. 6, 1982; 54 
FR 24334, June 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.422  Procedures during dive.

    (a) General. The employer shall comply with the following 
requirements which are applicable to each diving operation unless 
otherwise specified.
    (b) Water entry and exit. (1) A means capable of supporting the 
diver shall be provided for entering and exiting the water.
    (2) The means provided for exiting the water shall extend below the 
water surface.
    (3) A means shall be provided to assist an injured diver from the 
water or into a bell.
    (c) Communications. (1) An operational two-way voice communication 
system shall be used between:
    (i) Each surface-supplied air or mixed-gas diver and a dive team 
member at the dive location or bell (when provided or required); and
    (ii) The bell and the dive location.
    (2) An operational, two-way communication system shall be available 
at the dive location to obtain emergency assistance.
    (d) Decompression tables. Decompression, repetitive, and no-
decompression tables (as appropriate) shall be at the dive location.
    (e) Dive profiles. A depth-time profile, including when appropriate 
any breathing gas changes, shall be maintained for each diver during the 
dive including decompression.
    (f) Hand-held power tools and equipment. (1) Hand-held electrical 
tools and equipment shall be de-energized before being placed into or 
retrieved from the water.
    (2) Hand-held power tools shall not be supplied with power from the 
dive location until requested by the diver.
    (g) Welding and burning. (1) A current supply switch to interrupt 
the current flow to the welding or burning electrode shall be:
    (i) Tended by a dive team member in voice communication with the 
diver performing the welding or burning; and
    (ii) Kept in the open position except when the diver is welding or 
burning.
    (2) The welding machine frame shall be grounded.
    (3) Welding and burning cables, electrode holders, and connections 
shall be capable of carrying the maximum current required by the work, 
and shall be properly insulated.
    (4) Insulated gloves shall be provided to divers performing welding 
and burning operations.
    (5) Prior to welding or burning on closed compartments, structures 
or pipes, which contain a flammable vapor or in which a flammable vapor 
may be generated by the work, they

[[Page 874]]

shall be vented, flooded, or purged with a mixture of gases which will 
not support combustion.
    (h) Explosives. (1) Employers shall transport, store, and use 
explosives in accordance with this section and the applicable provisions 
of Sec. 1910.109 and Sec. 1926.912 of Title 29 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations.
    (2) Electrical continuity of explosive circuits shall not be tested 
until the diver is out of the water.
    (3) Explosives shall not be detonated while the diver is in the 
water.
    (i) Termination of dive. The working interval of a dive shall be 
terminated when:
    (1) A diver requests termination;
    (2) A diver fails to respond correctly to communications or signals 
from a dive team member;
    (3) Communications are lost and can not be quickly re-established 
between the diver and a dive team member at the dive location, and 
between the designated person-in-charge and the person controlling the 
vessel in liveboating operations; or
    (4) A diver begins to use diver-carried reserve breathing gas or the 
dive-location reserve breathing gas.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.423  Post-dive procedures.

    (a) General. The employer shall comply with the following 
requirements which are applicable after each diving operation, unless 
otherwise specified.
    (b) Precautions. (1) After the completion of any dive, the employer 
shall:
    (i) Check the physical condition of the diver;
    (ii) Instruct the diver to report any physical problems or adverse 
physiological effects including symptoms of decompression sickness;
    (iii) Advise the diver of the location of a decompression chamber 
which is ready for use; and
    (iv) Alert the diver to the potential hazards of flying after 
diving.
    (2) For any dive outside the no-decompression limits, deeper than 
100 fsw or using mixed gas as a breathing mixture, the employer shall 
instruct the diver to remain awake and in the vicinity of the 
decompression chamber which is at the dive location for at least one 
hour after the dive (including decompression or treatment as 
appropriate).
    (c) Recompression capability. (1) A decompression chamber capable of 
recompressing the diver at the surface to a minimum of 165 fsw (6 ATA) 
shall be available at the dive location for:
    (i) Surface-supplied air diving to depths deeper than 100 fsw and 
shallower than 220 fsw;
    (ii) Mixed gas diving shallower than 300 fsw; or
    (iii) Diving outside the no-decompression limits shallower than 300 
fsw.
    (2) A decompression chamber capable of recompressing the diver at 
the surface to the maximum depth of the dive shall be available at the 
dive location for dives deeper than 300 fsw.
    (3) The decompression chamber shall be:
    (i) Dual-lock;
    (ii) Multiplace; and
    (iii) Located within 5 minutes of the dive location.
    (4) The decompression chamber shall be equipped with:
    (i) A pressure gauge for each pressurized compartment designed for 
human occupancy;
    (ii) A built-in-breathing-system with a minimum of one mask per 
occupant;
    (iii) A two-way voice communication system between occupants and a 
dive team member at the dive location;
    (iv) A viewport; and
    (v) Illumination capability to light the interior.
    (5) Treatment tables, treatment gas appropriate to the diving mode, 
and sufficient gas to conduct treatment shall be available at the dive 
location.
    (6) A dive team member shall be available at the dive location 
during and for at least one hour after the dive to operate the 
decompression chamber (when required or provided).
    (d) Record of dive. (1) The following information shall be recorded 
and maintained for each diving operation:
    (i) Names of dive team members including designated person-in-
charge;
    (ii) Date, time, and location;
    (iii) Diving modes used;
    (iv) General nature of work performed;
    (v) Approximate underwater and surface conditions (visibility, water 
temperature and current); and

[[Page 875]]

    (vi) Maximum depth and bottom time for each diver.
    (2) For each dive outside the no-decompression limits, deeper than 
100 fsw or using mixed gas, the following additional information shall 
be recorded and maintained:
    (i) Depth-time and breathing gas profiles;
    (ii) Decompression table designation (including modification); and
    (iii) Elapsed time since last pressure exposure if less than 24 
hours or repetitive dive designation for each diver.
    (3) For each dive in which decompression sickness is suspected or 
symptoms are evident, the following additional information shall be 
recorded and maintained:
    (i) Description of decompression sickness symptoms (including depth 
and time of onset); and
    (ii) Description and results of treatment.
    (e) Decompression procedure assessment. The employer shall:
    (1) Investigate and evaluate each incident of decompression sickness 
based on the recorded information, consideration of the past performance 
of decompression table used, and individual susceptibility;
    (2) Take appropriate corrective action to reduce the probability of 
recurrence of decompression sickness; and
    (3) Prepare a written evaluation of the decompression procedure 
assessment, including any corrective action taken, within 45 days of the 
incident of decompression sickness.
[42 FR 37668, July 22, 1977, as amended at 49 FR 18295, Apr. 30, 1984]

                     Specific Operations Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 1910.424  SCUBA diving.

    (a) General. Employers engaged in SCUBA diving shall comply with the 
following requirements, unless otherwise specified.
    (b) Limits. SCUBA diving shall not be conducted:
    (1) At depths deeper than 130 fsw;
    (2) At depths deeper than 100 fsw or outside the no-decompression 
limits unless a decompression chamber is ready for use;
    (3) Against currents exceeding one (1) knot unless line-tended; or
    (4) In enclosed or physically confining spaces unless line-tended.
    (c) Procedures. (1) A standby diver shall be available while a diver 
is in the water.
    (2) A diver shall be line-tended from the surface, or accompanied by 
another diver in the water in continuous visual contact during the 
diving operations.
    (3) A diver shall be stationed at the underwater point of entry when 
diving is conducted in enclosed or physically confining spaces.
    (4) A diver-carried reserve breathing gas supply shall be provided 
for each diver consisting of:
    (i) A manual reserve (J valve); or
    (ii) An independent reserve cylinder with a separate regulator or 
connected to the underwater breathing apparatus.
    (5) The valve of the reserve breathing gas supply shall be in the 
closed position prior to the dive.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.425  Surface-supplied air diving.

    (a) General. Employers engaged in surface-supplied air diving shall 
comply with the following requirements, unless otherwise specified.
    (b) Limits. (1) Surface-supplied air diving shall not be conducted 
at depths deeper than 190 fsw, except that dives with bottom times of 30 
minutes or less may be conducted to depths of 220 fsw.
    (2) A decompression chamber shall be ready for use at the dive 
location for any dive outside the no-decompression limits or deeper than 
100 fsw.
    (3) A bell shall be used for dives with an inwater decompression 
time greater than 120 minutes, except when heavy gear is worn or diving 
is conducted in physically confining spaces.
    (c) Procedures. (1) Each diver shall be continuously tended while in 
the water.
    (2) A diver shall be stationed at the underwater point of entry when 
diving is conducted in enclosed or physically confining spaces.
    (3) Each diving operation shall have a primary breathing gas supply 
sufficient to support divers for the duration of the planned dive 
including decompression.
    (4) For dives deeper than 100 fsw or outside the no-decompression 
limits:
    (i) A separate dive team member shall tend each diver in the water;

[[Page 876]]

    (ii) A standby diver shall be available while a diver is in the 
water;
    (iii) A diver-carried reserve breathing gas supply shall be provided 
for each diver except when heavy gear is worn; and
    (iv) A dive-location reserve breathing gas supply shall be provided.
    (5) For heavy-gear diving deeper than 100 fsw or outside the no-
decompression limits:
    (i) An extra breathing gas hose capable of supplying breathing gas 
to the diver in the water shall be available to the standby diver.
    (ii) An inwater stage shall be provided to divers in the water.
    (6) Except when heavy gear is worn or where physical space does not 
permit, a diver-carried reserve breathing gas supply shall be provided 
whenever the diver is prevented by the configuration of the dive area 
from ascending directly to the surface.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.426  Mixed-gas diving.

    (a) General. Employers engaged in mixed-gas diving shall comply with 
the following requirements, unless otherwise specified.
    (b) Limits. Mixed-gas diving shall be conducted only when:
    (1) A decompression chamber is ready for use at the dive location; 
and
    (i) A bell is used at depths greater than 220 fsw or when the dive 
involves inwater decompression time of greater than 120 minutes, except 
when heavy gear is worn or when diving in physically confining spaces; 
or
    (ii) A closed bell is used at depths greater than 300 fsw, except 
when diving is conducted in physically confining spaces.
    (c) Procedures. (1) A separate dive team member shall tend each 
diver in the water.
    (2) A standby diver shall be available while a diver is in the 
water.
    (3) A diver shall be stationed at the underwater point of entry when 
diving is conducted in enclosed or physically confining spaces.
    (4) Each diving operation shall have a primary breathing gas supply 
sufficient to support divers for the duration of the planned dive 
including decompression.
    (5) Each diving operation shall have a dive-location reserve 
breathing gas supply.
    (6) When heavy gear is worn:
    (i) An extra breathing gas hose capable of supplying breathing gas 
to the diver in the water shall be available to the standby diver; and
    (ii) An inwater stage shall be provided to divers in the water.
    (7) An inwater stage shall be provided for divers without access to 
a bell for dives deeper than 100 fsw or outside the no-decompression 
limits.
    (8) When a closed bell is used, one dive team member in the bell 
shall be available and tend the diver in the water.
    (9) Except when heavy gear is worn or where physical space does not 
permit, a diver-carried reserve breathing gas supply shall be provided 
for each diver:
    (i) Diving deeper than 100 fsw or outside the no-decompression 
limits; or
    (ii) Prevented by the configuration of the dive area from directly 
ascending to the surface.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.427  Liveboating.

    (a) General. Employers engaged in diving operations involving 
liveboating shall comply with the following requirements.
    (b) Limits. Diving operations involving liveboating shall not be 
conducted:
    (1) With an inwater decompression time of greater than 120 minutes;
    (2) Using surface-supplied air at depths deeper than 190 fsw, except 
that dives with bottom times of 30 minutes or less may be conducted to 
depths of 220 fsw;
    (3) Using mixed gas at depths greater than 220 fsw;
    (4) In rough seas which significantly inpede diver mobility or work 
function; or
    (5) In other than daylight hours.
    (c) Procedures. (1) The propeller of the vessel shall be stopped 
before the diver enters or exits the water.
    (2) A device shall be used which minimizes the possibility of 
entanglement of the diver's hose in the propeller of the vessel.
    (3) Two-way voice communication between the designated person-in-
charge and the person controlling the vessel

[[Page 877]]

shall be available while the diver is in the water.
    (4) A standby diver shall be available while a diver is in the 
water.
    (5) A diver-carried reserve breathing gas supply shall be carried by 
each diver engaged in liveboating operations.

                  Equipment Procedures and Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 1910.430  Equipment.

    (a) General. (1) All employers shall comply with the following 
requirements, unless otherwise specified.
    (2) Each equipment modification, repair, test, calibration or 
maintenance service shall be recorded by means of a tagging or logging 
system, and include the date and nature of work performed, and the name 
or initials of the person performing the work.
    (b) Air compressor system. (1) Compressors used to supply air to the 
diver shall be equipped with a volume tank with a check valve on the 
inlet side, a pressure gauge, a relief valve, and a drain valve.
    (2) Air compressor intakes shall be located away from areas 
containing exhaust or other contaminants.
    (3) Respirable air supplied to a diver shall not contain:
    (i) A level of carbon monoxide (CO) greater than 20 p/m;
    (ii) A level of carbon dioxide (CO<INF>2</INF>) greater than 1,000 
p/m;
    (iii) A level of oil mist greater than 5 milligrams per cubic meter; 
or
    (iv) A noxious or pronounced odor.
    (4) The output of air compressor systems shall be tested for air 
purity every 6 months by means of samples taken at the connection to the 
distribution system, except that non-oil lubricated compressors need not 
be tested for oil mist.
    (c) Breathing gas supply hoses. (1) Breathing gas supply hoses 
shall:
    (i) Have a working pressure at least equal to the working pressure 
of the total breathing gas system;
    (ii) Have a rated bursting pressure at least equal to 4 times the 
working pressure;
    (iii) Be tested at least annually to 1.5 times their working 
pressure; and
    (iv) Have their open ends taped, capped or plugged when not in use.
    (2) Breathing gas supply hose connectors shall:
    (i) Be made of corrosion-resistant materials;
    (ii) Have a working pressure at least equal to the working pressure 
of the hose to which they are attached; and
    (iii) Be resistant to accidental disengagement.
    (3) Umbilicals shall:
    (i) Be marked in 10-ft. increments to 100 feet beginning at the 
diver's end, and in 50 ft. increments thereafter;
    (ii) Be made of kink-resistant materials; and
    (iii) Have a working pressure greater than the pressure equivalent 
to the maximum depth of the dive (relative to the supply source) plus 
100 psi.
    (d) Buoyancy control. (1) Helmets or masks connected directly to the 
dry suit or other buoyancy-changing equipment shall be equipped with an 
exhaust valve.
    (2) A dry suit or other buoyancy-changing equipment not directly 
connected to the helmet or mask shall be equipped with an exhaust valve.
    (3) When used for SCUBA diving, a buoyancy compensator shall have an 
inflation source separate from the breathing gas supply.
    (4) An inflatable flotation device capable of maintaining the diver 
at the surface in a face-up position, having a manually activated 
inflation source independent of the breathing supply, an oral inflation 
device, and an exhaust valve shall be used for SCUBA diving.
    (e) Compressed gas cylinders. Compressed gas cylinders shall:
    (1) Be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the 
applicable provisions of 29 CFR 1910.101 and 1910.169 through 1910.171.
    (2) Be stored in a ventilated area and protected from excessive 
heat;
    (3) Be secured from falling; and
    (4) Have shut-off valves recessed into the cylinder or protected by 
a cap, except when in use or manifolded, or when used for SCUBA diving.
    (f) Decompression chambers. (1) Each decompression chamber 
manufactured after the effective date of this standard, shall be built 
and maintained in

[[Page 878]]

accordance with the ASME Code or equivalent.
    (2) Each decompression chamber manufactured prior to the effective 
date of this standard shall be maintained in conformity with the code 
requirements to which it was built, or equivalent.
    (3) Each decompression chamber shall be equipped with:
    (i) Means to maintain the atmosphere below a level of 25 percent 
oxygen by volume;
    (ii) Mufflers on intake and exhaust lines, which shall be regularly 
inspected and maintained;
    (iii) Suction guards on exhaust line openings; and
    (iv) A means for extinguishing fire, and shall be maintained to 
minimize sources of ignition and combustible material.
    (g) Gauges and timekeeping devices. (1) Gauges indicating diver 
depth which can be read at the dive location shall be used for all dives 
except SCUBA.
    (2) Each depth gauge shall be deadweight tested or calibrated 
against a master reference gauge every 6 months, and when there is a 
discrepancy greater than two percent (2 percent) of full scale between 
any two equivalent gauges.
    (3) A cylinder pressure gauge capable of being monitored by the 
diver during the dive shall be worn by each SCUBA diver.
    (4) A timekeeping device shall be available at each dive location.
    (h) Masks and helmets. (1) Surface-supplied air and mixed-gas masks 
and helmets shall have:
    (i) A non-return valve at the attachment point between helmet or 
mask and hose which shall close readily and positively; and
    (ii) An exhaust valve.
    (2) Surface-supplied air masks and helmets shall have a minimum 
ventilation rate capability of 4.5 acfm at any depth at which they are 
operated or the capability of maintaining the diver's inspired carbon 
dioxide partial pressure below 0.02 ATA when the diver is producing 
carbon dioxide at the rate of 1.6 standard liters per minute.
    (i) Oxygen safety. (1) Equipment used with oxygen or mixtures 
containing over forty percent (40%) by volume oxygen shall be designed 
for oxygen service.
    (2) Components (except umbilicals) exposed to oxygen or mixtures 
containing over forty percent (40%) by volume oxygen shall be cleaned of 
flammable materials before use.
    (3) Oxygen systems over 125 psig and compressed air systems over 500 
psig shall have slow-opening shut-off valves.
    (j) Weights and harnesses. (1) Except when heavy gear is worn, 
divers shall be equipped with a weight belt or assembly capable of quick 
release.
    (2) Except when heavy gear is worn or in SCUBA diving, each diver 
shall wear a safety harness with:
    (i) A positive buckling device;
    (ii) An attachment point for the umbilical to prevent strain on the 
mask or helmet; and
    (iii) A lifting point to distribute the pull force of the line over 
the diver's body.
[39 FR 23502, June 27, 1974, as amended at 49 FR 18295, Apr. 30, 1984; 
51 FR 33033, Sept. 18, 1986]

                              Recordkeeping


<R05>
Sec. 1910.440  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a)(1) [Reserved]
    (2) The employer shall record the occurrence of any diving-related 
injury or illness which requires any dive team member to be hospitalized 
for 24 hours or more, specifying the circumstances of the incident and 
the extent of any injuries or illnesses.
    (b) Availability of records. (1) Upon the request of the Assistant 
Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health, or the Director, 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Department of 
Health and Human Services of their designees, the employer shall make 
available for inspection and copying any record or document required by 
this standard.
    (2) Records and documents required by this standard shall be 
provided upon request to employees, designated representatives, and the 
Assistant Secretary in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.20 (a)-(e) and (g)-
(i). Safe practices manuals (Sec. 1910.420), depth-time profiles 
(Sec. 1910.422), recordings of dives

[[Page 879]]

(Sec. 1910.423), decompression procedure assessment evaluations 
(Sec. 1910.423), and records of hospitalizations (Sec. 1910.440) shall 
be provided in the same manner as employee exposure records or analyses 
using exposure or medical records. Equipment inspections and testing 
records which pertain to employees (Sec. 1910.430) shall also be 
provided upon request to employees and their designated representatives.
    (3) Records and documents required by this standard shall be 
retained by the employer for the following period:
    (i) Dive team member medical records (physician's reports) 
(Sec. 1910.411)--5 years;
    (ii) Safe practices manual (Sec. 1910.420)--current document only;
    (iii) Depth-time profile (Sec. 1910.422)--until completion of the 
recording of dive, or until completion of decompression procedure 
assessment where there has been an incident of decompression sickness;
    (iv) Recording of dive (Sec. 1910.423)--1 year, except 5 years where 
there has been an incident of decompression sickness;
    (v) Decompression procedure assessment evaluations (Sec. 1910.423)--
5 years;
    (vi) Equipment inspections and testing records (Sec. 1910.430)--
current entry or tag, or until equipment is withdrawn from service;
    (vii) Records of hospitalizations (Sec. 1910.440)--5 years.
    (4) After the expiration of the retention period of any record 
required to be kept for five (5) years, the employer shall forward such 
records to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 
Department of Health and Human Services. The employer shall also comply 
with any additional requirements set forth at 29 CFR 1910.20(h).
    (5) In the event the employer ceases to do business:
    (i) The successor employer shall receive and retain all dive and 
employee medical records required by this standard; or
    (ii) If there is no successor employer, dive and employee medical 
records shall be forwarded to the National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, Department of Health and Human Services.
[42 FR 37668, July 22, 1977, as amended at 45 FR 35281, May 23, 1980; 47 
FR 14706, Apr. 6, 1982; 51 FR 34562, Sept. 29, 1986; 61 FR 9242, Mar. 7, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.441  Effective date.

    This standard shall be effective on October 20, 1977, except that 
for provisions where decompression chambers or bells are required and 
such equipment is not yet available, employers shall comply as soon as 
possible thereafter but in no case later than 6 months after the 
effective date of the standard.

 Appendix A to Subpart T to Part 1910--Examples of Conditions Which May 
           Restrict or Limit Exposure to Hyperbaric Conditions

    The following disorders may restrict or limit occupational exposure 
to hyperbaric conditions depending on severity, presence of residual 
effects, response to therapy, number of occurrences, diving mode, or 
degree and duration of isolation.
    History of seizure disorder other than early febrile convulsions.
    Malignancies (active) unless treated and without recurrence for 5 
yrs.
    Chronic inability to equalize sinus and/or middle ear pressure.
    Cystic or cavitary disease of the lungs.
    Impaired organ function caused by alcohol or drug use.
    Conditions requiring continuous medication for control (e.g., 
antihistamines, steroids, barbiturates, moodaltering drugs, or insulin).
    Meniere's disease.
    Hemoglobinopathies.
    Obstructive or restrictive lung disease.
    Vestibular end organ destruction.
    Pneumothorax.
    Cardiac abnormalities (e.g., pathological heart block, valvular 
disease, intraventricular conduction defects other than isolated right 
bundle branch block, angina pectoris, arrhythmia, coronary artery 
disease).
    Juxta-articular osteonecrosis.

 Appendix B to Subpart T to Part 1910--Guidelines for Scientific Diving

    This appendix contains guidelines that will be used in conjunction 
with Sec. 1910.401(a)(2)(iv) to determine those scientific diving 
programs which are exempt from the requirements for commercial diving. 
The guidelines are as follows:
    1. The Diving Control Board consists of a majority of active 
scientific divers and has

[[Page 880]]

autonomous and absolute authority over the scientific diving program's 
operations.
    2. The purpose of the project using scientific diving is the 
advancement of science; therefore, information and data resulting from 
the project are non-proprietary.
    3. The tasks of a scientific diver are those of an observer and data 
gatherer. Construction and trouble-shooting tasks traditionally 
associated with commercial diving are not included within scientific 
diving.
    4. Scientific divers, based on the nature of their activities, must 
use scientific expertise in studying the underwater environment and, 
therefore, are scientists or scientists in training.
[50 FR 1050, Jan. 9, 1985]


<R04>
                        Subparts U--Y [Reserved]


<R05>
Secs. 1910.442--1910.999 [Reserved]    

    Editorial Note: This listing is provided for information purposes 
only. It is compiled and kept up-to-date by the Department of Labor.

   Subject Index for 29 CFR Part 1910--Occupational Safety and Health
                                Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Subject term                          Section No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-Frame Derricks: (see also Derricks)...  .181
AIDS (see Bloodborne pathogens).........  .1030
Aboveground storage tanks, flammable and  .106(b)(2)
 combustible liquid.
  Spacing...............................  .106(b)(2)(ii)
  Venting...............................  .106(b)(2) (iv), (v), (vi)
  Spill control.........................  .106(b)(2) (viii)
Abrasive Blasting: (see also              .94
 Ventilation).
  Air Compressors, Breathing Air........  .94(a)(6)
  Air Supply, Breathing.................  .94(a)(6)
  Blast Cleaning Enclosures.............  .94(a)(3)
  Cleaning Nozzles......................  .244(b)
  Dust Hazards..........................  .94(a)(2)
Abrasive Wheel Machinery:
  Blotters..............................  .215(c)(6)
  Definitions...........................  .211(b)
  Effective Dates.......................  .220
  Excluded Machinery....................  .215(a)(5)
  Flanges...............................  .215(a)(3), (c)
  Guard Design..........................  .215(a)(2)
    Specifications......................  .215(b)(12)
  Guard Exposure Angles.................  .215(b)(2)
    Band Type...........................  .215(b)(11)
    Bench and Floor Stands..............  .215(b)(3)
    Cup Wheels..........................  .215(b)(1)
    Cylindrical Grinders................  .215(b)(4)
    Dimensions..........................  .215(b)(10)
    Material Requirements...............  .215(b)(10)
    Snagging Machines...................  .215(b)(7)
    Surface Grinding....................  .215(b)(5)
    Swing Frame.........................  .215(b)(6)
  Guarding..............................  .215(a)(1), (b)
  Mounting..............................  .215(d)
    Arbor Size..........................  .215(d)(2)
    Blotters............................  .215(d)(5)
    Bushings............................  .215(d)(4)
    Inspections.........................  .215(d)(1)
    Multiple Wheel......................  .215(d)(6)
    Ring Test...........................  .215(d)(1)
    Surface Conditions..................  .215(d)(3)
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
  Work Rests............................  .215(a)(4)
Abrasive Wheel Machinery, Portable:
  Definitions...........................  .241(b)
  Guarding..............................  .243(c)
    Cup Wheels..........................  .243(c)(2)
    General Requirements................  .243(c)(1)
    Other Type Grinders.................  .243(c)(4)
    Vertical Grinders...................  .243(c)(3)
  Inspection............................  .243(c)(5)
  Mounting..............................  .243(c)(5)
Abrasive Wheels: (see Abrasive Wheel
 Machinery)
Access:
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(2)(ii)
  Cranes................................  .179(c)(2)
  Exposure and medical records..........  .1020
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(9)(ii)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(8)(ii)
  Spraying Operations, Vents............  .107(d)(10)
  Sprinkler valve.......................  .107(f)(2)
Accident Prevention Signs and Tags: (see  .145
 also Signs and Tags).
  Effective Dates.......................  .149(a)
  Standards Sources.....................  .150
2-Acetylaminofluorene...................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)

[[Page 881]]

    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Acetylene...............................  .102
  Cylinders.............................  .102(a), (c)
  Generators............................  .102(c)
  Pipe Systems..........................  .102(b)
Acetylene Generators....................  .253(f)
  Approval..............................  .253(f)(1)
  Location..............................  .253(f)(3)
  Maintenance...........................  .253(f)(7)
  Marking...............................  .253(f)(1)
  Operation.............................  .253(f)(7)
  Portable..............................  .253(f)(5)
  Pressure Limits.......................  .253(f)(2)
  Rating................................  .253(f)(2)
  Stationary............................  .253(f)(4)
    Houses and Rooms....................  .253(f)(6)
Acid Carboys............................  .262(nn)
Acrylonitrile...........................  .1045
  Emergency situations..................  .1045(i)
  Employee information and training.....  .1045(o)
  Exposure monitoring...................  .1045(e)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1045(k)
  Hygiene facilities and practices......  .1045(m)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1045(n)
  Methods of compliance.................  .1045(g)
  Notification of regulated areas and     .1045(d)
   emergencies.
  Observation and monitoring............  .1045(r)
  Permissible exposure limit............  .1045(c)
  Protective clothing and equipment.....  .1045(j)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1045(q)
  Regulated areas.......................  .1045(f)
  Respiratory protection................  .1045(h)
  Signs and labels......................  .1045(p)
  Waste disposal........................  .1045(l)
Adjustments:
  Cranes................................  .179(l)(3)
  Derricks..............................  .181(f)(2), (3)
AEC Licensees...........................  .96(p)
Agricultural Operations.................  .267
Air Compressors, Abrasive Blasting......  .94(a)(6), .134(d)(2)(ii)
Air Contaminants........................  .1000, .1001
  Effective Dates.......................  .98, .1000
  Exposure Limits.......................  .1000, .1001
  Permissible exposure limits...........  .1000
  Standards Sources.....................  .99
Air Controlling Equipment, Power Presses  .217(b)(10)
Air Lift Hammers, Forging...............  .218(e)(1)
Air Quality.............................  .134(d)
Air Receivers:
  Application...........................  .169(a)(1)
  Compressed Air........................  .169
  Equipment:
    Drains..............................  .169(b)(2)
    Installation........................  .169(b)(1)
    Pressure Gages......................  .169(b)(3)
    Traps...............................  .169(b)(2)
    Valves..............................  .169(b)(3)
  Standards Sources.....................  .169(a)(2), .170
Air Supply..............................  .94(a)(6), .134(d)
Airborne Radioactive Materials Exposure   .96(c)
 Limits.
Airhoses................................  .243(b)(2)
Aisles:
  Working Surfaces......................  .22(b)
Alarms: (see also Fire Alarms,
 Sprinklers, Warning Devices)
  Employee alarm systems................  .165
  Mills and Calenders...................  .216(g)
  Rubber and Plastics...................  .216(g)
4-Aminodiphenyl.........................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)

[[Page 882]]

Ammonia, Anhydrous: (see also Anhydrous   .111
 Ammonia).
Ammonium Nitrate........................  .109(i)
  Bulk Storage..........................  .109(i)(4)
  Containers............................  .109(i)(3)
  Contaminants..........................  .109(i)(5)
  Electrical Installations..............  .109(i)(6)
  Fire Protection.......................  .109(i)(7)
  Separation Walls......................  .109(i)(5)
  Warehouses............................  .109(i)(4)
Anchoring Fixed Machinery...............  .212(a)(5), (b)
Anhydrous Ammonia:
  Containers:
    Appurtenances.......................  .111(b)(6)
    Charging............................  .111(b)(11)
    DOT.................................  .111(e)
    Farm Vehicles.......................  .111(g), (h)
    Location............................  .111(b)(5)
    Motor Vehicle.......................  .111(f)
    Markings............................  .111(b)(3)
    Non-Refrigerated....................  .111(b)(2), (c)
    Refrigerated........................  .111(d)
      Markings..........................  .111(b)(4)
    Safety Relief Devices...............  .111(b)(9), (c)(3), (d)(4),
                                           (f)(5)
  Electrical Systems....................  .111(b)(16)
  Fittings..............................  .111(b)(7)
  Handling..............................  .111
  Hoses.................................  .111(b)(8)
  Liquid Level Gaging Devices...........  .111(b)(14)
  Liquid Transfer.......................  .111(b)(12), (f)(6)
  Piping................................  .111(b)(7)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Storage...............................  .111
  Tank Car Unloading....................  .111(b)(13)
  Tubing................................  .111(b)(7)
Appliances:
  Electric..............................  .306(d)(1)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(20), (g)(11)
Arbor Grinding Wheels...................  .215(d)(2)
Arc Welding.............................  .254
  Environmental Conditions..............  .254(b)(2)
  Equipment:
    Design..............................  .254(b)(4)
    Disconnecting Means.................  .305(j)(3)
    Grounding...........................  .254(c)(2)
    Installation........................  .254(c)
    Maintenance.........................  .254(d)(9)
    Operation...........................  .254(d)
    Personnel Protection................  .252(b)
    Protection from Rays................  .252(b)(2)(iii)
    Supply Connections..................  .254(c)(3), (d)(3)
  Health Protection.....................  .252(c)
  Ventilation...........................  .252(b)(4)(ii), (c)
  Voltage...............................  .254(b)(3)
Arsenic, Inorganic......................  .1018
Asbestos:
  Airborne Concentration................  .1001(c)
  Caution Signs and Labels..............  .1001(g)
  Change Rooms..........................  .1001(d)(4)
  Compliance............................  .1001(f)
  Definitions...........................  .1001(a)
  Exposure, Permissible.................  .1001(c)
  Fibers Exposure, Permissible..........  .1001(b)
  Hazard Communication..................  .1001(j)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1001(k)
  Hygiene Facilities and Practices......  .1001(i)
  Medical Surveillance..................  .1001(l)
  Measurements..........................  .1001(e)
  Medical Examinations..................  .1001(j)
  Monitoring............................  .1001(d)
  Personal Protective Equipment.........  .1001(h)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1001(m)
  Regulated Areas.......................  .1001(e)
  Respiratory protection................  .1001(g)
  Special Clothing......................  .1001(d)(3)
  Waste Disposal........................  .1001(h)(2)
Atmospheric Contaminants: (see Air
 Contaminants)
Atmospheric Tanks.......................  .106(b)(1)(iii)
Attendants:
  Liquified Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(4)(ii)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(14)
Automatic Sprinkler Systems: (see also    .159
 Sprinkler Systems, Automatic).
Automobile Undercoatings................  .107(k)
Baffle Plates:
  Spray Booths..........................  .107(b)(4)
Bakery Equipment........................  .263(k)
  Air Conditioning......................  .268(i)(14)
  Bag Chutes and Lifts..................  .263(d)(2)
  Biscuit Equipment.....................  .263(k)
  Blenders..............................  .263(d)(3)
  Bolting Reels.........................  .263(d)(5)
  Conveyors.............................  .263(d)(7), (i)(7)
  Cracker Equipment.....................  .263(k)
  Dividers..............................  .263(f)
  Dough Brakes..........................  .263(h)
  Dumpbins..............................  .263(d)(3)
  Flour Elevators.......................  .263(d)(4)
  Flour Handling Equipment..............  .263(d)
  Machine Guarding......................  .263(c)
  Miscellaneous Equipment...............  .263(i)
  Mixers................................  .263(e)
  Moulders..............................  .263(g)
  Ovens.................................  .263(l)
  Pulverizers...........................  .263(k)(2)
  Scales, Flour.........................  .263(d)(9)
  Sifters...............................  .263(d)(8)
  Slicers...............................  .263(j)
  Storage Bins..........................  .263(d)(6)
  Wrappers..............................  .263(j)
Ballast, Cranes.........................  .180(i)(2)
Band Saws and Resaws....................  .213(i)
Barking Devices:
  Hydraulic.............................  .261(e)(14)
  Pulp Wood and Chips...................  .261(c), (e)(8)
  Sawmills..............................  .265(d)(4)

[[Page 883]]

Barrels:
  Guarding..............................  .212(a)(4)
Basket Derricks: (see Derricks).........  .181
Bathing Facilities:
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(f)
Battery Changing and Charging...........  .178(g), .305(j)(7)
Bearings................................  .219(j), (p)(3)
Belts:
  Definitions...........................  .211(f)(1)-(3)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(c)(1)
  Power Transmission Apparatus..........  .219(e)(1), (o)(3), (p)(6)
Bench and Floor Stands Guarding.........  .215(b)(3)
Benzene.................................  .1028
  Communication of benzene hazards to     .1028(j)
   employees.
  Exposure monitoring and measurement...  .1028(e)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1028(i)
  Methods of compliance.................  .1028(f)
  Observation of monitoring.............  .1028(l)
  Permissible exposure limit............  .1028(c)
  Protective clothing and equipment.....  .1028(h)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1028(k)
  Regulated areas.......................  .1028(d)
  Respiratory protection................  .1028(g)
Benzidine...............................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Beryllium...............................  .1000, Table Z-2
Bins, Bulk Storage of Explosives........  .109(g)(4)
Biological Hazards Signs and Tags.......  .145(e)(4), (f)(8)
Blades Exposure.........................  .212(a)(5)
Blankets, Rubber Insulating.............  .137
Blasting Agents (see also Explosives and  .109(g), (k) (1), (2), .119
 Blasting Agents).
  Bulk Delivery.........................  .109(g)(3), (h)(4)
  Bulk Storage Bins.....................  .109(g)(4)
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Mixing, Fixed Location................  .109(g)(2), (h)(3)
  Mixing Vehicles.......................  .109(g)(3), (h)(4)
  Slurries..............................  .109(h)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Storage...............................  .109(g)(5)
  Transportation........................  .109(g)(6)
  Use...................................  .109(g)(7)
  Water Gels............................  .109(h)
Bleaching:
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(h)
  Textiles..............................  .262(p)
Bloodborne pathogens....................  .1030
  Effective dates.......................  .1030(i)
  Engineering and work-practice controls  .1030(d)(2)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1030(d)(4)
  Laboratories and production             .1030(e)
   facilities, HIV and HBV research.
  Personal protective equipment.........  .1030(c)(2)(ii), (d)(2)(i),
                                           (3)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1030(f)(6), (h)
  Training..............................  .1030(e)(5), (g)(2)
  Vaccinations, HBV.....................  .1030(f)
  Warning labels an signs...............  .1030(g)(1)
Blotters................................  .215(c)(1)(v), (c)(6), (d)(5)
Board Drop Hammers......................  .218(e)(2)
Boatswain's Chair Scaffolds.............  .28(j)
  Employee Protection...................  .28(j)(4)
  Fiber Ropes...........................  .28(j)(2)
  Life Belts............................  .28(j)(4)
  Roof Irons, Hooks.....................  .28(j)(6)
  Seat Slings...........................  .28(j)(3)
  Size..................................  .28(j)(1)
  Tackle................................  .28(j)(5)
Boom Guards:
  Cranes................................  .180(j)(2)
  Derricks..............................  .181(j)(5)(ii)
Booms, Derricks.........................  .181(i)(6)
Boring Machines.........................  .213(l)
Brakes:
  Bandsaws..............................  .213(j)(1)
  Bridges...............................  .179(f)(4), (6)
  Control...............................  .179(f)(3)
  Cranes................................  .179(f)
  Friction, Power Presses...............  .217(b)(2)
  Hoists................................  .179(f)(1)
  Holding...............................  .179(f)(2)
  Industrial Trucks.....................  .178(g), (h), (m)(5)

[[Page 884]]

  Manlifts..............................  .68(c)(1)(i)
  Power Control.........................  .179(f)(3)
  Trolleys..............................  .179(f)(4), (5)
Brazing: (see also Welding).............  .252
  Definitions...........................  .251
  Standards Sources.....................  .256
Breast Derricks: (see also Derricks)....  .181(a)(4)
Bricklayers' Square Scaffolds...........  .28(l)
Bridge Bumpers, Cranes..................  .179(e)(2)
Bridge Plates: (see also Dockboards)....  .30(a)
Buffing: (see Grinding, Polishing and
 Buffing)
Building Maintenance Powered Platforms..  .66
Buildings, Sawmills.....................  .265(c)
Bulk Delivery:
  Blasting Agents.......................  .109(g)(3), (h)(4)
  Explosives............................  .109(h)(4)
Bulk Oxygen Systems.....................  .104
  Accessibility.........................  .104(b)(2)(ii)
  Cleaning..............................  .104(b)(8)(i)
  Clear Zone............................  .104(b)(10)(ii)
  Containers............................  .104(b)(4), (6)
    Gaseous.............................  .104(b)(4)(iii)
    Liquid..............................  .104(b)(4)(ii)
  Dikes.................................  .104(b)(2)(v)
  Distances from Hazards................  .104(b)(3)
    Combustible Liquids.................  .104(b)(3)(vii), (viii)
    Combustible Materials...............  .104(b)(3)(x)
    Combustible Structures..............  .104(b)(3)(ii)
    Congested Areas.....................  .104(b)(3)(xiii)
    Fire Resistant Structures...........  .104(b)(3)(iii)
    Flammable Gases.....................  .104(b)(3)(ix)
    Flammable Liquids...................  .104(b)(3)(v), (vi)
    Openings............................  .104(b)(3)(iv)
    Slow-Burning Materials..............  .104(b)(3)(xi)
  Electrical Wiring.....................  .104(b)(8)(ix)
  Firewalls.............................  .104(b)(3)(viii)
  Fittings..............................  .104(b)(5)
  Inspection............................  .104(b)(10)(i)
  Installation..........................  .104(b)(8)(iv)
  Joints................................  .104(b)(8)(ii)
  Leakage...............................  .104(b)(2)(iii)
  Liquid Oxygen Vaporizers..............  .104(b)(7)
    Grounding...........................  .104(b)(7)(iv)
  Location..............................  .104(b)(2)
  Maintenance...........................  .104(b)(10)
  Marking...............................  .104(b)(8)(viii)
  Operating Instructions................  .104(b)(9)
  Piping................................  .104(b)(5)
  Placarding............................  .104(b)(8)(viii)
  Safety Relief Devices.................  .104(b)(6), (7)(ii)
    All Containers......................  .104(b)(6)(i)
    ASME Containers.....................  .104(b)(6)(iii)
    DOT Containers......................  .104(b)(6)(ii)
  Security..............................  .104(b)(8)(vi)
  Storage Containers....................  .104(b)(4), (6)
  Testing...............................  .104(b)(8)(v)
  Tubing................................  .104(b)(5)
  Vaporizers............................  .104(b)(7)
  Ventilation...........................  .104(b)(3)(xii)
  Venting...............................  .104(b)(8)(vii)
Bulk Plants, Flammable and Combustible    .106(f)
 Liquids.
  Buildings.............................  .106(f)(2)
  Drainage..............................  .106(f)(7)
  Electrical Equipment..................  .106(f)(5)
  Fire Protection.......................  .106(f)(8)
  Ignition Sources......................  .106(f)(6)
  Liquid Storage........................  .106(f)(1)
  Loading...............................  .106(f)(3)
  Waste Disposal........................  .106(f)(7)
  Wharves...............................  .106(f)(4)
Bumpers:
  Bridge................................  .179(e)(2)
  Trolley...............................  .179(e)(3)
1,3 Butadiene:..........................
  Permissible Exposure Limits...........  .1051(c)
  Exposure Monitoring...................  .1051(d)
  Regulated Areas.......................  .1051(e)
  Methods of Compliance.................  .1051(f)
  Exposure Goal Program.................  .1051(g)
  Respiratory Protection................  .1051(h)
  Protective Clothing and Equipment.....  .1051(i)
  Emergency Situations..................  .1051(j)
  Medical Screening and Surveillance....  .1051(k)
  Communication of BD Hazards to          .1051(l)
   Employees.
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1051(m)
Cabinets, Flammable and Combustible       .106(d)(3)
 Liquid storage.
  Size..................................  .106(d)(3)(i)
  Fire resistance.......................  .106(d)(3)(ii)
Cabs:
  Cranes................................  .179(c), (o)(2); 180(i)(3)
  Derricks..............................  .181(j)(6)
Cadmium.................................  .252(c)(9)
  Airborne Concentration................  .1027(c)
  Compliance............................  .1027(f)
  Confined Spaces.......................  .252(c)(9)(ii)
  Emergency Situations..................  .1027(h)
  Exposure, Permissible.................  .1027(c)
  Hazard Communication..................  .1027(m)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1027(k)
  Hygiene Areas and Practices...........  .1027(j)
  Indoors...............................  .252(c)(9)(i)
  Medical Surveillance..................  .1027(l)
  Monitoring............................  .1027(d)
  Personal Protective Equipment.........  .1027(i)
      Clothing..........................  .1027(i)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1027(n)
  Regulated Areas.......................  .1027(e)
  Respiratory protection................  .1027(g)
  Warning Labels........................  .252(c)(1)(v),

[[Page 885]]

Calcium Carbide:
  Indoors...............................  .253(g)(2)
  Packaging.............................  .253(g)(1)
  Storage...............................  .253(g)(2), (3)
Calenders...............................  .262(ee)
  Rubber and Plastics Industry:
    Alarms..............................  .216(g)
    Location Protection.................  .216(d)(2)
    Safety Controls.....................  .216(c)
    Stopping Limits.....................  .216(f)(1), (3)
    Switches, Trip and Emergency........  .216(e)
  Textiles..............................  .262(ee)
Canisters, Gas Mask: (see Gas Mask
 Canisters, Respirators)
Cantilever Gantry Cranes: (see Gantry
 Cranes)
Carbon Dioxide Extinguishers............
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(g)(4)
Carpenters' Bracket Scaffolds...........  .28(k)
  Bracket Attachment....................  .28(k)(2)
  Bracket Dimensions....................  .28(k)(1)
  Employee Protection...................  .28(k)(3)
  Guardrails............................  .28(k)(5)
  Platform Size.........................  .28(k)(4)
Caustics................................  .262(oo)
  Emergency Showers.....................  .261(g)(18)(i)
  Pipeline Identification...............  .261(h)(3)(vi)
Caution Signs and Labels................  .145(c)(2), (d)(4)
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(g)
  Fluorides.............................  .252(c)(1)(iv)
  Ionizing Radiation....................  .96(e), (g), (h)
  Welding...............................  .252(c)(1)(iv)
Ceiling Workers' Scaffolds: (see also     .28(o)
 Plasterers' Scaffolds).
Chain Guarding..........................  .219(f)
Change Rooms:
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(d)(4)
  Drying Facilities.....................  .141(f)
  Separate Facilities...................  .141(e)
Charge Initiation.......................  .109(e)(4)
Chemical Plants: (see also Refineries,    .106(i)
 Chemical Plants and Distilleries).
Chemicals, hazard communication.........  .1200
Chemicals, hazardous; occupational
 exposure in laboratories:
  Chemical Hygiene Plan.................  .1450(e)
  Exposure determination, monitoring....  .1450(d)
  Hazard identification.................  .1450(h)
  Hygiene recommendations...............  .1450, App. A
  Medical consultations and examinations  .1450(g)
  Permissible exposure limits...........  .1450(c)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1450(j)
  Respirator use........................  .1450(i)
  Training..............................  .1450(f)
Chemicals, highly hazardous; process      .119
 safety management.
  Chemicals, toxic and reactive,          .119, App. A
   threshold list.
  Compliance guidelines.................  .119, App. A
  Contractor, employer responsibilities.  .119(h)
  Emergency planning and response.......  .119(h)
  Hot work (welding) permits............  .119(n)
  Trade secrets.........................  .119(p)
  Training..............................  .119(g)
Chicago Boom Derricks: (see also          .181
 Derricks).
Chicken Ladders: (see also Crawling       .28(t)
 Boards).
bis-Chloromethyl ether..................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(l)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Chute Openings..........................  .23(a)(2)
Circular Resaws.........................  .213(e)
Circular Saws...........................  .213(f)
  Arbors................................  .213(s)(4)
  Portable..............................  .243(a)(1)
Clean Air, Spray Finishing..............  .94(c)(7)
Cleaning:
  Air Receivers.........................  .169
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(8)(i)
  Compressed Air........................  .242(b)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(4)(i)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(e)(7)
  Respirators...........................  .134(f)(3)
  Solvents..............................  .107(g)(5)
  Spray.................................  .94(d)(5)

[[Page 886]]

  Spray Booths..........................  .107(b)(9)
  Spraying Operations...................  .107(g)(2)
Cleaning Compounds......................  .252(c)(11)
  Degreasing............................  .252(c)(11)(ii)
  Manufacturer's Instructions...........  .252(c)(11)(i)
Cleaning Solvents:
  Spraying..............................  .107(g)(5)
Clear Zones:
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(10)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(9)(iv)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(5)(ii)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(8)(iv)
Clearances:
  Cranes................................  .179(b)(6), .180(j)(1)
  Derricks..............................  .181(j)(5)
  Fixed Ladders.........................  .27(c)
    Back................................  .27(c)(4)
    Climbing Side.......................  .27(c)(1)
    Grab Bars...........................  .27(c)(5)
    Hatch Covers........................  .27(c)(7)
    Step-Across Distance................  .27(c)(6)
    With Cages or Baskets...............  .27(c)(3)
    Without Cages or Wells..............  .27(c)(2)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(b)(11)
  Spraying Discharges...................  .107(d)(8)
  Stairs................................  .24(i)
Clothing, Protective: (see also Personal  .252(b)(3), .132
 Protective Equipment).
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(d)(3)
  Body..................................  .156(e)(3)
  Electrical............................  .137
  Eye...................................  .133, .156(e)(5)
  Face..................................  .133,.156(e)(5)
  Fire brigade..........................  .156
  Footwear..............................  .136,.156(e)(2)
  Goggles...............................  .133
  Hand..................................  .156(e)(4)
  Head..................................  .135, .156(e)(5)
  Helmets...............................  .135
  Leg...................................  .156(e)(3)
  Rubber................................  .137
  Storage...............................  .107(g)(4)
  Welders...............................  .252(b)(3)
Clutches................................  .217(b)(3), (7)
  Definition............................  .180(a)(19)
  Power Transmission Apparatus..........  .219(k)
Coatings, Spray:
  Dual Component........................  .107(m)
  Organic Peroxide......................  .107(m)
  Powder................................  .107(l)
  Undercoatings.........................  .107(k)
Collars.................................  .219(i)
Coke oven emissions.....................  .1029
  Employee information and training.....  .1029(k)
  Exposure monitoring and measurement...  .1029(e)
  Hygiene facilities and practices......  .1029(i)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1029(j)
  Methods of compliance.................  .1029(f)
  Observation of monitoring.............  .1029(n)
  Permissible exposure limit............  .1029(c)
  Protective clothing and equipment.....  .1029(h)
  Precautionary signs and labels........  .1029(l)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1029(m)
  Regulated areas.......................  .1029(d)
  Respiratory protection................  .1029(g)
Color Codes:
  Air Contaminants......................  .134(g)(6)
  Danger................................  .144(a)(1)(ii), .145((d)(2)
  Effective Dates.......................  .149
  Gas Mask Canisters....................  .134(g)(6)
  Physical Hazards, Colors..............  .144(a), .145(d)(2)
  Respirators...........................  .134(g)(6)
  Standards Sources.....................  .150
  Stop..................................  .144(a)(1)(iii)
Combustible Dusts, Trucks Used..........  .178(c)(2)(vi)
Combustible Liquids: (see Flammable and   .106
 Combustible Liquids).
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
Combustible Materials:
  Welding...............................  .252(a)(2)
Communicable Diseases Reporting:
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(l)
Communications, Powered Platforms.......  .66(e)(11)(vi)
Compressed Air, Cleaning................  .242(b)
Compressed Air Equipment: (see also
 Compressed Gas Equipment)
  Air Receivers.........................  .169
Compressed Gas Cylinders: (see also       .253(a)(2)
 Compressed Gases).
  Approval..............................  .252(b)(1)
  Inspection............................  .101(a)
  Manifolding...........................  .253(c)
  Markings..............................  .253(b)(1)
  Operating Procedures..................  .253(b)(5)
  Oxygen Manifolds......................  .253(c)(2), (3)
  Public Protection.....................  .101(c), .252(a)(8)
  Safety Relief Valves..................  .101(c)
  Standards Sources.....................  .170
  Storage...............................  .253(b)(2)-(4)
Compressed Gas Equipment: (see
 Compressed Gas Cylinders)
Compressed Gases: (see also Compressed    .101
 Gas Cylinders).
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Handling..............................  .101(b)
  Safety Relief Devices.................  .101(c)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115

[[Page 887]]

  Storage...............................  .101(b)
Conductors: (see also Electric Wiring)
  Cranes................................  .179(g)(1)(iv), (6)
  General Wiring........................  .305(f)
Confined Spaces, Hazardous work.........  .120(b)(4)(ii)(I), (c)(3)
  Electrical safety-related work          .333(c)(5)
   practices.
Confined Spaces:
  Atmospheric testing flow charts.......  .146, App. B
  Attendant duties......................  .146(i)
  Authorized entrant duties.............  .146(h)
  Entry supervisor duties...............  .146(j)
  Flow chart, decisions.................  .146, App. A
  Instruction of employees relating to..  .21(b)(6)
  Permit samples........................  .146, App. D
  Program examples......................  .146, App. C
  Rescue and emergency services.........  .146(k)
  Sewer system entry....................  .146, App. E
  Training..............................  .146(g)
  Welding and Cutting...................  .353(b), .352(g)
Containers: (see also Tank Storage,
 Portable)
  Ammonium Nitrate......................  .109(i)(3)
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(4), (6)
    Gaseous.............................  .104(b)(4)(iii)
    Liquid..............................  .104(b)(4)(ii)
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(d)
    Design..............................  .106(d)(2)
    Bulk plants, storage................  .106(f)
    Industrial plants, storage..........  .106(e)(2)(ii)
    Service stations, storage...........  .106(g)(1)
    Processing plants...................  .106(h)(4)
  Gaseous Hydrogen Systems..............  .103(b)(1)(i)
  Guarding..............................  .212(a)(4)
  Liquified Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(1)(i)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110
  Spraying..............................  .107(e)(3), (5)
  Welding, Gas..........................  .253(a), (b)
Containers, Liquefied Petroleum Gases...  .110
  Accessories...........................  .110(b)(7); (c)(6); (d)(3),
                                           (8); (e)(5)
  Awaiting Use or Resale................  .110(f)
  Capacity..............................  .110(d)(6), (h)(5)
  Charging Plants.......................  .110(d)(13)
  Construction..........................  .110(b)(3)
  Cylinder Systems......................  .110(c)
    Accessories.........................  .110(c)(6)
    Indoor..............................  .110(c)(5)
    Markings............................  .110(c)(2)
    Outdoor.............................  .110(c)(4)
    Valves..............................  .110(c)(6)
  Filling Densities.....................  .110(b)(12)
  Fire Protection.......................  .110(d)(14)
  Fittings..............................  .110(b)(8); (e)(6); (h)(7),
                                           (9)
  Hoses.................................  .110(b)(9)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .110(d)(12)
  Installation..........................  .110(e)(4), (h)(6)
  Lighting..............................  .110(d)(16)
  Location..............................  .110(b)(6), (f)(5)
  Markings..............................  .110(b)(5), (c)(2)
  Non-DOT Containers....................  .110(d)
    Accessories.........................  .110(d)(3)
    Capacity............................  .110(d)(6)
    Installation........................  .110(d)(7)
    Pipes...............................  .110(d)(3)
    Pressure, Design....................  .110(d)(2)
    Reinstallation......................  .110(d)(5)
    Safety Relief Devices...............  .110(d)(4)
    Valves..............................  .110(d)(3)
  Original Testing......................  .110(b)(4)
  Piping................................  .110(b)(8), (d)(3), (e)(6),
                                           (h)(10), (h)(9)
  Pressure Design.......................  .110(d)(2), (e)(3)
  Safety Relief Devices.................  .110(b)(10), (c)(7), (d)(4),
                                           (e)(7), (h)(4)
  Tubing................................  .110(b)(8), (e)(6)
  Valves................................  .110(b)(7), (c)(6), (d)(3),
                                           (e)(5), (h)(9)
  Vaporizers............................  .110(b)(11), (d)(17), (e)(8)
  Welding...............................  .110(b)(4)
Controllers:
  Cranes................................  .179(g)(3)
Conveyors:
  Bakeries..............................  .263(d)(7), (i)(7)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(c)(6)
  Electrostatic Spraying................  .107(h)(7)
  Forging Machines......................  .218(j)(3)
  Sawmills..............................  .265(c)(18)
  Spray Booths..........................  .107(b)(7)
Corrosion Protection:
  Piping, Valves and Fittings...........  .106(c)(5)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(b)(1)(vi)
  Underground Tanks.....................  .106(b)(3)(iii)
Cotton Dust.............................  .1043
Counterbalances.........................  .217(b)(9)
Counterweights:
  Cranes................................  .180(i)(2)
Covers, Openings:
  Working Surfaces......................  .22(e);23(a)(1), (3)(i), (5),
                                           (6), (8)(ii), (9)
Cranes:
  Crawler...............................  .180
  Definitions...........................  .179(a)
  Effective Dates.......................  .179(b)(2), .180(b)(2), .182
  Electric..............................  .306(b)
  Gantry................................  .179
  Locomotive............................  .180

[[Page 888]]

  Overhead..............................  .179
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(c)(8)
  Standards Sources.....................  .183
  Truck.................................  .180
Crawler Cranes: (see also Crawler,        .180
 Locomotive and Truck Cranes).
Crawler, Locomotive and Truck Cranes....  .180
  Cabs..................................  .180(i)(3)
  Electric Power Lines..................  .180(j)
  Fire Extinguishers....................  .180(i)(5)
  Inspections...........................  .180(d)
    Frequent............................  .180(d)(3)
    Idle (Irregular)....................  .180(d)(5)
    Initial.............................  .180(d)(1)
    Periodic............................  .180(d)(4)
    Records.............................  .180(d)(6)
    Ropes...............................  .180(g)
  Load Handling.........................  .180(h)
  Load Ratings..........................  .180(c)
  Maintenance...........................  .180(f)
  Refueling.............................  .180(i)(4)
  Rope Inspection.......................  .180(g)
  Standards Sources.....................  .183
  Swinging Locomotives..................  .180(i)(6)
  Testing...............................  .180(e)
Crawling Boards.........................  .28(t)
Crosscut Table Saws.....................  .213(d)
Cup Wheels..............................  .243(c)(2)
  Flaring-Cup, Type 11..................  .241(b)(8)
  Straight-Cup, Type 6..................  .241(b)(9)
  Straight, Type 1......................  .241(b)(10)
Curing Apparatus: (see Drying, Curing
 and Fusion Apparatus)
Cutting: (see also Welding).............  .252
  Containers............................  .252(a)(3)
  Definitions...........................  .251
  Ventilation...........................  .252(c)
Cutting-Off Machines....................  .215(b)(5)
Cutoff Couplings........................  .219(k)(1)
Cutoff Saws, Swing......................  .213(g)
Cylinders, Welding Gas..................  .253(b)
  Manifolding...........................  .253(c)
  Operating Procedures..................  .253(b)(5)
  Storage...............................  .253(b)(2)-(4)
Cylindrical Grinders....................  .215(b)(4)
Danger:
  Color Codes...........................  .144(a)(1)(ii)
  Signs.................................  .145(c)(1), (d)(2)
  Tag...................................  .145(f)(5)
Dates, Effective: (see Effective Dates)
DBCP (1,2-Dibromo 3-Chloropropane)......  .1044
  Emergency situations..................  .1044(i)
  Employee information and training.....  .1044(n)
  Exposure monitoring...................  .1044(f)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1044(k)
  Hygiene facilities and practices......  .1044(l)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1044(m)
  Methods of compliance.................  .1044(g)
  Notification of use...................  .1044(d)
  Observation of monitoring.............  .1044(q)
  Permissible exposure limit............  .1044(c)
  Protective clothing and equipment.....  .1044(j)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1044(p)
  Regulated areas.......................  .1044(e)
  Respirators...........................  .1044(h)
  Signs and labels......................  .1044(o)
Dead-Man Controls.......................  .243(a)(2)
Decorations:
  Egress................................  .37(l)
  Explosives............................  .37(l)
Decorators' Scaffolds: (see also          .28(o)
 Plasterers' Scaffolds).
Degreasing:
  Cleaning Compounds....................  .252(c)(11)(ii)
  Open Surface Tanks....................  .94(d)(5), (12)
Derricks:
  Adjustments...........................  .181(f)(3)
  Cabs..................................  .181(j)(6)
  Electric Power Lines..................  .181(j)(5)
  Fire Extinguishers....................  .181(j)(3)
  Guards................................  .181(j)(1)
  Hooks.................................  .181(j)(2)
  Inspections...........................  .181(d) and (g)
  Load Handling.........................  .181(i)
  Load Ratings..........................  .181(c)
  Maintenance...........................  .181(f)
  Operations............................  .181(h)
  Refueling.............................  .181(j)(4)
  Repairs...............................  .181(f)(3)
  Rope Inspections......................  .181(g)
  Standards Sources.....................  .183
  Testing...............................  .181(e)
3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine (and its salts)..  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)

[[Page 889]]

  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and Indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Dies....................................  .217(d)
  Changing..............................  .218(h)(5)
  Fastening.............................  .217(d)(7)
  Guide Post Hazards....................  .217(d)(4)
  Handling..............................  .217(d)(3), (8)
  Requirements..........................  .217(d)(1)
  Scrap:
    Ejecting............................  .217(d)(2)
    Handling............................  .217(d)(3)
  Selling...............................  .217(d)(9)
  Stroke................................  .217(d)(6)
  Tonnage...............................  .217(d)(6)
  Unitized Tooling......................  .217(d)(5)
  Weight................................  .217(d)(6)
Diesel Powered Trucks...................  .178(b)(1)-(3)
Dikes:
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(2)(v)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(b)(2)(vii), (c)
4-Dimethylaminoazobenzene...............  .1003
  Area Requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed System Operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated Systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel System Operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated Area Requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination Control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, Information, and Training......  .1003(e)
    Container Contents Identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited Statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and Indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Dining Facilities: (see also Lunchrooms)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(i)
Dip Tanks...............................  .108
  Applications..........................  .108(h)
  Bottom Drains.........................  .108(c)(3)
  Construction..........................  .108(c)
  Conveyors.............................  .108(c)(6)
  Covers................................  .108(g)(6)
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Electrical Ignition Sources...........  .108(e)
  Electrostatic Apparatus...............  .108(h)(3)
  Fire Extinguishers....................  .108(g)
  Fire Protection.......................  .108(c)(5), (g), (h)(1)(v)
  Flow Coating..........................  .108(h)(2)
  Hardening.............................  .108(h)(1)
  Heating...............................  .108(c)(7)
  Ignition Sources......................  .108(e)
  Inspections...........................  .108(f)(3)
  Liquid Storage........................  .108(d)
  Maintenance...........................  .108(f)
  Overflow Pipes........................  .108(c)(2)
  Salvage Tanks.........................  .108(c)(4)
  Sprinklers............................  .108(c)(5)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Tempering.............................  .108(h)(1)
  Ventilation...........................  .108(b)
  Warning Signs.........................  .108(f)(4)
  Waste Cans............................  .108(f)(2)
Disposal Systems: (see Waste Disposal
 Systems)
Distances From Hazards:
  Ammonium Nitrate......................  .109(i)(5)
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(3)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(e)
  Electrostatic Spraying................  .107(h)(6)
  Explosives Storage....................  .109(c)
  Ignition Sources, Separation..........  .107(c)(2)
  Spray Booths, Separations.............  .107(b)(8)
Distilleries: (see also Refineries,       .106(i)
 Chemical Plants and Distilleries).
Distribution Plates:
  Spray Booths..........................  .107(b)(4)
Dividers, Bakery Equipment..............  .263(f)
Diving, Commercial......................  .401, .410, .411, .420-.427,
                                           .430, .440, .441
  Scientific............................  .401(iv), 402, Appendix B
Dockboards..............................  .30(a)
Dough Brakes, Manually Fed..............  .263(h)
Drag Saws...............................  .213(r)
Drainage:
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(7)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(3)(iii)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(a)
  Materials Handling....................  .176(d)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(3)(ii)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(7)

[[Page 890]]

  Sprinkler Systems.....................  .159(c)(7)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(b)(2)(vii)(c)
Drains:
  Air Receivers.........................  .169(b)(2)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(c)(3)
Dressing Rooms, Personnel...............  .141(e)
Drips, Condensed Gas....................  .110(d)(11)
Drives--Belt, Rope and Chain............  .219(e), (g), (o)(3)
  Belt Tighteners.......................  .219(e)(6)
  Cone-Pulley Belts.....................  .219(e)(5)
  Horizontal Belts and Ropes............  .219(e)(1)(i)
  Inclined Belts........................  .219(e)(3)
  Overhead Horizontal Belts.............  .219(e)(2)
  Vertical Belts........................  .219(e)(3), (4)
Drums...................................  .212(a)(4)
Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems,       .161
 Fixed.
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(g)(5)
  Scope and Application.................  .161(a)
  Specific Requirements.................  .161(b)
Drying:
  Spraying Operations...................  .107(d)(12)
Drying, Curing, and Fusion Apparatus....  .107(j)
  Adjacent System.......................  .107(j)(3)
  Alternate Use:
    Permitted...........................  .107(j)(4)
    Prohibited..........................  .107(j)(2)
  Conformance...........................  .107(j)(1)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(3)
  Spraying Rooms........................  .107(j)(2)
Dual Component Coatings.................  .107(m)
Dust Hazards:
  Abrasive Blasting.....................  .94(a)(2)
  Asbestos..............................  .19, .93a
  Employee Exposure.....................  .1000(a)
  Grain handling facilities.............  .272
Effective Dates:
  Abrasive Wheels.......................  .220
  Accident Prevention Signs and Tags....  .149
  Acetylene.............................  .114
  Air Contaminants......................  .98
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .114
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(b)(1), (2); .98
  Blasting Agents.......................  .114
  Clothing, Protective..................  .138
  Color Codes...........................  .149
  Combustible Liquids...................  .114
  Compressed Gases......................  .114
  Cooperage Machinery...................  .220
  Crawler, Locomotive, and Truck Cranes.  .180(b)(2), .182
  Derricks..............................  .181(b)(2), .182
  Dies..................................  .217(d)(1)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .114
  Environmental Controls................  .98, .149
  Explosives............................  .114
  Federal Standards.....................  .17
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .114
  Forging...............................  .221
  Guarding Machinery....................  .220
  Hand-Held Equipment...................  .245
  Hazardous Materials...................  .114
  Hydrogen..............................  .114
  Indoor Storage........................  .182
  Ionizing Radiation....................  .98
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(d)(7), .149(b)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(19)(i), (i)(3); .11
  Machinery.............................  .221
  Machinery Guarding....................  .220
  Materials Handling....................  .182
  Mechanical Power Presses..............  .220
  Mechanical Power Transmission           .221
   Apparatus.
  Mills and Calenders...................  .216(a)(1), (2); .220
  National Electrical Code..............  .309
  Nitrous Oxide.........................  .114
  Noise Exposure........................  .98
  Nonionizing Radiation.................  .98
  Nonwater Disposal Systems.............  .149
  Occupational Health...................  .98
  Overhead and Gantry Cranes............  .179(b)(2), .182
  Oxygen................................  .114
  Physical Hazards Markings.............  .149
  Powered Industrial Trucks.............  .182
  Powered Tools, Hand and Portable......  .245
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(n)
  Pulpwood Logging......................  .266(f)
  Safety Color Codes....................  .149
  Sanitation............................  .149
  Sawmills..............................  .265(j)
  Signs and Tags........................  .149
  Spray Finishing.......................  .114
  Standpipe and Hose Systems............  .165
  Ventilation...........................  .98
  Woodworking...........................  .220
Egress Means: (see also Exits)
  Access to Exits.......................  .37(f), (g), (j), (l)
  Alarms, Fire..........................  .37(n)
  Application...........................  .36(a)
  Automatic Sprinkler Systems...........  .37(m)
  Definitions...........................  .35
  Discharge From Exits..................  .37(h)
  Elevation Changes.....................  .37(j)
  Employee Capacity.....................  .36(c)
  Exit Arrangements.....................  .37(e)
  Exit Capacity.........................  .37(c), (d)
  Exit Components.......................  .37(a)
  Exit Markings.........................  .37(q)
  Exit Width............................  .37(c)
  Exterior Exit Access..................  .37(g)
  Furnishings and Decorations...........  .37(l)
  General Requirements..................  .36
  Headroom..............................  .37(i)
  Lighting..............................  .36(b)(6)

[[Page 891]]

  Maintenance...........................  .37(k)
  Occupant Load.........................  .37(d)
  Paints................................  .37(o)
  Protective Enclosures.................  .37(b)
  Sprinklers............................  .37(d)(2), (m)
  Standards Sources.....................  .39
  Workmanship...........................  .37(k)
Electric controls, Mechanical Power       .217(b)(8)
 Presses.
Electric energy, hazardous; control of
 (see Lockout/tagout)
Electric Equipment: (see Electrical
 Wiring)
Electric Ignition Sources: (see Ignition  .107(c), (d)(5)
 Sources).
Electric Motor Ignition Sources.........  .107(d)(5)
Electric power generation, transmission,  .269
 and distribution.
  Definitions...........................  .269(x)
  Enclosed spaces.......................  .269(e)
  Fall protection.......................  .269(g)(1)
  Hazardous energy control (Lockout/      .269(d)
   tagout).
  Ladders, platforms, steps, etc........  .269(h)
  Live-line tools.......................  .269(j)
  Materials handling and storage........  .269(k)
  Mechanical equipment..................  .269(p)
  Medical services and first aid........  .269(b)
  Overhead lines........................  .269(q)
  Personal protective equipment.........  .269(g), (n)(4), (r)(2)(v),
                                           (r)(4)(ii)
  Power tools, hand and portable........  .269(i)
  Telecommunications facilities.........  .269(s)
  Testing and test facilities...........  .269(o)
  Training..............................  .269(a)(2), (b)(1), (d)(2),
                                           (e)(2), (q)(3)(i), (r)(1)(vi)
  Tree trimming, line-clearance.........  .269(r), (a)(1)(E)
  Water, work near......................  .269(w)(5)
Electric Power Lines:
  Crane Operations......................  .180(j)
    Boom Guards.........................  .180(j)(2)
    Clearances..........................  .180(j)(1)
    Notifying Owners....................  .180(j)(3)
    Overhead Wires......................  .180(j)(4)
  Derrick Operations....................  .181(j)(5)
    Boom Guards.........................  .181(j)(5)(ii)
    Clearances..........................  .181(j)(5)(i)
    Notifying Owners....................  .181(j)(5)(iii)
    Overhead Wires......................  .181(j)(5)(iv)
    Safety-related work practices.......  .333(c)(3)
Electric Powered Trucks.................  .178(b)(4)-(7), .120(g)(3)
Electric wiring:
  Ammonium Nitrate......................  .109(i)(6)
  Appliances............................  .305(j)(3)
  Approval..............................  .303(a)
  Arcing Parts..........................  .303(d)
  Attachment Plugs (Caps)...............  .304(j)(2)
  Boxes.................................  .305(b)
  Branch Circuits.......................  .304(b)
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(8)(ix)
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(5)
  Cabinets..............................  .305(b)
  Capacitors............................  .305(i)(6)
  Communications Systems................  .308(e)
  Conductors............................  .305(f)
  Cranes................................  .179(g), .306(b)
  Data Processing Systems...............  .306(e)
  Electrolytic Cells....................  .306(h)
  Elevators.............................  .306(c)
  Emergency Systems.....................  .308(b)
  Enclosures for Damp or Wet Locations..  .305(e)
  Escalators............................  .306(c)
  Examination of Equipment..............  .303(b)(1)
  Fire Protective Signaling Circuits....  .308(d)
  Fittings..............................  .305(b)
  Fixture Wires.........................  .305(i)
  Flexible Cords and Cables.............  .305(g)
  General requirements..................  .303
  Grounded and Grounding Conductors,      .304(a)
   Installation and Use.
  Grounding.............................  .304(f)
  Guarding Live Parts...................  .303(g)(2), (h)(2)
  Hand Spraying.........................  .107(i)(5)
  Hazardous (Classified) Locations......  .307
  Heating Equipment.....................  .306(g)
  High Voltage (Over 600 Volts):
    General.............................  .308(a)
    Grounding...........................  .304(f)(7)
    Guarding............................  .303(h)(2)
    Workspace...........................  .303(h)(3), (h)(4)
  Hoists................................  .306(b)
  Identification of Disconnecting Means   .303(f)
   and Circuits.
  Ignition Sources......................  .107(c)(4), (6)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(7)
  Installation and Use of Equipments....  .303(b)(2)
  Irrigation Machines...................  .306(i)
  Lamps.................................  .305(j)(1)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(1)(ix)
  Liquefied Petroleum Systems...........  .110(b)(17), (18), (h)(13)
  Marking...............................  .303(e)
  Motors................................  .305(j)(4)
  Moving Walks..........................  .306(c)
  Outline Lighting......................  .306(a)
  Outside Conductors....................  .304(c)
  Overcurrent Protection................  .304(e)

[[Page 892]]

  Panelboards...........................  .305(d)
  Portable Cables.......................  .305(h)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(1)
  Power-Limited Circuits................  .308(c)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(7)(iii)
  Receptacles...........................  .305(j)(2)
  Remote Control Circuits...............  .308(c)
  Services..............................  .304(d)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(5)
  Signaling Circuits....................  .308(c)
  Signs.................................  .306(a)
  Splices...............................  .303(c)
  Spraying Operations...................  .107(c)(4), (6), (i)(1)-(5)
  Storage Batteries.....................  .305(j)(7)
  Storage Rooms.........................  .106(d)(4)(iii)
  Swimming Pools........................  .306(j)
  Switchboards..........................  .305(d)
  Switches..............................  .305(c)
  Transformers..........................  .305(j)(5)
  Type F Powered Platforms..............  .66(c)(22)
  Type T Powered Platforms..............  .66(d)(6)
  Welders...............................  .306(d)
  Wiring Design and Protection..........  .304
  Wiring Methods........................  .305(a)
  Work practices, safety-related........  .331-.335
  Working Space about Electric Equipment  .303(g)(1), (h)(3), (h)(4)
  X-Ray Equipment.......................  .306(f)
Electrical Installations................  .301-.399
Electrical Protective Equipment.........  .137, .268(f)
  Design................................  .137(a)
  Care and use, in-service..............  .137(b)
Electrical safety-related work practices  .331-.335
  Confined spaces.......................  .333(c)(5)
  Illumination..........................  .333(c)(4)
  Ladders, portable.....................  .333(c)(7)
  Lockout and tags......................  .333(b), .335(b)(1)
  Personal protective equipment.........  .333(c)(2), .335(a)
  Portable electric equipment...........  .334(a)
  Power lines, overhead.................  .333(c)(3)
  Training..............................  .332
Electromagnetic Radiation:
  Definitions...........................  .97(a)(1)
  Nonionizing Radiation.................  .97(a)
  Protection Guide......................  .97(a)(2)
  Warning Symbol........................  .97(a)(3)
Electrostatic Apparatus: (see also
 Electrostatic Apparatus, Fixed;
 Electrostatic Hand Spraying Equipment)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(h)(3)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(5)-(7)
Electrostatic Apparatus, Fixed..........  .107(h)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(5)
  Spraying:
    Conformance.........................  .107(h)(1)
    Conveyors...........................  .107(h)(7)
    Fail-Safe Controls..................  .107(h)(9)
    Fire Protection.....................  .107(h)(12)
    Grounding...........................  .107(h)(5)
    Guarding............................  .107(h)(10)
    Insulators..........................  .107(h)(5)
    Location............................  .107(h)(3)
    Safe Distances......................  .107(h)(6)
    Supports............................  .107(h)(4)
    Ventilation.........................  .107(h)(11)
Electrostatic Hand Spraying Equipment...  .107(i)
  Application...........................  .107(i)(1)
  Approval..............................  .107(i)(3)
  Conformance...........................  .107(i)(2)
  Electrical Support Equipment..........  .107(i)(4)
  Grounding.............................  .107(i)(5)-(7)
  Interlocks............................  .107(i)(8)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(6)
  Specifications........................  .107(i)(3), (4)
  Spray Gun Grounding...................  .107(i)(5)
  Ventilation...........................  .107(i)(9)
Elevating Work Platforms: (see Vehicle-   .67
 Mounted Work Platforms).
Emergency Action Plan...................  .38(a)
  Hazardous waste operations and          .120(l)(1)(ii)
   emergency response, exemption.
  Highly hazardous chemicals, process     .119(n)
   safety management.
Emergency Lighting......................  .261(b)(2)
Employee Alarm Systems..................  .165
  Installation and Restoration..........  .165(c)
  Maintenance and Testing...............  .165(d)
  Manual Operation......................  .165(e)
Employee-Owned Protective Equipment.....  .132(b)
Employee Protection: (see also Personal
 Protective Equipment)
  Egress................................  .36(c)
Engine Room Guardrails..................  .219(k)(2)
Environmental Controls:
  Accident Prevention Signs and Tags....  .145
  Air Contaminants......................  .93
  Asbestos..............................  .93a
  Effective Dates.......................  .98, .149
  Labor Camps...........................  .142
  Marking Physical Hazards..............  .144
  Noise Exposure........................  .95
  Physical Hazards Markings.............  .144
  Radiation:
    Ionizing............................  .96
    Nonionizing.........................  .97
  Safety Color Codes....................  .144
  Sanitation............................  .141
  Signs and Tags........................  .145
  Standards Sources.....................  .99, .150
  Ventilation...........................  .94

[[Page 893]]

Emergency Response, Hazardous Waste.....  .120
Equalizers, Crane Hoists................  .179(h)(3)
Ethylene Oxide..........................  .1047
Ethyleneimine...........................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Evacuation, Ionizing Radiation..........  .96(f)
Exhaust Air Filters, Spray Booths.......  .107(b)(5)
Exhaust Systems: (see also Ventilation)   .94(a)(4)
 Abrasive Blasting.
  Grinding, Polishing, Buffing..........  .94(b)(4)
  Open Surface Tanks....................  .94(d)(7)(iv)
  Sawmills..............................  .265(c)(20)
Exhausts, Spraying Operations...........  .107(d) (3), (7), (9)
Exits: (see also Access, Egress)
  Access................................  .37(f)
  Arrangement...........................  .37(e)
  Capacity..............................  .37(c), (d)
  Components............................  .37(a)
  Discharge From........................  .37(h)
  Elevation Change......................  .37(j)
  Headroom..............................  .37(i)
  Illumination..........................  .37(q)
  Maintenance...........................  .37(k)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(b)(8)
  Markings..............................  .37(q)
  Protective Enclosures.................  .37(b)
Explosive-Actuated Fastening Tools......  .243(d)
  Definitions...........................  .241(a)
  Fasteners.............................  .243(d)(3)
  High-Velocity Tools...................  .243(d)(2)(i)
  Inspection............................  .243(d)(2)
  Loads.................................  .243(d)(3)
  Low-Velocity Tools....................  .243(d)(2)(ii)
  Maintenance...........................  .243(d)(2)
Explosive character of furnishings and    .37(l)
 decorations; occupancy use.
Explosives and Blasting Agents..........  .109
  Blast Holes...........................  .109(e)(3)
  Bulk Delivery.........................  .109(h)(4)
  Charge Initiation.....................  .109(e)(4)
    Warning.............................  .109(e)(5)
  Chemicals, highly hazardous, process    .119
   safety management.
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Hours of Transfer.....................  .109(f)(5)
  Loading...............................  .109(e)(3)
  Magazines.............................  .109(c)(2)
  Mixing Vehicles.......................  .109(h)(4)
  Piers.................................  .109(f)
  Pulpwood Logging......................  .266(c)(7)
  Railroad Cars and Stations............  .109(f)
  Slurries..............................  .109(h)
  Small Arms Ammunition.................  .109(j)
  Smoking...............................  .109(e)(1)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Storage...............................  .109(c), (f)(4)
  Transportation........................  .109(d)
  Use...................................  .109(e)
  Vessels...............................  .109(f)
  Water Gels............................  .109(h)
Exposure:
  Air Contaminants......................  .1000
  Airborne Radioactive Material.........  .96(c)
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(b)
  Asbestos Fibers.......................  .1001(b)
  Limits (Tables G-1 to G-3)............  .1000
  Mineral Dusts.........................  .1000
  Minors................................  .96(b)(3), (c)(2), (d)(2)(ii)
  Noise.................................  .95
  Radiation Exposure....................  .96(b)
Extension Ladders, Portable:
  Metal.................................  .26(a)(2)
  Metal, Trestle........................  .26(a)(4)
  Wood..................................  .25
  Wood, Trestle.........................  .25(c)(3)(v)
Extension Lamps, Cranes.................  .179(g)(7)
Extractors..............................  .262(y)
Eye and Face Protection.................  .133
  Markings..............................  .133(a)(4)
  Optical Corrections...................  .133(a)(3)
  Protectors............................  .133(a)(2)
  Welding...............................  .252(b)(2)
Face Protection: (see also Eye and Face   .133
 Protection; Personal Protective
 Equipment).

[[Page 894]]

Facilities, Labor Camps: (see Labor
 Camps, Temporary)
Fail-Safe Controls, Spraying............  .107(h)(9)
  Overhead and Gantry Cranes............  .179(a)(40), (g)(3)(viii)
Fan-Rotating Element....................  .107(d)(4)
Farm Vehicles, Anhydrous Ammonia........  .111(g), (h)
Fasteners...............................  .243(d)(3)
Fastening Tools.........................  .243(d)
Fibers, Asbestos........................  .1001(b)
Filling Densities, Liquefied Petroleum    .110(b)(12)
 Gases.
Filters, Spraying.......................  .107(b)(5)
Fire Alarms: (see also Fire Protection)
  Egress................................  .37(n)
Fire Brigades...........................  .156
  Fire Fighting Equipment...............  .156(d)
  Organization..........................  .156(b)
  Protective Clothing...................  .156(e)(1)
    Body protection.....................  .156(e)(3)
    Foot and Leg Protection.............  .156(e)(2)
    Hand Protection.....................  .156(e)(4)
    Head, Eye, Face Protection..........  .156(e)(5)
  Respiratory Protection................  .156(f)
    General Requirements................  .156(f)(1)
    Positive-Pressure Breathing           .156(f)(2)
     Apparatus.
  Selection and Distribution............  .157(d)
  Training and Education................  .156(c)
Fire Prevention Plan....................  .38(b)
Fire Detection Systems..................  .164
  Installation and Restoration..........  .164(b)
  Maintenance and Testing...............  .164(c)
  Number, Location, Spacing.............  .164(f)
  Protection of Detectors...............  .164(d)
  Response Time.........................  .164(e)
Fire Extinguishers
  Cranes................................  .179(c)(3), (i)(5), (o)(3)
  Derricks..............................  .180(j)(5)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(g), (h)
  Explosives Transportation.............  .109(d)(2)(ii)
  Powered working platforms.............  .66(f)(5)(ii)(I)
  Welding...............................  .252(a)(2)(ii)
Fire Extinguishers, Portable............  .157
  Exemptions............................  .157(b)
  General Requirements..................  .157(c)
  Hydrostatic Testing...................  .157(f)
  Inspection, Maintenance Testing.......  .157(e)
  Selection and Distribution............  .157(d)
  Training and Education................  .157(g)
Fire Prevention Plan....................  .38(b)
Fire Protection:
  Ammonium Nitrate......................  .109(i)(7)
  Blasting Agents.......................  .109(i)(7)
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(4)(ix), (8)
  Chemical Plants.......................  .106(i)(5)
  Definitions...........................  .155
  Distilleries..........................  .106(i)(5)
  Electrostatic Apparatus...............  .107(h)(12)
  Explosives............................  .109(i)(7)
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .106(d)(7), (e)(5), (f)(8),
                                           (g)(9), (h)(6), (i)(5)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(5)
  Liquified Petroleum Gases.............  .110(d)(14), (f)(7), (h)(14)
  Local Fire Alarms.....................  .163
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(6)
  Refineries............................  .106(i)(5)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(9)
  Spray Booths..........................  .107(f)
    Cleaning............................  .107(f)(3)
    Conformance.........................  .107(f)(1)
    Extinguishers, Portable.............  .107(f)(4)
    Valve Access........................  .107(f)(2)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(d)(7)
  Trucks................................  .178
Fire Protection Equipment:
  Color Identification..................  .144(a)(1)
  Fire Brigades.........................  .156(d)
Fire Resistance (Rating):
  Inside Storage Rooms..................  .106(d)(4)(ii)
  Storage Cabinets......................  .106(d)(3)(ii)
  Tank Supports.........................  .106(b)(5)(ii)
Fire Retardant Paints...................  .37(o)
Fire Watch, Welding.....................  .252(a)(2)(iii)
Fireworks: (see Pytrotechnics)
First Aid...............................  .262(pp)
  Eye Flushing..........................  .151(c)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(k)
  Pulpwood Logging......................  .266(c)(1)(vii)
  Standards Sources.....................  .153
  Welding...............................  .252(c)(13)
Fittings: (see Piping, Fittings and
 Tubing; Piping, Valves and Fittings)
Fixed Extinguishing Systems.............  .160, .161, .162, .163
  Dry Chemical Agent Systems............  .161
  Gaseous Agent Systems.................  .162
  General Requirements..................  .160(b)
  Total Flooding Systems................  .160(c)
  Water Spray and Foam Systems..........  .163
Fixed Industrial Stairs: (see Stairs,     .24
 Fixed Industrial).
Fixed Ladders: (see Ladders, Fixed).....  .27
Flammable and Combustible Liquids:
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)
  Chemical Plants.......................  .106(i)
  Container Marking, color codes........  .144(a)(1)(ii)
  Containers............................  .106(d)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108
  Distilleries..........................  .106(i)
  Effective Dates.......................  .114

[[Page 895]]

  Hazardous communication...............  .1200
  Ignition Sources......................  .106(b)(6), (e)(6), (f)(6),
                                           (g)(8), (h)(7)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)
  Piping, Valves and Fittings...........  .106(c)
  Pressure Vessels......................  .106(b)(1)(v)
  Process safety management of highly     .119
   hazardous chemicals.
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)
  Refineries............................  .106(i)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)
  Spray Finishing.......................  .107
    Storage and Handling................  .107(e)
      Conformance.......................  .107(e)(1)
      Containers........................  .107(e)(3), (5)
      Hoses.............................  .107(e)(6)
      Grounding.........................  .107(c)(9), (e)(9)
      Liquid Heaters....................  .107(e)(7)
      Liquid Transfer...................  .107(e)(4)
      Pipes.............................  .107(e)(6)
      Pump Relief.......................  .107(e)(8)
      Quantity..........................  .107(e)(2)
      Safety Relief Devices.............  .107(e)(8)
      Spraying Containers...............  .107(e)(5)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Storage Containers....................  .106(d)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(b), (d)
  Tanks.................................  .106(b), (d)
Flammable Materials, Trucks Used........  .178(c)(2)
Flanges, Abrasive Wheel Machinery.......  .215(a)(3), (c)
  Balance...............................  .215(c)(3)
  Blotters..............................  .215(c)(1)(v), (c)(6), (d)(5)
  Diameter Uniformity...................  .215(c)(4)
  Dimensions............................  .215(c)(8)
  Driving...............................  .215(c)(7)
  Finish................................  .215(c)(3)
  General Requirements..................  .215(c)(1)
  Maintenance...........................  .215(c)(9)
  Recess................................  .215(c)(5)
  Repairs...............................  .215(c)(9)
  Types.................................  .215(c)(1)(iv)
  Undercut..............................  .215(c)(5)
Flash Welding Equipment.................  .255(d)
  Fire Curtains.........................  .255(d)(2)
  Ventilation...........................  .255(d)(1)
Float Scaffolds.........................  .28(u)
Flooding, Tank Areas....................  .106(b)(5)(vi)
Floor Loading...........................  .22(d)
Floor Openings (Holes)..................  .23(a)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(b) (5), (7)
Flooring: (see also Floor Openings;
 Floors)
  Type F Powered Platforms..............  .66(c)(12)
  Type T Powered Platforms..............  .66 (b)(5)(iii)(d)
Floors:
  Covers, Hinged........................  .23(a)(3)(i)
  Open-Sided............................  .23(c)
  Spray Booths..........................  .107(b)(3)
Flow Coatings...........................  .108(h)(2)
Fluidized Beds..........................  .107(l)(7)
Fluorine Compounds, Welding: (see also    .252(c)(5)
 Air Contaminants).
Foam Extinguishers, Dip Tanks...........  .108(g)(3)
Foam Extinguishing Systems, Fixed.......  .163
Food Handling...........................  .141(h), .120(m)(4)
Foot Pedals, Power Presses..............  .217(b)(4)
Foot Protection.........................  .136
Footwalks:
  Cranes................................  .179(d)
Forging Hammers.........................  .218(a)(3)
  Foot-Operated Devices.................  .218(b)(2)
  Gravity...............................  .218(e)
    Air Lifts...........................  .218(e)(1)
    Board Drop Hammers..................  .218(e)(2)
  Keys..................................  .218(b)(1)
  Power-Driven..........................  .218(d)
    Cylinder Draining...................  .218(d)(3)
    Pressure Pipes......................  .218(d)(4)
    Safety Cylinder Heads...............  .218(d)(1)
    Shutoff Valves......................  .218(d)(2)
Forging Machine Area....................  .30(b)
Forging Machines:
  Billet Shears.........................  .218(j)(1)
  Boltheading...........................  .218(i)(1)
  Conveyors.............................  .218(j)(3)
  Definitions...........................  .211(e)
  Effective Dates.......................  .220
  Grinding..............................  .218(j)(5)
  Hammers...............................  .218(a)(3), (b), (d), (e)
  Inspections...........................  .218(a)(2)
  Lead Use..............................  .218(a)(1)
  Maintenance...........................  .218(a)(2)
  Presses...............................  .218(a)(3), (c), (f), (g)
  Rivet Making..........................  .218(i)(2)
  Saws..................................  .218(j)(2)
  Shot Blast............................  .218(j)(4)
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
  Upsetters.............................  .218(h)
Forging Presses.........................  .218(f)
Fork Trucks: (see also Powered            .178
 Industrial Trucks).
Formaldehyde............................  .1048
  Airborne Concentration................  .1048(c)
  Compliance............................  .1048(f)
  Emergencies...........................  .1048(k)
  Exposure, Permissible.................  .1048(c)
  Hazard Communication..................  .1048(m)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1048(j)
  Hygiene Protection....................  .1048(i)
  Medical Surveillance..................  .1048(l)
  Monitoring............................  .1048(d)
  Personal Protective Clothing..........  .1048(h)

[[Page 896]]

  Recordkeeping.........................  .1048(o)
  Regulated Areas.......................  .1048(e)
  Respiratory protection................  .1048(g)
  Training, Employee....................  .1048(n)
Fuel-Gas Systems: (see also Oxygen-Fuel   .253
 Gas Systems).
Fuels: (see also Refueling)
  Handling and Storage..................  .178(f)
Furnishings:
  Egress................................  .37(l)
Fusion Apparatus: (see Drying, Curing
 and Fusion Apparatus)
Gantry Cranes: (see also Overhead and     .179
 Gantry Cranes).
Garages, Undercoating Operations........  .107(k)
Garnett Machines........................  .262(f)
Gas Cylinder Inspection.................  .101(a)
Gaging Devices..........................  .110(b)(19)
Gas Mask Canisters......................  .134(g)
  Color Codes...........................  .134(g)(6)
  Labeling..............................  .134(g)
Gaseous agent extinguishing systems;      .162
 fixed.
  Scope and Application.................  .162(a)
  Specific Requirements.................  .162(b)
Gaseous Hydrogen Systems: (see Hydrogen)
Gasoline Powered Trucks.................  .178(b)(8), (9)
Gears...................................  .219(f)
Gill Boxes..............................  .262(k)
Gin Pole Derricks: (see also Derricks)..  .181(a)(6)
Gloves, Rubber Insulating...............  .137
Glue Spreaders..........................  .213(r)
Goggles: (see also Eye Protection; Eye    .133
 and Face Protection).
Grain Handling..........................  .272
  Application...........................  .272(b)
  Continuous flow bulk raw grain dryers.  .272(o)
  Contractors...........................  .272(h)
  Emergency action plan.................  .272(d)
  Emergency escape......................  .272(n)
  Entry into bins, silos, tanks.........  .272(g)
  Filter collectors.....................  .272(k)
  Grain stream processing equipment.....  .272(m)
  Grate openings........................  .272(j)
  Hot work permit.......................  .272(f)
  Housekeeping..........................  .272(i)
  Inside bucket elevators...............  .272(p)
  Preventive maintenance................  .272(l)
  Training..............................  .272(e)
Gravity Hammers.........................  .218(e)
Grinders: (see also Abrasive Wheel)
  Machinery; Cutoff Wheels..............  .243(c)(3), (4)
Grinding, Forging Equipment.............  .218(j)(5)
Grinding Machines:
  Cylindrical...........................  .215(b)(4)
  Flanges...............................  .215(a)(3)
  Surface Grinders......................  .215(b)(5)
  Swing Frame Grinders..................  .215(b)(6)
  Top Grinding..........................  .215(b)(8)
  Work Rest.............................  .215(a)(4)
Grinding, Polishing, and Buffing:
  Branch Pipes..........................  .94(b)(3)
  Enclosure Design......................  .94(b)(5)
  Exhaust Systems.......................  .94(b)(4)
  Hoods.................................  .94(b)(3), (5)
Grinding, Top...........................  .215(b)(8)
Grounding:
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(7)(iv)
  Circuits..............................  .314
  Electrostatic Spraying................  .107(h)(5), (i)(5)-(7)
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(e)(6)(ii), (f)(3)(iv)
  General...............................  .304(f)
  Hand Spraying.........................  .107(i)(5)-(7)
  Ignition Sources......................  .107(c)(9)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(4)(iv)
  Liquid Transfer.......................  .107(e)(9)
  Methods...............................  .314(e)
  Spray Booths..........................  .107(h)(10)
  Spraying Operations...................  .107(c)(9), (e)(9), (i)(5)-(7)
  Welding...............................  .254(c)(2), (d)(3);
                                           .255(b)(9), (c)(6)
  Woodworking Tools.....................  .243(a)(5)
Guarding: (see also Term To Which It      .211-.222
 Applies).
  Abrasive Wheels, Portable.............  .243(c)
  Floor Openings (Holes)................  .23(a)
  Hatchways.............................  .23(a)(3)
  Ladderways............................  .23(a)(2)
  Live Parts............................  .303(g)(2), (h)(2)
  Machinery.............................  .211-.222
  Mechanical Power Transmission           .219(m)
   Apparatus.
    Clutches............................  .219(k)
    Friction Drives.....................  .219(g)
    Prime Movers........................  .219(b)
    Pulleys.............................  .219(d)
  Open-Sided Floors.....................  .23(c)
  Platforms.............................  .23(c)
  Powered Tools, Portable...............  .243
  Railings..............................  .23(e)
  Runways...............................  .23(c)
  Skylight..............................  .23(a)(4)
  Spraying Equipment....................  .107(h)(10)
  Stairways.............................  .23(a)(1), (d)
  Wall Openings (Holes).................  .23(b)
Guardrails:
  Definitions...........................  .21(f)(10)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(b)(8)(i), (10)(iv)
  Power Transmission Apparatus..........  .219(o)(5)

[[Page 897]]

  Powered and Working Platforms.........  .66(e)(3), (f)(3)(i)(K),
                                           (f)(5)(i)(G), (f)(5)(ii)(K)
  Removable.............................  .23(a)(3)
  Working Surfaces......................  .22(c)
Guardrails, Scaffolds: (see Listing
 Under Specific Type Scaffold)
Guards: (see also Guardrails)
  Derricks..............................  .181(j)(1)
  Hoisting Ropes........................  .179(e)(5)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(b)(7)-(9)
  Moving Parts..........................  .179(e)(6)
  Trucks................................  .178(e)
Guide Posts.............................  .217(d)(4)
Gudgeon Pin.............................  .181(a)(20)
Guy Derricks............................  .181(a)(7)
Hammers, Forging: (see Forging Hammers)
Hand protection.........................  .138
Hand Spraying Equipment: (see
 Electrostatic Hand Spraying Equipment)
Hand Tools..............................  .242
  Dead-Man Controls.....................  .243(a)(2)
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(c)(13)
Handholds, Manlifts.....................  .68(c)(4)
Handling: (see also Materials Handling
 and Storage)
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .111
  Compressed Gases......................  .101(b)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(2)(iii)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110
  Liquids...............................  .106(h)(4)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(1)
Handrails...............................  .24(h)
  Cranes................................  .179(d)(3), (4)(ii)
  Mobile Ladder Stands..................  .29(f)(4)
Hangers.................................  .219(p)(4)
Hardening Tanks.........................  .108(h)(1)
Hatchways Guarding......................  .23(a)(3)
Hazard Communication, chemical            .1200
 information, transmittal.
  Hazard Communication Program..........  .1200(e)
  Hazard Determination..................  .1200(d)
  Information and Training..............  .1200(h)
  Labels and Warnings...................  .1200(f)
  Material Safety Data Sheets...........  .1200(g)
  Trade Secrets.........................  .1200(i)
Hazardous chemicals, occupational         .1450
 exposure to in laboratories (see
 Chemicals, hazardous).
Hazardous chemicals, highly, process      .119
 safety management (see Chemicals, etc.).
Hazardous energy; control of (see
 Lockout/tagout)
Hazardous Materials:
  Acetylene.............................  .102
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .111
  Blasting Agents.......................  .109
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104
  Chemicals (see entries under            .119
   Chemicals, etc.).
  Combustible Liquids...................  .106-.108
  Compressed Gases......................  .101
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Explosives............................  .109
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .106-.108
  Hazardous Wastes......................  .120
  Hydrogen..............................  .103
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110
  Nitrous Oxide.........................  .105
  Oxygen................................  .104
  Packages, transport vehicles, etc.,     .1201
   retention of DOT markings.
  Spray Finishing.......................  .107
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Storage and Handling:
    Anhydrous Ammonia...................  .111
    DOT markings, retention.............  .1201
    Liquefied Petroleum Gases...........  .110
  Trucks Used...........................  .178(c)(2)
Hazardous Waste Operations:
  Contractors and Subcontractors........  .120(b)(1)(iv)
  Decontamination.......................  .120(k), (p)(4)
  Drums and Containers..................  .120(j)
  Emergency Response....................  .120(e)(7), (l), (p)(8), (q)
  Engineering Controls and Personal       .120(g)
   Protective Equipment.
  Illumination..........................  .120(m)
  Information Program...................  .120(b)(i)
  Laboratory Waste Packs................  .120(j)(6)
  Material Handling.....................  .120(j)
  Medical Surveillance..................  .120(f), (p)(3), (q)(9)
  Monitoring............................  .120(c)(6), (h)
  Post-emergency Response...............  .120(l)(5)
  Radioactive Wastes....................  .120(j)(4)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .120(f)(7)
  RCRA Facilities.......................  .120(p)
  Safety and Health Program.............  .120(b)
  Sanitation............................  .120(n)
  Site Characterization and Analysis....  .120(c)
  Site Control..........................  .120(d)
  Training..............................  .120(e), (p)(8)(iii), (q)(6)
  Shock-sensitive Wastes................  .120(j)(5)
  Site Safety and Health Plan...........  .120(b)(4)
  Tank and Vault Procedures.............  .120(j)(9)
  Totally-encapsulating Chemical          .120(g)(4)
   Protective Suits.
  Uncontrolled sites, emergency           .120(l)
   responses.

[[Page 898]]

Head Protection.........................  .135
Headroom, Egress........................  .37(i)
Healthcare professions and related        .1030
 industries, exposures to bloodborne
 pathogens.
Hearing Conservation Program............  .95(c)
Heating:
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(c)(7)
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(2)(ii)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(6)
Helicopters.............................  .183
Helmets.................................  .135, .252(e)(2), .266(c)(iii)
Hepatitis B (see also Bloodborne          .1030
 pathogens).
Hinged Floor Covers.....................  .23(a)(3)(i)
Hoist Limit Switches....................  .179(n)(4)
Hoisting Equipment:
  Cranes................................  .179(e)(5), (h)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(f)(4), (g)(6)
  Rope Guards...........................  .179(e)(5)
Holding Brakes..........................  .179(f)(2)
Holes: (see also Floor Openings (Holes);  .23
 Wall Openings (Holes)).
Hooks:
  Cranes................................  .179(h)(4)
  Derricks..............................  .181(j)(2)
Horse Scaffolds.........................  .28(m)
Hoses...................................
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .107(e)(6)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(9)
  Semiconductors........................  .109(a)(12)
  Sprinkler Systems.....................  .159(c)(5)
  Standpipe and hose systems............  .158(c)(3)
  Welding and Cutting...................  .253(e)
Hot Sources.............................  .107(c)(3)
Hot-work permits, process safety          .119(k)
 management of highly hazardous
 chemicals.
Hours of Transfer, Explosives...........  .109(f)(5)
Household Stepladders, Type III.........  .25(c)(2)(iv)
Housekeeping............................  .141(a)(3)
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(d)
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .106(e)(9)
  Walking-Working Surfaces..............  .22(a)
Hydraulic Barkers.......................  .261(e)(14)
Hydraulic Equipment.....................  .217(b)(11)
Hydraulically designed sprinkler systems  .159(c)(11)
Hydrogen................................  .103
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Gaseous Hydrogen Systems..............  .103(a)(2)(i), (b)
    Clear Zone..........................  .103(b)(5)(ii)
    Containers..........................  .103(b)(1)(i)
    Design..............................  .103(b)(1)
    Equipment Assembly..................  .103(b)(1)(iv)
    Fittings............................  .103(b)(1)(iii)
    Inspection..........................  .103(b)(5)
    Location............................  .103(b)(2)
      Outdoor...........................  .103(b)(3)(i)
      Separate Buildings................  .103(b)(3)(ii)
    Operating Instructions..............  .103(b)(4)
    Piping..............................  .103(b)(1)(iii)
    Safety Relief Devices...............  .103(b)(1)(ii)
    Testing.............................  .103(b)(1)(vi)
    Tubing..............................  .103(b)(1)(iii)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(a)(2)(ii), .103(c)
    Clear Zone..........................  .103(c)(5)(ii)
    Containers..........................  .103(c)(1)(i)
    Design..............................  .103(c)(1)
    Electrical Systems..................  .103(c)(1)(ix)
    Equipment Assembly..................  .103(c)(1)(vi)
    Fittings............................  .103(c)(1)(v)
    Grounding...........................  .103(c)(4)(iv)
    Inspection..........................  .103(c)(5)(i)
    Location............................  .103(c)(2)
      Outdoor...........................  .103(c)(3)(i)
      Separate Buildings................  .103(c)(3)(ii)
      Special Rooms.....................  .103(c)(3)(iii)
    Maintenance.........................  .103(c)(5)
    Markings............................  .103(c)(1)(iii)
    Operating Instructions..............  .103(c)(4)
      Attendants........................  .103(c)(4)(ii)
      Security..........................  .103(c)(4)(iii)
    Piping..............................  .103(c)(1)(v)
    Safety Relief Devices...............  .103(c)(1)(iv)
    Supports............................  .103(c)(1)(ii)
    Testing.............................  .103(c)(1)(vii)
    Tubing..............................  .103(c)(1)(v)
    Vaporizers..........................  .103(c)(1)(viii)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
Hydrostatic Tests: (see also Testing)
  Fire Extinguishers....................  .157(f)
  Piping................................  .106(c)(7)
Ignition Sources:
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(6)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(c)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(6)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(1)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(7)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(8)
  Spraying Operations...................  .107(c)
    Combustible Residues................  .107(c)(5)
    Conformance.........................  .107(c)(1)
    Electrical Wiring...................  .107(c)(4), (6)
    Grounding...........................  .107(c)(9)
    Hot Sources.........................  .107(c)(3)
    Lamps...............................  .107(c)(7), (8)
    Separation Minimum..................  .107(c)(2)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(b)(6)
Illumination: (see Lighting)
Indoor Storage:
  Effective Dates.......................  .182
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(b)(4), (d)(4), (d)(5),
                                           (e)(5), (g)(1)(iii),
                                           (h)(4)(i)
  Rooms.................................  .106(d)(4)
  Standards Sources.....................  .183

[[Page 899]]

Industrial Plants:
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(e)
    Electrical Systems..................  .106(e)(7)
    Fire Protection.....................  .106(e)(5)
    Housekeeping........................  .106(e)(9)
    Incidental Storage..................  .106(e)(2)
    Ignition Sources....................  .106(e)(6)
    Maintenance.........................  .106(e)(9)
    Repairs, Equipment..................  .106(e)(8)
    Tank Loading........................  .106(e)(4)
    Unit Physical Operations............  .106(e)(3)
  Liquefied Petroleum...................  .110(d)(12), (f)(4)
Industrial Stepladders, Type I..........  .25(c)(2)(ii)
Insect Control..........................  .141(a)(5)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(j)
Inspection: (see also Term To Which It
 Applies)
  Compressed Gas Cylinders..............  .101(a), .166
  Cranes................................  .179(j), .180(d)
    Crawler.............................  .180(d)
    Gantry..............................  .179(j)
      Ropes.............................  .179(m)
    Locomotive..........................  .180(d)
    Overhead............................  .179(j)
      Ropes.............................  .179(m)
    Truck...............................  .180(d)
  Cylinders.............................  .101(a)
  Derricks..............................  .181(d)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(f)(3)
  Fire Extinguishers....................  .157(e)
  Flooding, Tank Areas..................  .106(b)(5)(vi), (v)
  Gas Cylinders.........................  .101(a)
  Gaseous Hydrogen......................  .103(b)(5)
  Liquefied Hydrogen....................  .103(c)(5)(i)
  Liquid Oxygen.........................  .104(b)(10)(i)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(e)
  Open Surface Tanks....................  .94(d)(11)
  Power Presses.........................  .217(e)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(g)
  Respirators...........................  .134(f)
  Ropes, Cranes.........................  .179(m)
  Woodworking Machines..................  .213(s)
Instruction Signs, Manlifts.............  .68(c)(7)
Insulators..............................  .107(h)(5)
Interior Hung Scaffolds.................  .28(p)
Ionizing Radiation......................  .1096
  AEC Licensees.........................  .1096(p)
  Airborne Radioactive Materials........  .1096(c)
  Caution Signs and Labels..............  .1096(e)
  Employees:
    Disclosure..........................  .1096(o)
    Exposure Records....................  .1096(m), (n)
    Incident Reporting..................  .1096(l)
    Instruction Posting.................  .1096(i)
  Evacuation............................  .1096(f)
  Exemptions............................  .1096(g), (h)
  Exposure..............................  .1096(b)
    Airborne Radioactive Materials......  .1096(c)
    Minors..............................  .1096(b)(3), (c)(2),
                                           (d)(2)(ii)
  Exposure Records......................  .1096(m)-(o)
  Incident Reporting....................  .1096(l)
  Monitoring............................  .1096(d)
  Overexposure Reports..................  .1096(m)
  Personnel Instructions, Posting.......  .1096(i)
  Radioactive Materials:................
    Packaged............................  .1096(h)
    Storage.............................  .1096(j)
  Warning Signals.......................  .1096(f)
  Waste Disposal........................  .1096(k)
Jacks:
  Definitions...........................  .241(d)
  Fixed Truck...........................  .178(k)(3)
  Loading...............................  .244(a)(1)
  Marking...............................  .244(a)(1)
  Maintenance...........................  .244(a)(2)
  Truck.................................  .178(k)(3)
Jointers................................  .213(j)
  Blades................................  .213(s)(12)
Keys, Projecting........................  .219(h)
Kiers...................................  .262(q)
Kilns...................................  .265(f)
Kitchens, Labor Camps...................  .142(i)
Labeling, Hazardous Chemicals...........  .1200
Labor Camps, Temporary..................  .142
  Bathing Facilities....................  .142(f)
  Bedding...............................  .142(b)(3)
  Communicable Diseases Reportings......  .142(i)
  Dining Facilities.....................  .142(j)
  Effective Dates.......................  .149
  Facilities............................  .142(b)
  First Aid.............................  .142(k)
  Furnishings...........................  .142(b)
  Floors................................  .142(b)(4), (5)
  Grounds...............................  .142(a)(3)
  Heating Equipment.....................  .142(b)(11)
  Insect Control........................  .142(j)
  Kitchens..............................  .142(i)
  Laundry Facilities....................  .142(f)
  Lighting..............................  .142(g)
  Refuse Disposal.......................  .142(h)
  Rodent Control........................  .142(j)
  Screening.............................  .142(b)(8)
  Sewage Disposal.......................  .142(e)
  Shelters..............................  .142(b)
  Site..................................  .142(a)
  Size..................................  .142(a)(2)
  Sleeping..............................  .142(b)(2), (3)
  Space.................................  .142(b)(2), (9)
  Standards Sources.....................  .150
  Stoves................................  .142(b)(10)
  Toilet Facilities.....................  .142(d)
  Washing...............................  .142(f)
  Waste Disposal........................  .142(h)
  Water Supply..........................  .142(c)
  Windows...............................  .142(b)(7), (8)

[[Page 900]]

Laboratories, occuptional exposures to    .1450
 hazardous chemicals in (see Chemicals,
 hazardous).
Laboratories and production facilities,   .1030(e)
 HIV and HBV research.
Ladder-Jack Scaffolds...................  .28(q)
Ladder Stands, Manual Mobile; (see Work   .29(f)
 Platforms, Mobile).
Ladders:
  Cranes................................  .179(d)(4), (o)(1)
  Fixed.................................  .27
  Manlifts..............................  .68(b)(12)
  Portable Metal........................  .26
  Portable Wood.........................  .25
  Sawmills..............................  .265(c)(10)
Ladders, Fixed..........................  .27
  Cages.................................  .27(c)(3), (d)(1)
  Clearances............................  .27(c)
  Cleats................................  .27(b)(1)
  Design................................  .27(a)
    Stresses............................  .27(a)(2)
  Deterioration.........................  .27(b)(7)
  Electrolytic Action...................  .27(b)(5)
  Extensions............................  .27(d)(3)
  Fastenings............................  .27(b)(3)
  Grab Bars.............................  .27(c)(5), (d)(4)
  Ladder Extensions.....................  .27(d)(3)
  Landing Platforms.....................  .27(d)(2)
  Maintenance...........................  .27(f)
  Pitch.................................  .27(e)
  Rungs.................................  .27(b)(1)
  Safety Devices........................  .27(d)(5)
  Side Rails............................  .27(b)(2)
  Splices...............................  .27(b)(4)
  Standards Sources.....................  .31
  Welding...............................  .27(b)(6)
  Wells.................................  .27(d)(1)
Ladders, Portable Metal.................  .26
  Care..................................  .26(c)(2)
  Electrical safety-related work          .333(c)(7)
   practices.
  Extension Ladders.....................  .26(a)(2), (4)
  General Requirements..................  .26(a)(1)
  Platform Ladders......................  .26(a)(5)
  Standards Sources.....................  .31
  Stepladders...........................  .26(a)(3)
  Straight Ladders......................  .26(a)(2), (4)
  Use...................................  .26(c)(3)
Ladders, Portable Wood..................  .25
  Care..................................  .25(d)(1)
    Rung Ladders........................  .25(c)(3)
      Sectional.........................  .25(c)(3)(iv)
      Single............................  .25(c)(3)(ii)
      Trestle...........................  .25(c)(3)(v)
      Two-Section.......................  .25(c)(3)(iii)
    Side-Rolling Ladders................  .25(c)(5)
    Special Purpose Ladders.............  .25(c)(4)
      Masons'...........................  .25(c)(4)(iii)
      Painters'.........................  .25(c)(4)(ii)
    Standards Sources...................  .31
    Stepladders.........................  .25(c)(2)
    Trolley Ladders.....................  .25(c)(5)
  Materials.............................  .25(b)
  Use...................................  .25(d)(2)
Ladderway Guarding......................  .23(a)(2)
Lamps: (see also Lighting)..............  .107(c)(7)(8); .305(j)(1)
Landings, Manlifts......................  .68(b) (6), (10)
Lathers' Scaffolds: (see also             .28(o)
 Plasterers' Scaffolds).
Lathes..................................  .213(o)
Laundry Facilities, Labor Camps.........  .142(f)
Laundry Operations......................  .264
  Miscellaneous Equipment...............  .264(c)(4)
  Operating Rules.......................  .264(d)
    Markers.............................  .264(d)(1)(iii)
    Mechanical Safeguards...............  .264(d)(2)
  Point-of-Operation Guards.............  .264(c)
  Washroom Machines.....................  .264(c)(1)
Lavatories..............................  .141(d)(2)
Lawn Mowers, Power......................  .243(e)
  Definitions...........................  .241(c)
  Forging Machines......................  .218(a)(1)
  General Requirements..................  .243(e)(1)
  Riding Rotary.........................  .243(e)(2), (4)
  Walk-Behind...........................  .243(e)(2), (3)
Lead....................................  .1025, .252(f)(7)
  Compliance............................  .1025(e)
  Confined Spaces.......................  .252(f)(7)(i), (iii)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1025(h)
  Hygiene Facilities and Practices......  .1025(i)
  Indoors...............................  .252(c)(7)(ii), (iii)
  Medical Removal.......................  .1025(k)
  Medical Surveillance..................  .1025(j)
  Monitoring............................  .1025(d)
  Monitoring, Observation of............  .1025(o)
  Protective Equipment and..............  .1025(g)
      Clothing..........................  .1025(g)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1025(n)
  Respiratory Protection................  .1025(f)
  Signs.................................  .1025(m)
  Training, Employee....................  .1025(l)
  Ventilation...........................  .252(c)(7)(iii)
Leakage, Bulk Oxygen Systems............  .104(b)(2)(iii)
Levers, Hand-Operated...................  .217(b)(5)
Lifelines: (see also Safety Belts)
  Confined Spaces.......................  .252(b)(4)(iv)
  Crawling Boards.......................  .28(t)(2)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(d)(9), App. C
  Welding...............................  .252(b)(4)(iv)
  Chicken Ladders.......................  .28(t)(2)
Lighting: (see also Lamps)
  Container Areas.......................  .110(d)(16)
  Cranes................................  .179(c)(4), (g)(7)
  Electric Equipment, Workspace About...  .303(g)(1)(v), (h)(3)(ii)
  Electrical safety-related work          .333(c)(4)
   practices.
  Exits and Exit Signs..................  .37(q)
  Hazardous Waste Operations............  .120(m)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(g)

[[Page 901]]

  Machinery, Basement Areas.............  .219(c)(5)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(b)(6)(iii), (14)
  Operating Areas, Industrial Trucks....  .178(h)
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(b)(2), (c)(10), (k)(21)
  Pulpwood Harvesting...................  .266(e)(15)
  Sawmills..............................  .265(c)(5)(iii), (9),
                                           (23)(iii)
  Spray Booths..........................  .107(b)(10)
  Storage Areas.........................  .177(f)(1), .178(h)
Lighting Receptacles:
  Cranes................................  .179(g)(7)
Liquefied Hydrogen Systems: (see
 Hydrogen)
Liquefied, Petroleum Gases: (see also     .110, .168(b)(3)(x)
 Containers, Liquefied Petroleum Gases).
  Appliances............................  .110(b)(20)
  Attendant.............................  .110(b)(14)
  Buildings:
    Engines Use.........................  .110(e)(11), (12)
    Industrial Trucks...................  .110(e)(13)
    Inside Storage......................  .110(f)
    Piping Into.........................  .110(b)(13)
  Condensed Gas Drips...................  .110(d)(9)
  Definitions...........................  .110(a)
  Effective Dates.......................  .110(b)(19)(i), .114
  Electrical Equipment..................  .110(b)(17), (18); (h)(13)
  Engines in Buildings..................  .110(e)(11), (12)
  Equipment Approval....................  .110(b)(2)
  Fire Protection.......................  .110(d)(14), (f)(7), (h)(14)
  Fuel Handling and Storage.............  .178(f)
  Gaging Devices........................  .110(b)(19)
  Garaging Vehicles.....................  .110(e)(14)
  Handling..............................  .110
  Liquid Level Gaging Device............  .110(b)(19)
  Liquid Transfer.......................  .110(b)(14)
  Loading...............................  .110(b)(15)
  Motor Fuel............................  .110(e)
  Odorizing Gases.......................  .110(b)(1)
  Pits and Drains.......................  .110(d)(11)
  Regulating Equipment..................  .110(b)(6); (c)(5); (d)(9);
                                           (e)(9)
    Indoor..............................  .110(c)(5)
    Location............................  .110(b)(6)
    Outdoor.............................  .110(c)(4)
  Service Stations......................  .110(h)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Storage...............................  .110
  Tank Car Loading......................  .110(b)(15)
  Transport Trucks......................  .110(b)(15)
  Trucks................................  .178(b)(10), (11)
  Trucks Conversion.....................  .178(d), (q)(12)
Liquid Fuels:
  Handling and Storage..................  .178(f)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)
Liquid Heaters, Spray...................  .107(e)(7)
Liquid Transfer:
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .111(b)(12), (f)(6)
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .106(e)(2)(iv), (e)(3)(vi),
                                           (f)(3)(vi), (g), (h)(4),
                                           .107(e)(4), (9)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(14)
Load Handling:
  Crawler, Locomotive and Truck Cranes..  .180(h)
    Attaching...........................  .180(h)(2)
    Holding.............................  .180(h)(4)
    Moving..............................  .180(h)(3)
    Size................................  .180(h)(1)
  Derricks..............................  .181
    Attaching...........................  .181(i)(2)
    Boom Securing.......................  .181(i)(6)
    Holding.............................  .181(i)(4)
    Moving..............................  .181(i)(3)
    Size................................  .181(i)(1)
    Winch Heads.........................  .181(i)(5)
  Overhead and Gantry Cranes............  .179(n)
    Attaching...........................  .179(n)(2)
    Hoist Limit Switches................  .179(n)(4)
    Moving..............................  .179(n)(3)
    Size................................  .179(n)(1)
Load Ratings:
  Cranes................................  .180(c)
  Derricks..............................  .181(c)
  Overhead and Gantry Cranes............  .179(b)(5)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(c)(7)
Loading:
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(3)
  Explosives............................  .109(e)(3)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(4)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(15)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(5)
  Scaffolds.............................  .29(a)(2)
Lockout/tagout of hazardous energy......  .147
  Control sequence......................  .147(d)
  Electrical safety-related work          .333(b)
   practices.
  Inspection............................  .147(c)(6)
  Powered platforms.....................  .66(f)(3)()i)(J)
  Release procedures....................  .147(e)
  Testing...............................  .147(f)(1)
  Training..............................  .147(c)(7)
Locomotive Cranes: (see also Crawler,     .180
 Locomotive and Truck Cranes).
Log Handling: (see also Sawmills).......  .265(d)
Longshoring.............................  .16(a)
Looms...................................  .262(n)
Low Pressure Tanks......................  .106(b)(1)(iv)
LP-Gases: (see Liquefied Petroleum
 Gases)
Lumber Handling.........................  .265(c)(27), (28)

[[Page 902]]

Lunchrooms..............................  .141(g)
  Location..............................  .141(g)(1), (2)
  Waste Disposal Containers.............  .141(g)(3)
Machine Guarding: (see Machine(ry)
 Guarding)
Machine(ry) Guarding....................  .211-.222
  Abrasive Wheel Machinery..............  .215
  Anchoring Fixed Machinery.............  .212(a), (b)
  Bakeries..............................  .263(c)
  Barrels...............................  .212(a)(4)
  Blades Exposure.......................  .212(a)(5)
  Calendars.............................  .216
  Containers............................  .212(a)(4)
  Definitions...........................  .211
  Drums.................................  .212(a)(4)
  Effective Dates.......................  .220
  Forging Machines......................  .218
  Mills.................................  .216
  Point of Operation....................  .212(a)(3)
  Power Presses.........................  .217
  Power Transmission Equipment..........  .219
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
  Types.................................  .212(a)(1)
  Woodworking Machinery.................  .213
Machines:
  Abrasive Wheels.......................  .215
  Definitions...........................  .211
  Forging...............................  .218
  Laundry...............................  .264
  Mills and Calenders...................  .216
  Power Transmission, Mechanical........  .219
  Presses, Mechanical...................  .217
  Textiles..............................  .262
  Woodworking...........................  .213
Magazines, Explosives...................  .109(c)(2)
  Class I...............................  .109(c)(3)
  Class II..............................  .109(c)(4)
  Class III.............................  .109(c)(5)
Maintenance: (see also Term To Which It
 Applies)
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(10)
  Cranes................................  .179(l), .180(f)
  Derricks..............................  .181(f)
  Egress................................  .36(d), .37(k)
  Fire Alarm Systems....................  .163(c)
  Fire Extinguishers:                     .157(e)
  Gaseous Hydrogen Systems..............  .103(b)(5)
  Industrial Plants.....................  .106(e)(9)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(5)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(4)
  Powered Industrial Trucks.............  .178(q)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(e)(6)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(8)
  Respirators...........................  .134(f)
  Standpipe and Hose System.............  .158(e)
  Sprinkler Systems.....................  .159(c)(2)
  Type F Powered Platforms..............  .66(c)(5)
Manifolding Gas Cylinders...............  .253(c)
  Fuel-Gas..............................  .253(c)(1)
  Operating Procedures..................  .253(c)(5)
  Oxygen................................  .253(c)(2), (3)
  Portable Outlet Headers...............  .253(c)(4)
Manholes................................  .23(a)(6), .268(o)
Manlifts................................  .68
  Belts.................................  .68(c)(1)(ii)
  Brakes................................  .68(c)(1)(i)
  Clearances............................  .68(b)(11)
  Design................................  .68(b)(3)
  Exit Protection.......................  .68(b)(8)
  Floor Openings........................  .68(b)(5), (7)
  Guardrails............................  .68(b)(8)(i), (10)(iv)
  Guards................................  .68(b)(7), (9)
  Handholds.............................  .68(c)(4)
  Inspections...........................  .68(e)
  Instruction Signs.....................  .68(c)(7)
  Ladders...............................  .68(b)(12)
  Landings..............................  .68(b)(6)
  Lighting..............................  .68(b)(6)(iii), (14)
  Machinery.............................  .68(c)
  Mechanical Requirements...............  .68(c)
  Operating Rules.......................  .68(d)
  Platforms.............................  .68(c)(3)
  Speed.................................  .68(c)(2)
  Standards Sources.....................  .68(b)(4), .69
  Steps.................................  .68(c)(3)
  Stops.................................  .68(c)(5), (6)
  Warning Signs.........................  .68(c)(7)
  Weather Protection....................  .68(b)(15)
Marine Service Stations.................  .106(g)(4)
Marine Terminals........................  .16(b)
Marking Physical Hazards................  .144
  Sawmills..............................  .265(c)(11)
Markings: (see also Signs and Tags)
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(8)(viii)
  Compressed Gas Cylinders..............  .253(b)(1)
  Electric equipment:
    General.............................  .303(e)
    Hazardous locations.................  .307(b)(2)(ii)
  Explosive Actuated Tools..............  .243(d)(3)
  Explosives............................  .109(d)(2)(ii)
  Eye and Face Protection...............  .133(a)(4)
  Gaseous Hydrogen Systems..............  .103(b)(1)(v)
  Hazardous materials, retention of DOT   .1201
   markings.
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(1)(iii)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(5), (c)
  Load Ratings:
    Cranes..............................  .180(c)(2)
    Derricks............................  .181(c)
    Powered Industrial Trucks...........  .178(a)(3)
    Powered Platforms...................  .66(f)(7)
  Physical Hazards......................  .144
  Respirators...........................  .134(g)
  Sawmills..............................  .265(c)(11)
Mason's Adjustable Multiple Point         .28(f)
 Suspension Scaffolds.
Masons' Ladders.........................  .25(c)(4)(iii)
Matching Machines.......................  .213(n)

[[Page 903]]

Material Safety Data Sheets, chemical     .1200
 hazards information.
Materials Handling and Storage:
  Aisles and Passageways................  .176(a)
  Clearance Signs.......................  .176(e)
  Cranes--Crawler, Locomotive and Truck.  .180
  Cranes, Overhead and Gantry...........  .179
  Derricks..............................  .181
  Effective Dates.......................  .182
  Guarding Openings.....................  .176(g)
  Hazardous materials, retention of DOT   .1201
   markings.
  Hazardous Waste Operations............  .120(j), (p)(6)
  Housekeeping..........................  .176(c)
  Mechanical Equipment..................  .176(a)
  Powered Industrial Trucks.............  .178
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(c), (d), (m)
  Railroad Car Blocks...................  .176(f)
  Securing..............................  .176(b)
  Standards Sources.....................  .183
Maximum Allowable Concentration:
  Fluorine..............................  .252(c)(5)(ii)
  Welding Contamination.................  .252(c)(1)(iii)
Means of Egress: (see Egress Means)
Mechanical Handling Equipment:
  Clearances............................  .176(a)
  Powered Industrial Trucks.............  .177(e), .178
Mechanical Power Presses:
  Air Controlling Equipment.............  .217(b)(10)
  Brakes, Friction......................  .217(b)(2)
  Clearances, Work Area.................  .217(f)(3)
  Clutches:
    Full Revolution.....................  .217(b)(3)
    Part Revolution.....................  .217(b)(7)
  Definitions...........................  .211(d)
  Dies..................................  .217(d)
  Effective Dates.......................  .220
  Electrical Controls...................  .217(b)(8)
  Excluded Machines.....................  .217(a)(5)
  Foot Pedals...........................  .217(b)(4)
  Guarding..............................  .217(b)
  Guide Posts...........................  .217(d)(4)
  Hand Feeding Tools....................  .217(c)(4)
  Hazards:
    Guide Posts.........................  .217(d)(4)
    Personnel...........................  .217(b)(1)
  Hydraulic Equipment...................  .217(b)(11)
  Inspection, Records...................  .217(e)(1)
  Instructions..........................  .217(f)(2)
  Lever, Hand-Operated..................  .217(b)(5)
  Maintenance:
    Records.............................  .217(e)(1)
    Training Personnel..................  .217(e)(3)
  Modifications.........................  .217(a)(4), (e)(2)
  Operating Instructions................  .217(f)(2)
    Overloading.........................  .217(f)(4)
    Point of Operation..................  .217(c)
  Pressure Vessels......................  .217(b)(12)
  Slide Counterbalances.................  .217(b)(9)
    Air.................................  .217(b)(9)(iii)-(v)
    Spring..............................  .217(b)(9)(i), (ii)
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
  Training Maintenance Personnel........  .217(e)(3)
  Treadles..............................  .217(b)(4)
  Trips, Two-Hand.......................  .217(b)(6)
  Unitized Tooling......................  .217(d)(5)
Mechanical Power Transmission Apparatus.  .219
  Bearings..............................  .219(j), (p)(3)
  Belts:
    Care................................  .219(p)(6)
    Fasteners...........................  .219(l)(4)
    Perches.............................  .219(l)(3)
    Shifters............................  .219(l)(1)
    Shippers............................  .219(l)(2)
  Chains................................  .219(f)
  Clutches..............................  .219(k), (l)
  Collars...............................  .219(i)
  Couplings.............................  .219(i), (k)(1)
  Cutoff Couplings......................  .219(k)(1)
  Definitions...........................  .211(f)
  Drives:
    Belt, Rope, and Chain...............  .219(e)
    Friction............................  .219(g)
  Effective Dates.......................  .220
  Engine Rooms..........................  .219(k)(2)
  Equipment Care........................  .219(p)
  Excluded Apparatus....................  .219(a)(1)
  Gears.................................  .219(f)
  Guarding..............................  .219
  Guards:
    Disks...............................  .219(m)(1)
    Horizontal Overhead:
      Belts.............................  .219(o)(3)
      Rope and Chain Drives.............  .219(o)(4)
    Materials...........................  .219(m)(1), (o)
    Prime Mover.........................  .219(b)
    Shields.............................  .219(m)(2)
    Standard............................  .219(m)
        Manufacturing Methods...........  .219(m)(2)
        Materials.......................  .219(m)(1)
    Toeboards...........................  .219(o)(5)
    U-Guards............................  .219(m)(3)
    Wooden..............................  .219(o)(2)
  Hangers...............................  .219(p)(4)
  Keys..................................  .219(h)
  Located in Basements, Towers, and       .219(c)(5)
   Rooms.
  Personnel Protection..................  .219(p)(7)
  Prime Mover Guards:
    Connecting Rods.....................  .219(b)(2)
    Cranks..............................  .219(b)(2)
    Extension Piston Rods...............  .219(b)(3)
    Flywheels...........................  .219(b)(1)
    Tail Rods...........................  .219(b)(3)
  Projections...........................  .219(h)

[[Page 904]]

  Pulleys...............................  .219(d), (k), (p)(5)
  Setscrews.............................  .219(h)
  Shafting..............................  .219(c)
    Care................................  .219(p)(2)
    Guarding............................  .219(c)(2), (3)
    Installation........................  .219(c)(1)
    Projecting Shafts...................  .219(c)(4)
  Sprockets.............................  .219(f)
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
  Textile Industry......................  .219(a)(3)
Medical Services: (see also First Aid     .151
 Personnel Protective Equipment).
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(j)
  First Aid.............................  .151
    Labor Camps.........................  .142(k)
    Open Surface Tanks..................  .94(d)(9)(xi)
    Pulpwood Logging....................  .266(c)(1)
    Textiles............................  .262(pp)
    Welding.............................  .252(c)(13)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(k)
  Radiation Exposure Records............  .96(n)
  Standards Sources.....................  .153
Medical Surveillance....................  .120(b)(5), (f)
Mercantile Occupancies..................  .106(d)(5)(iv)
Mercury.................................  .252(f)(10)
  Exposure Limit........................  .95(b)
Metal Cutting: (see Cutting and Welding)
Metal Ladders, Portable: (see also        .26
 Ladders, Portable Metal).
Methyl chloromethyl ether...............  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Methylene Chloride:.....................
  Permissible Exposure Limits...........  .1052(c)
  Exposure Monitoring...................  .1052(d)
  Regulated Areas.......................  .1052(e)
  Methods of Compliance.................  .1052(f)
  Respiratory Protection................  .1052(g)
  Protective Work Clothing and Equipment  .1052(h)
  Hygiene Facilities....................  .1052(i)
  Medical Surveillance..................  .1052(j)
  Hazard Communications.................  .1052(k)
  Employee Information and Training.....  .1052(l)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1052(m)
4,4-Methylenedianiline:
  Airborne Concentration................  .1050(c)
  Compliance............................  .1050(g)
  Emergency Situations..................  .1050(d)
  Hazard Communication..................  .1050(k)
  Exposure, Permissible.................  .1050(c)
  Housekeeping..........................  .1050(l)
  Hygiene Facilities and Practices......  .1050(j)
  Medical Surveillance..................  .1050(m)
  Monitoring............................  .1050(e)
  Personal Protective Equipment.........  .1050(i)
      Clothing..........................  .1050(i)
  Recordkeeping.........................  .1050(n)
  Regulated Areas.......................  .1050(f)
  Respiratory protection................  .1050(h)
Mill Roll Heights.......................  .216(a)(4)
Mills, Pulp, Paper and Paperboard (see    .261
 also Pulp, Paper and Paperboard Mills).
Mills, Rubber and Plastics Industry:
  Definitions...........................  .211(c)
  Location Protection...................  .216(d)(1)
  Roll Heights..........................  .216(a)(4)
  Safety Controls.......................  .216(b)
    Auxiliary Equipment.................  .216(b)(3)
    Safety Trip Control.................  .216(b)(1)
  Stopping Limits.......................  .216(f)(1), (2)
  Switches, Trip and Emergency..........  .216(e)
Minors:
  Ionizing Radiation Exposure...........  .96(b)(3), (c)(2), (d)(2)(ii)
Minors Employment.......................  .217(f)(4)
Mixing:
  Blasting Agents.......................  .109(g)(2), (3); (h)(3), (4)
  Explosives............................  .109(h)(3), (4)
Molding Machines........................  .213(n)
Monitoring:
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(f)
  Ionizing Radiation....................  .96(d)
Mortising Machines......................  .213(e)

[[Page 905]]

Motor Fuels.............................  .110(e)
Motor Vehicles:
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .111(f)
Motorized Hand Trucks: (see also Powered  .178
 Industrial Trucks).
Multi-piece Rim Wheels..................  .177
alpha-Napthylamine......................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    General regulated area requirements.  .1003(d)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
beta-Napthylamine.......................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    General regulated area requirements.  .1003(d)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Needle Beam Scaffolds...................  .28(n)
4-Nitrobiphenyl.........................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
N-Nitrosodimethylamine..................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)

[[Page 906]]

    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Nitrous Oxide...........................  .105
  Administrative Controls...............  .95(b)(1)
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Engineering Controls..................  .95(b)(1)
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
Noise Exposure..........................  .95
  Effective Dates.......................  .98
  Personal Protective Equipment.........  .95(b)(1), (c), (i), (j)
  Pulpwood Logging......................  .266(c)(1)(vi)
  Standards Sources.....................  .99
Nonionizing Radiation...................  .97
  Effective Dates.......................  .98
  Electromagnetic Radiation.............  .97(a)
  Standards Sources.....................  .99
Nonpotable Water........................  .120(n)(2)
Noxious Gases, Storage Areas............  .178(i)
Nozzles:
  Abrasive Blasting.....................  .94(a)(2)(iii), .244(b)
  Gasoline..............................  .106(g)(3)(vi)
  Standpipe.............................  .158(c)(4)
Occupant Load...........................  .37(d)
Occupational Noise Exposure: (see Noise
 Exposure)
Odorizing Gases.........................  .110(b)(1)
Open-Sided Floors.......................  .23(c)
Open Surface Tanks: (see Tanks: Open
 Surface)
Openings: (see also Floor Openings        .23
 (Holes), Wall Openings (Holes)).
  Tanks:
    Inside..............................  .106(b)(4)(iv)
Organic Peroxide Coatings: (see also      .107(m)
 Dual Component Coatings).
Outdoor Storage:
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .106(d)(6)
Outlet Headers, welding.................  .253(c)(4)
  Protective Equipment..................  .253(e)(4)
Outrigger Scaffolds.....................  .28(e)
Outside Storage Trucks..................  .178(c)(2)(ix), (xi)
Ovens...................................  .263(l)
  Direct-Fire...........................  .263(l)(10)
  Direct Recirculating..................  .263(l)(11)
  Electrical Heating Equipment..........  .263(l)(8)
  General Requirements..................  .263(l)(9)
  Indirect Recirculating................  .263(l)(15)
  Location..............................  .263(l)(1)
  Mechanical Parts......................  .263(l)(3)
Overflow Pipes, Dip Tanks...............  .108(c)(2)
Overhead Cranes: (see also Overhead and   .179
 Gantry Cranes).
Overhead and Gantry Cranes:
  Access................................  .179(c)(2)
  Adjustments...........................  .179(l)(3)
  Brakes................................  .179(f)
  Bridge Bumpers........................  .179(e)(2)
  Cabs..................................  .179(c)
  Clearances............................  .179(b)(6)
  Effective Dates.......................  .179(b)(2), .182
  Electric Equipment....................  .179(g)
  Fire Extinguishers....................  .179(c)(3), (o)(3)
  Footwalks.............................  .179(d)
  Guards................................  .179(e)(5), (6)
  Handrails.............................  .179(d)(3), (4)(ii)
  Hoisting Equipment....................  .179(h)
  Hoisting Rope Guards..................  .179(e)(5)
  Inspections...........................  .179(j), (m)
  Ladders...............................  .179(d)(4)
  Lighting..............................  .179(c)(4)
  Load Handling.........................  .179(n)
  Maintenance...........................  .179(l)
  Modifications.........................  .179(b)(3)
  Moving Part Guards....................  .179(e)(6)
  Rail Clamps...........................  .179(b)(4)
  Rail Sweeps...........................  .179(e)(4)
  Rated Load:
    Markings............................  .179(b)(5)
    Tests...............................  .179(k)(2)
  Repairs...............................  .179(l)(3)
  Rope inspection.......................  .179(m)
  Stairways.............................  .179(d)(4)
  Standards Sources.....................  .183
  Testing...............................  .179(k)
  Toeboards.............................  .179(d)(3)
  Trolley Bumpers.......................  .179(e)(3)
  Trolley Stops.........................  .179(e)(1)
  Warning Devices.......................  .179(i)
  Wind Indicators.......................  .179(b)(4)
Overhead Wires:
  Cranes................................  .180(j)(4)
  Derricks..............................  .181(j)(5)(iv)
Overspray Collectors....................  .107(b)(6)

[[Page 907]]

Oxygen: (see also Bulk Oxygen Systems)..  .104
  Deficiency............................  .94(d)(9)(vi), (11)(iii)
  Effective Dates.......................  .114
  Standards Sources.....................  .115
  Storage...............................  .252(a)(2)(iv)
Oxygen-Fuel Gas Systems.................  .253
  Outlet Headers........................  .253(c)(4)
  Piping Systems........................  .253(d)
  Protective Equipment..................  .253(e)
Oxygen Manifolds:
  High Pressure.........................  .253(c)(2)
  Low Pressure..........................  .253(c)(3)
Painters' Stepladders...................  .25(c)(4)(ii)
Paints:
  Color Code............................  .144
  Fire Retardant........................  .37(o)
Paper and Paperboard Mills: (see also     .261
 Pulp, Paper and Paperboard Mills).
Passageways, Working Surfaces...........  .22(b)
Permissible Exposure Limits.............  .1000
Personal Protection: (see also Personal   .94(d)(9), .219(p)(7)
 Protective Equipment).
Personal Protective Equipment: (see also
 Lifelines, and Other Terms Listed
 Below)
  Abrasive Blasting.....................  .94(a)(5)
  Asbestos Exposure.....................  .1001(d)
    Clothing............................  .1001(d)(3)
  Bloodborne pathogens, exposure to, use  .1030(c)(2)(ii), (d) (2)(i)
   of ppe.                                 and (3)
  Electrical Protective Equipment.......  .137, .268(f)
  Electrical safety-related work          .333(c)(2), .335(a)
   practices, use of ppe.
  Emergency Showers and Fountains:
    Open Surface Tanks..................  .94(d)(9)
    Pulp, Paper and Paperboard Mills....  .261(g)(5), (18)
  Eye Protection........................  .133
  Face Protection.......................  .133
  Fire Brigades.........................  .156
  Foot Protection.......................  .136
  General Requirements..................  .132
  Hand protection.......................  .138
  Hazardous Waste Operations............  .120(g)
  Head Protection.......................  .135
  Noise Exposure........................  .95(b)(1)
  Open Surface Tanks....................  .94(d)(9)
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(g)(2), (i)(4), (k)(3)
  Pulpwood Logging......................  .266(c)(1)(i)-(v)
  Respiratory Protection................  .134
  Textiles..............................  .262(qq)
  Welding...............................  .252-.257
    Booths..............................  .252(b)(2)(iii)
    Cable...............................  .252(b)(1)(ii)
    Clothing............................  .252(b)(3)
    Eye Protection......................  .252(b)(2)
    Helmets.............................  .252(b)(2)
    Railing.............................  .252(b)(1)(i)
    Shade Numbers, Lenses...............  .252(b)(2)(ii)(H), (b)
Physical Hazards Markings: (see also      .144
 Color Codes, Physical Hazards:
 Markings).
  Effective Dates.......................  .149
  Standards Sources.....................  .150
Piers and Wharves: (see also Wharves)
  Trucks Used...........................  .178(c)(2)(x)
Pipes:
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(c)(2)
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .107(e)(6)
  Overflow..............................  .108(c)(2)
Piping: (see Piping, Fittings and
 Tubing; Piping, Valves and Tubing)
Piping, Fittings and Tubing:
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .111(b)(7)
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(5)
  Gaseous Hydrogen Systems..............  .103(b)(1)(ii), (iii)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(1)(iv), (v)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(8)
  Safety Relief Devices.................  .103(b)(1)(ii), (c)(1)(iv)
Piping Systems, Oxygen-Fuel.............  .253(d)
  Fittings..............................  .253(d)(1)
  Installation..........................  .253(d)(3)
  Painting..............................  .253(d)(4)
  Piping................................  .253(d)(1)
  Piping Joints.........................  .253(d)(2)
  Pressure Relief Devices...............  .253(e)(2)
  Protective Equipment..................  .253(e)(3), (4)
  Signs.................................  .253(d)(4)
  Station Outlets.......................  .253(e)(4)
  Testing...............................  .253(d)(5)
  X-ray Inspections.....................  .252(d)(1)(vii)
Piping, Valves, and Fittings:
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(c)
    Corrosion Protection................  .106(c)(5)
    Design..............................  .106(c)(1)
    Joints..............................  .106(c)(3)
    Materials...........................  .106(c)(2)
    Supports............................  .106(c)(4)
    Testing.............................  .106(c)(7)
    Valves..............................  .106(c)(6)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(h)(7)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(4)(ii)
Pits....................................  .23(a)(5)
  Drains................................  .110(d)(11)
Planing Machines........................  .213(n)
Plasterers' Scaffolds...................  .28(o)
Plastics Industry: (see also Mills,
 Rubber and Plastics Industry)
  Auxiliary Equipment...................  .216(a)(3)
  Effective Dates.......................  .216(a)(1), (2), .220

[[Page 908]]

  Installations:
    Existing............................  .216(a)(2)
    New.................................  .216(a)(1)
  Mills and Calenders...................  .216
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
Platform Lift Trucks: (see also Powered   .178
 Industrial Trucks).
Platforms, Scaffolds: (see also Listings
 Under Specific Type Scaffold)
  Guarding..............................  .23(c)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(c)(3)
Pneumatic Powered Tools.................  .243(b)
  Airhoses..............................  .243(b)(2)
  Portable..............................  .243(b)(1)
Point of Operation Guarding.............  .212(a)(3), .217(c)
Polishing: (see Grinding, Polishing and
 Buffing)
Portable Fire Extinguishers: (see also    .157
 Fire Extinguishers, Portable).
Portable Metal Ladders: (see also         .26
 Ladders, Portable Metal).
Portable Stepladders: (see Stepladders,
 Portable)
Portable Tank Storage: (see Tank
 Storage, Portable)
Portable Tanks: (see Tanks, Portable)
Portable Tools: (see also Powered Tools,  .244
 Hand and Portable).
Portable Welding Machines: (see Welding
 Machines, Portable)
Portable Wood Ladders: (see also          .25
 Ladders, Portable Wood).
Powder Coatings.........................  .107(l)
Power Presses, Mechanical: (see
 Mechanical Power Presses)
Powered Industrial Trucks:
  Approval Labels.......................  .178(a)(3), (7)
  Batteries.............................  .178(g)
  Combustible Dusts.....................  .178(c)(2)(vi)
  Conversion............................  .178(d), (q)(12)
  Design and Construction...............  .178(a)(2)
  Designated Locations..................  .178(c)(1)
  Designations, Trucks:
    D...................................  .178(b)(1)
    DS..................................  .178(b)(2)
    DY..................................  .178(b)(3)
    E...................................  .178(b)(4)
    ES..................................  .178(b)(5)
    EE..................................  .178(b)(6)
    EX..................................  .178(b)(7)
    G...................................  .178(b)(8)
    GS..................................  .178(b)(9)
    LP..................................  .178(b)(10)
    LPS.................................  .178(b)(11)
  Effective Dates.......................  .182
  Fire Protection.......................  .178(a)(1)
  Front End Attachments.................  .178(a)(5)
  Fuel Handling.........................  .178(f)
  Gases and Fumes.......................  .178(i)
  Grain Handling........................  .178(c)(2)(vi), (b)
  Hazardous Materials...................  .178(c)(2)
  Lighting..............................  .178(h)
  Loading...............................  .178(o)
  Maintenance...........................  .178(q)
  Markings..............................  .178(a)(6)
  Modifications.........................  .178(a)(4)
  Operations............................  .178(p)
  Repairs...............................  .178(q)
  Safety Guards.........................  .178(e)
  Standards Sources.....................  .183
  Training Operators....................  .178(l)
  Traveling.............................  .178(n)
  Truck Operations......................  .178(m)
Powered Platforms.......................  .66-.70
  Access................................  .66(f)(3) (i)(K), (ii)(D),
                                           (iii)(C)(2), (f)(5)(ii)(J)
  Application...........................  .66(b)
  Buildings, affected parts.............  .66(e)
  Definitions...........................  .66(d)
  Electrical............................  .66(e)(11), (f)(8)
  Equipment.............................  .66(f)
  Fall Arrest systems...................  66(f)(5)(ii)(L), (M),
                                           (iii)(B), (j), App. C
  Hoisting Equipment....................  .66(f)(4), (g)(6)
  Inspections...........................  .66(g)
  Lockout...............................  .66(f)(3)(i)(J)
  Maintenance...........................  .66(e)(5), (10), (g), (h)
  Manlifts..............................  .68
  Reshackling Hoists....................  .66(h)(4)
  Ropes.................................  .66(f)(7), (g)(5), (h)(3), (4)
  Standards Sources.....................  .69
  Tests.................................  .66(g)
  Vehicle-Mounted.......................  .67
Powered Tools, Hand and Portable:
  Abrasive Wheels.......................  .243(c)
  Compressed Air Cleaning...............  .242(b)
  Definitions...........................  .241
  Effective Dates.......................  .245
  Employees.............................  .242(a)
  Explosive Actuated Fastening..........  .243(d)
  Guarding..............................  .243
  Lawn Mowers, Power....................  .243(e)
  Pneumatic Powered.....................  .243(b)
  Standards Sources.....................  .246
  Woodworking...........................  .243(a)
Presses: (see also Mechanical Power
 Presses)
  Cold Trimming.........................  .218(g)(2)
  Forging...............................  .218(f)
  Hot Trimming..........................  .218(g)(2)
  Hydraulic Forging.....................  .218(f)(2)
  Trimming..............................  .218(g)

[[Page 909]]

Pressure Gages, Air Receivers...........  .169(b)(3)
Pressure Vessels........................  .106(b)(1)(v), .217(b)(12)
  Chemical Plants.......................  .106(i)(3)
  Distilleries..........................  .106(i)(3)
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .216(g)(16), (17)
  Refineries............................  .106(i)(3)
Pressures: (see Safety Relief Devices)
Prime Mover Guards......................  .219(b)
Primers, Ammunition.....................  .109(j)(4)
Process safety management of highly       .119
 hazardous chemicals (see Chemicals,
 etc.).
Processing Plants, Flammable and          .106(h)
 Combustible Liquids.
  Application...........................  .106(h)(1)
  Buildings.............................  .106(h)(3)
  Fire Protection.......................  .106(h)(6)
  Housekeeping..........................  .106(h)(8)
  Ignition Sources......................  .106(h)(7)
  Liquid Handling.......................  .106(h)(4)
  Loading...............................  .106(h)(5)
  Location..............................  .106(h)(2)
  Maintenance...........................  .106(h)(8)
Profile Lathes..........................  .213(o)
Projections.............................  .219(h)
beta-Propiolactone......................  .1003
  Area requirements.....................  .1003(c)
    Closed system operation.............  .1003(c)(2)
    Isolated systems....................  .1003(c)(1)
    Maintenance and decontamination       .1003(c)(5)
     activities.
    Open-vessel system operations.......  .1003(c)(3)
    Transfer from a closed operation....  .1003(c)(4)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1003(g)
    Examinations........................  .1003(g)(1)
    Records.............................  .1003(g)(2)
  Regulated area requirements...........  .1003(d)
    Contamination control...............  .1003(d)(4)
    Emergencies.........................  .1003(d)(2)
    Hygiene facilities and practices....  .1003(d)(3)
  Reports...............................  .1003(f)
    Incidents...........................  .1003(f)(2)
    Operations..........................  .1003(f)(1)
  Signs, information, and training......  .1003(e)
    Container contents identification...  .1003(e)(2)
    Lettering...........................  .1003(e)(3)
    Prohibited statements...............  .1003(e)(4)
    Signs...............................  .1003(e)(1)
    Training and indoctrination.........  .1003(e)(5)
Protective Clothing: (see Clothing,
 Protective and Personal Protective
 Equipment)
Protective Equipment, Piping: (see also   .253(e)
 Personal Protective Equipment).
  Hoses and Connections.................  .253(5)
  Pressure-Reducing Regulations.........  .253(6)
  Stations Outlet.......................  .253(4)
Pulleys.................................  .219(d), (k), (p)(5)
Pulp, Paper and Paperboard Mills:
  Barking Devices.......................  .261(c)(12)
  Belt Conveyors........................  .261(c)(15)
  Bleaching.............................  .261(h)
  Bridge or Dock Plates.................  .261(c)(11)
  Chemical Processes....................  .261(g)
  Cranes................................  .261(c)(8)
  Finishing Rooms.......................  .261(1)
  Hand Tools............................  .261(c)(13)
  Handling..............................  .261(c), (d)
  Lighting..............................  .261(b)(2), (c)(10), (k)(21)
  Lockouts..............................  .261(b)(1)
  Machine Rooms.........................  .261(k)
  Materials Handling....................  .261(m)
  Mechanical Pulp Processes.............  .261(i)
  Personal Protective Equipment.........  .261(d)(1)
  Pulpwood:
    Preparation.........................  .261(e)
    Removal.............................  .261(c)(14)
  Rags and Old Paper....................  .261(f)
  Safe Practices........................  .261(b)
  Signs:
    Conveyors...........................  .261(c)(16)
    Traffic.............................  .261(c)(9)
  Standards Sources.....................  .261(a)(3), (4); .268
  Stock Preparation.....................  .261(j)
  Storage...............................  .261(c), (d)
    Chocking Rolls......................  .261(d)(4)
    Clearances..........................  .261(d)(2)
    Piling..............................  .261(d)(3)
  Traffic Warning Signs.................  .261(c)(9)
Pulpwood Logging........................  .266
  Chain Saw Operations..................  .266(e)(2)
  Chipping..............................  .266(h)(4)
  Environmental Conditions..............  .266(d)(5)
  Explosives............................  .266(d)(10)
  First Aid.............................  .266(d)(2), (i)(7), App. A,
                                           App. B
  Hand and Portable Powered Tools.......  .266(e)
  Harvesting............................  .266(h)
    Bucking.............................  .266(h)(3)
    Felling.............................  .266(h)(2)
    Limbing.............................  .266(h)(3)

[[Page 910]]

  Loading                                 .266(h)(6)
  Machines for Moving Materials.........  .266(f)
    designated operator.................  .266(f)(2)
    FOPS/ROPS...........................  .266(f)(3)
    overhead guard......................  .266(f)(4)
    machine access......................  .266(f)(5)
    exhaust system......................  .266(f)(6)
    brakes..............................  .266(f)(7)
    guarding............................  .266(f)(8)
  Personal Protective Equipment.........  .266(d)(1)
  Seat Belts............................  .266(d)(3)
  Storage...............................  .266(h)(8)
  Training..............................  .266((i)
    frequency...........................  .266(i)(2)
    content.............................  .266(i)(3)
    first-aid...........................  .266(i)(7)
    designated trainer..................  .266(i)(8)
    certification.......................  .266(i)(10)
    meetings............................  .266(i)(11)
  Vehicles..............................  .266(g)
    maintenance.........................  .266(g)(1)
    inspection..........................  .266(g)(2)
    instructions........................  .266(g)(3)
  Work Areas............................  .266(d)(6)
Pumps, Gasoline: (see also Service        .106(g)(3), (4)
 Stations).
Pyrotechnics............................  .109(k), .119
Radial Saws.............................  .213(h)
Radiation:
  Ionizing..............................  .96
  Nonionizing...........................  .97
Radioactive Materials:
  Packaged..............................  .96(h)
  Storage...............................  .96(j)
Rail Clamps.............................  .179(b)(4), .180(i)(1)
Rail Sweeps.............................  .179(e)(4)
Railroad Cars...........................  .176, .178(k)(2)-(4)
  Explosives............................  .109(f)
Ramps:
  Egress................................  .37(j)
Rated Load Markings:
  Cranes................................  .179(b)(5)
  Derricks..............................  .181(c)(2)
Rated Load Test:
  Crawler, Locomotive, and Truck Cranes.  .180(e)(2)
  Overhead and Gantry Cranes............  .179(k)(2)
Recordkeeping:
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(i), (j)(6)
  Bloodborne pathogens, exposure to.....  .1030(f)(6), (h)
  Building Inspection, assurance for      .66(c)
   powered platform use.
  Communicable Diseases.................  .142(l)(1) and (2)
  Cranes:
    Crawler, Locomotive and Truck.......  .180(d)(2) and (6), (e)(2),
                                           (g)(i) and (2)
    Overhead and Gantry.................  .179(k)(2), (m)(1) and (2)
  Derricks..............................  .181(g)(1) and (3)
  Forging Equipment Inspection..........  .218(a)(2)
  Hazardous Waste Operations............  .120(f)(7)
  Injury Reporting, Welding.............  .252(c)(13)
  Ionizing Radiation Exposure...........  .96(m), (o)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(l)(1) and (2)
  Liquid Storage Tanks, Class I.........  .106(g)(1)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(e)(3)
  Mechanical Power Presses..............  .217(e)(1)
  Personal Monitoring:
    Asbestos............................  .1001(i)(1)
    Ionizing Radiation..................  .96(n)
  Power Presses Inspection..............  .217(e)(1)
  Powered Platforms Inspection..........  .66(g)
  Radiation Exposure....................  .96(b)(2)(iii), (m)(1), (n),
                                           (o)(1)
  Records, Disclosure, Ionizing           .96(o)(1)
   Radiation.
  Respirators...........................  .134(e)(2), (f)(2)(iv)
  Welding Operations....................  .252(c)(13), .255(e)
Records:
  Asbestos..............................  .93a(i), (j)(6)
  Ionizing Radiation....................  .96(m), (n)
  Mechanical Power Presses..............  .217(e)(1)
Refineries, Chemical Plants and           .106(i)
 Distilleries.
  Application...........................  .106(j)
  Fire Protection.......................  .106(i)(5)
  Pressure Vessels......................  .106(i)(3)
  Process Unit Location.................  .106(i)(4)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(i)(1)
  Wharves...............................  .106(i)(2)
Refrigerated Containers:
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .111(d)
Refueling:
  Cranes................................  .180(i)(4)
  Derricks..............................  .181(j)(4)
  Trucks................................  .178(p)(2)
Refuse:
  Disposal..............................  .142(h)
  Receptacles...........................  .141(a)(4)
Relief Devices: (see Safety Relief
 Devices)
Remote Gas Pumping Systems..............  .106(g)(3)(v)
Residue Disposal: (see Waste Disposal)
Resistance Welding Equipment............  .255(c)

[[Page 911]]

  Capacitor Discharge Welding...........  .255(b)(2)
  Disconnecting Means...................  .306(d)(2)
  Foot Switches.........................  .255(b)(6)
  Grounding.............................  .255(b)(9)
  Guarding..............................  .255(a)(4), (b)(4)
  Installation..........................  .255(a)(1)
  Interlocks............................  .255(b)(3)
  Safety Pins...........................  .255(b)(8)
  Shields...............................  .255(b)(5)
  Spot and Seam Welding.................  .255(b)
  Stop Buttons..........................  .255(b)(7)
  Thermal Protection....................  .255(a)(2)
Resistors:
  Cranes................................  .179(g)(4)
Respirators: (see also Gas Mask           .134
 Canisters).
  Abrasive Blasting.....................  .94 (a)(1)(ii), (a)(5)
  Air Supply............................  .94(a)(6), .134(d)
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(d)(1), (2)
  Cleaning..............................  .134(b)(5), (f)(3)
  Color Codes...........................  .134(g)(6)
  Employer Provided.....................  .134(a)(2)
  Fire brigades.........................  .156(f)
  Identification........................  .134(g)
  Inspection............................  .134(b)(7), (f)
  Labeling..............................  .134(g)
  Maintenance...........................  .134(f)
  Minimum Acceptable Program............  .134(b)
  Open Surface Tanks....................  .94(d)(9)(vi)
  Positive-pressure.....................  .156(f)(2)
  Pulp, and Paper Mills.................  .261(g)(2), (6), (10),
                                           (15)(ii)
  Repairs...............................  .134(f)(4)
  Selection.............................  .134(c)
  Storage...............................  .134(b)(6), (f)(5)
  Training..............................  .134(b)(3)
  Use...................................  .134(e)
  Welding...............................  .252(c)(4)(ii), (iii);
                                           (5)(ii); (7)(ii); (8); (9);
                                           (10)
Respiratory Protection: (see also         .134
 Respirators).
  Air Quality...........................  .94(a)(6), .134(d)
  Air Supply............................  .94(a)(6), .134(d)
  Fire brigades.........................  .156(f)
  Fit testing...........................  .1001(g)(4), App. C,
                                           .1025(f)(3), App. D,
                                           .1028(g)(5), App. E,
                                           .1048(g)(3)(ii), App. E
  Gas Mask Canister Identification......  .134(g)
  Minimum Acceptable Program............  .134(b)
  Permissible Practices.................  .134(a)(1)
  Respirators...........................  .134(a)(2), (b), (c), (e)
  Use...................................  .134(e)(5)
Right to know...........................  .1200
Rim wheels, multi-piece.................  .177
Ring Test...............................  .215(d)(1)
Ripsaws.................................  .213(c), .214(d)
Risers, Open............................  .24(j)
Rodent Control..........................  .141(a)(5)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(j)
Roll Coatings...........................  .108(h)(4)
Rolling Scaffolds: (see Work Platforms,
 Mobile).
Roofing Brackets........................  .28(s)
  Catch Platforms.......................  .28(s)(3)
  Construction..........................  .28(s)(1)
  Supports..............................  .28(s)(2)
Rope Inspections:
  Cranes................................  .179(m), .180(g)
  Derricks..............................  .181(g)
Ropes:
  Cranes................................  .179(m), .180(g)
    Hoists..............................  .179(h)(2)
    Inspections.........................  .179(m), .180(g)
    Running.............................  .179(m)(1)
  Derricks..............................  .181(g)
    Idle Ropes..........................  .181(g)(3)
    Limited Travel......................  .181(g)(2)
    Nonrotating Ropes...................  .181(g)(4)
    Running.............................  .181(g)(1)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(f)(7), (g)(5), (h)(3), (4)
Rotary Lawn Mowers......................  .243(e)(1), (4)
Rotating Work Platforms: (see also        .67
 Vehicle-Mounted Work Platforms).
Rubber Industry: (see also Mills, Rubber
 and Plastics Industry)
  Auxiliary Equipment...................  .216(a)(3), (b)(3)
  Effective Dates.......................  .216(a)(1), (2); .220
  Installations:
    Existing............................  .216(a)(2)
    New.................................  .216(a)(1)
  Mills and Calenders...................  .216
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
Rubber Protective Equipment.............  .221
Rung Ladders, Portable..................  .25(c)(3)
Running Ropes:
  Cranes................................  .179(m)(1), .180(g)(1)
  Derricks..............................  .181(g)(1)
Runway Conductors:
  Cranes................................  .179(g)(6)
Runway Protection.......................  .23(c)
Safety Belts: (see also Lifelines)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(f)(5(ii), (L), (M),
                                           (iii)(B), (j), App. C
  Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Mills.....  .261(g)(4), (15)
  Scaffolding...........................  .28(j)(4), (n)(8), (s)(3),
                                           (t)(2),(u)(6)

[[Page 912]]

  Tanks.................................  .94(d)(11)(v)
  Welding...............................  .252(b)(4)(iv)
Safety Color Codes:
  Effective Dates.......................  .149
  Standards Sources.....................  .147
Safety Devices:
  Ladders...............................  .27(d)(5)
Safety Guard Design, Abrasive Wheel       .215(a)(2), (b)(10)-(12)
 Machinery.
Safety Instruction Signs................  .145(c)(3), (d)(6)
Safety Relief Devices:
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(6), (7)(ii)
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .107(e)(8)
  Gaseous Hydrogen Systems..............  .103(b)(1)(ii)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(1)(iv)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(10), (c)(7), (d)(4),
                                           (e)(7), (g)(7), (h)(4)
  Non-DOT Containers....................  .110(d)(4)
  Spraying..............................  .107(e)(8)
Safety-Toe Footwear: (see Foot
 Protection)
Sanding Machines........................  .213(p), .243(a)(3)
Sanitation..............................  .141
  Application...........................  .141(a)(1)
  Change Rooms..........................  .141(e)
  Effective Dates.......................  .149
  Food Handling.........................  .141(h)
  Hazardous Waste Operations............  .120(b)(13), (n)
  Housekeeping..........................  .141(a)(3)
  Insect Control........................  .141(a)(5)
  Lunchrooms............................  .141(g)
  Rodent Control........................  .141(a)(5)
  Sawmills..............................  .265(h)
  Standards Sources.....................  .150
  Toilet Facilities.....................  .141(c)
  Vermin Control........................  .141(a)(5)
  Washing Facilities....................  .141(d)
  Waste Disposal........................  .141(a)(4)
  Water Supply..........................  .141(b)
Sawmills:
  Bins, Bunkers, Hoppers, and Fuel        .265(c)(23)
   Houses.
    Lighting............................  .265(c)(23)(iii)
    Loading Bins........................  .265(c)(23)(ii)
  Blower Systems........................  .265(c)(20)
  Building Facilities...................  .265(c)
    Docks...............................  .265(c)(4)
    Emergency Exits.....................  .265(c)(6)
    Fire Escapes........................  .265(c)(6)
    Floors..............................  .265(c)(3)
    Lighting............................  .265(c)(9)
    Platforms...........................  .265(c)(4)
    Stairways...........................  .265(c)(5)
      Handrails.........................  .265(c)(5)(ii)
      Lighting..........................  .265(c)(5)(iii)
    Tanks...............................  .265(c)(8)
    Vats................................  .265(c)(8)
    Walkways............................  .265(c)(4)
    Work Areas..........................  .265(c)(2)
  Burners...............................  .265(c)(29)
  Chippers..............................  .265(c)(21)
  Conveyors.............................  .265(c)(18)
  Definitions...........................  .265(b)
  Effective Dates.......................  .265(j)
  Exhaust Systems.......................  .265(c)(20)
  Gas Piping and Appliances.............  .265(c)(15)
  General Requirements..................  .265(a)
  Hydraulic Systems.....................  .265(c)(13)
  Kilns, Dry............................  .265(f)
  Log Breakdown.........................  .265(e)
  Log Handling, Sorting, and Storage....  .265(d)
    Barking Devices.....................  .265(d)(4)
    Log Decks...........................  .265(d)(3)
    Storage Areas.......................  .265(d)(2)
    Unloading...........................  .265(d)(1)
    Unloading Areas.....................  .265(d)(2)
  Lumber:
    Loading.............................  .265(c)(28)
    Piling..............................  .265(c)(27)
    Storage.............................  .265(c)(27)
  Marking Physical Hazards..............  .265(c)(11)
  Refuse Removal........................  .265(c)(20)(vi)
  Ropes, Cables, Slings, and Chains.....  .265(c)(24)
  Stackers and Unstackers...............  .265(c)(26)
  Standards Sources.....................  .265(a)(2), (j); .268
  Traffic Control.......................  .265(c)(31)
  Tramways..............................  .265(c)(19)
  Trestles..............................  .265(c)(19)
  Vehicles..............................  .265(c)(30)
Saws:
  Band..................................  .213(i)
  Band Resaws...........................  .213(i)
  Circular..............................  .213(f); .243(a)(1)
  Circular Resaws.......................  .213(e)
  Cracked...............................  .243(a)(4)
  Cylindrical Saws......................  .214(c)
  Drag..................................  .213(r)
  Forging Machines......................  .218(j)(2)
  Heading Bolt..........................  .214(a), (c)
  Inspection............................  .213(s)
  Radial................................  .213(h)
  Ripsaws...............................  .213(c)
  Swing Cutoff..........................  .213(g)
  Table.................................  .213(d)
Scaffolding: (see also Scaffolds)
  Safety Requirements...................  .28
Scaffolds: (see also Ladder Stands
 Listings by Names of Scaffolds)
  Boatswain's Chair.....................  .28(j)
  Bricklayers' Square...................  .28(l)
  Carpenters' Bracket...................  .28(k)
  Chicken Ladders.......................  .28(t)
  Coupler, Mobile.......................  .29(d)
  Crawling Boards.......................  .28(t)
  Decorators'...........................  .28(o)

[[Page 913]]

  Float.................................  .28(u)
  Horse.................................  .28(m)
  Interior Hung.........................  .28(p)
  Ladder-Jack...........................  .28(q)
  Masons' Adjustable Multiple-Point       .28(f)
   Suspension.
  Needle Beam...........................  .28(n)
  Outrigger.............................  .28(e)
  Plasterers'...........................  .28(o)
  Powered platforms.....................  .66
  Roofing Brackets......................  .28(s)
  Ship..................................  .28(u)
  Single-Point Adjustable Suspension....  .28(i)
  Stone Setters' Adjustable Multiple      .28(h)
   Point Suspension.
  Suspension............................  .28(f), (g), (h), (i)
  Swinging..............................  .28(g)
  Tube and Coupler......................  .28(c)
  Tube and Coupler, Mobile..............  .29(d)
  Tubular Welded Frame..................  .28(d), .29(b)
  Tubular Welded Sectional Folding......  .29(c)
  Two-Point Suspension..................  .28(g)
  Window-Jack...........................  .28(r)
  Wood Pole.............................  .28(b)
Scaffolds, Manual Mobile: (see also Work  .29
 Platforms, Mobile Scaffolds).
Scientific Diving (see Diving,
 Scientific
Semigantry Cranes: (see Gantry Cranes)
Separation Walls: (see also Distances
 From Hazards)
  Ammonium Nitrate......................  .109(i)(5)
Service Stations:
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(g)
  Dispensing Systems....................  .106(g)(3)
  Drainage..............................  .106(g)(7)
  Electrical Equipment..................  .106(g)(5)
  Fire Protection.......................  .106(g)(9)
  Handling..............................  .106(g)(1)
  Heating Equipment.....................  .106(g)(6)
  Ignition Sources......................  .106(g)(8)
  Marine Stations.......................  .106(g)(4)
  Multi-piece rim wheels, servicing.....  .177
  Private Stations......................  .106(g)(2)
  Storage...............................  .106(g)(1)
  Waste Disposal........................  .106(g)(7)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(h)
    Containers..........................  .110(h)(2)
      Accessories.......................  .110(h)(3)
      Capacity..........................  .110(h)(5)
      Installation......................  .110(h)(6)
      Protecting Fittings...............  .110(h)(7), (9)
      Valves............................  .110(h)(3)
    Dispensing Devices..................  .110(h)(11)
    Electrical Systems..................  .110(h)(13)
    Fire Protection.....................  .110(h)(14)
    Fittings............................  .110(h)(7)
    Piping..............................  .110(h)(7)
    Pumps...............................  .110(h)(10)
    Safety Relief Valves................  .110(h)(4)
    Truck Unloading.....................  .110(h)(8)
    Valves..............................  .110(h)(7)
Setscrews...............................  .219(h)
Sewage Disposal.........................  .142(e)
Shafting Guarding:
  Horizontal............................  .219(c)(2)
  Inclined..............................  .219(c)(3)
  Vertical..............................  .219(c)(3)
Sheaves:
  Crane Hoists..........................  .179(h)(1)
Shelters, Labor Camps: (see also          .142(b)
 Facilities, Labor Camps).
Ship Scaffolds: (see also Float           .28(u)
 Scaffolds).
Side-Rolling Ladders....................  .25(c)(5)
Signs and Tags: (see also Markings)
  Accident Prevention...................  .145
    Classification......................  .145(c)
    Definitions.........................  .145(b)
    Use Classification..................  .145(c)
  Biological Hazards....................  .145(e)(4), (f)(8)
  Caution...............................  .1001(g), .145(c)(2), (d)(4),
                                           (f)(6)
  Colors................................  .145(d)
  Danger................................  .145(c)(1), (d)(2), (e)(3),
                                           (f)(5)
  Design................................  .145(d), (f)(4)
  Effective Dates.......................  .149
  Egress Means..........................  .37(q)
  Exits.................................  .37(q)
  Gas Mask Canisters....................  .134(g)
  Hazardous materials, retention of DOT   .1201
   markings.
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(f)(7)(vi)
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(c)(9), (16)
  Radiation Warning.....................  .97(a)(3)
  Respirators...........................  .134(g)
  Safety Instruction....................  .145(c)(3), (d)(6)
  Slow-Moving Vehicles..................  .145(d)(10)
  Specifications........................  .93a(g)(ii), .145
  Standards Sources.....................  .150
  Wordings..............................  .145(e)
Single-Point Adjustable Suspension        .28(i)
 Scaffolds.
Single-Rung Ladders.....................  .25(c)(3)(ii)
  Mason's...............................  .25(c)(4)(iii)
Skylight Floor Openings.................  .23(a)(4)
Sleeping Facilities, temporary..........  .120(n)(5)
Sleeves, Rubber Insulating..............  .137
Slings..................................  .184
Slurries................................  .109(h)
Small Arms Ammunition...................  .109(j)
  Primers...............................  .109(j)(4)
  Smokeless Propellants.................  .109(j)(3)
  Storage...............................  .109(j)
Smokeless Propellants...................  .109(j)(3)

[[Page 914]]

Smoking:
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(f)(4)
  Dual Component Coatings...............  .107(m)(2)
  Explosives............................  .109(e)(1)
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .106(d)(7)(iii)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)(4)(iii)
  Spraying..............................  .107(g)(7), (l)(4)(iii),
                                           (m)(2)
Snagging Machines.......................  .215(b)(7)
Sources of Standards: (see Standards
 Sources)
Special Industries:
  Bakeries..............................  .263
  Cooperage.............................  .214
  Forging...............................  .218
  Hazardous Waste Operations............  .120
  Laundries.............................  .264
  Paper and Paperboard Mills............  .261
  Plastics Industry.....................  .216
  Pulp Mills............................  .261
  Pulpwood Logging......................  .266
  Rubber Industry.......................  .216
  Sawmills..............................  .265
  Standards Sources.....................  .268
  Textiles..............................  .219(a)(3), .262
  Woodworking...........................  .213
Spill Containment.......................  .106(d)(6)(iii)
Spot and Seam Welding Machines..........  .255(b)
Spray Booths............................  .107(b)
Spray Finishing.........................  .107
  Air Flow..............................  .94(c)(6)
  Application...........................  .107(n)
  Automobile Undercoatings..............  .107(k)
  Clean Air.............................  .94(c)(7)
  Combustible Liquids Storage...........  .107(e)
  Curing Apparatus......................  .107(j)
  Drying Apparatus......................  .107(j)
  Dual Component Coatings...............  .107(m)
  Electrical Systems....................  .107(c)
  Electrostatic Apparatus...............  .107(h), (1)
  Fire Protection.......................  .107(f)
  Flammable Liquids Storage.............  .107(e)
  Fusion Apparatus......................  .107(j)
  Ignition Sources......................  .107(c)
  Location..............................  .94(c)(2)
  Maintenance...........................  .106(g)
  Make-Up Air...........................  .94(c)(7)
  Organic Peroxide Coatings.............  .107(m)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(l)
  Spray Booths..........................  .94(c)(3), .107(b)
  Spray Rooms...........................  .94(c)(4)
  Undercoatings.........................  .107(k)
  Velocity..............................  .94(c)(6)
  Ventilation...........................  .94(c)(5), .107(d)
Spray Liquid Heaters....................  .107(e)(7)
Spraying Operations.....................  .107(g)
Sprinkler Systems:
  Egress................................  .37(m)
Sprinkler Systems, Automatic............  .159
  Acceptance tests......................  .159(c)(3)
  Design................................  .159(c)(1)
  Drainage..............................  .159(c)(7)
  Exemptions............................  .159(a)
  Hose Connections......................  .159(c)(5)
  Hydraulically Designed................  .159(c)(11)
  Maintenance...........................  .159(c)(2)
  Protection of Piping..................  .159(c)(6)
  Sprinkler Alarms......................  .159(c)(9)
  Sprinkler Spacing.....................  .159(c)(10)
  Water supply..........................  .159(c)(4)
Sprinklers
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(c)(5)
  Egress Means..........................  .37(m)
Sprockets...............................  .219(f)
Stability Margin:
  Crane Loads...........................  .180(c)(1)(i)-(iv)
Stainless Steel Cutting.................  .252(c)(12)
Stairs, Fixed Industrial................  .24
  Handrails.............................  .24(h)
  Length of Stairways...................  .24(g)
  Railings..............................  .24(h)
  Rise Angle............................  .24(e)
  Strength..............................  .24(c)
  Treads................................  .24(f)
  Vertical Clearance....................  .24(i)
  Width.................................  .24(d)
Standards Sources:
  Accident Prevention Signs and Tags....  .150
  Acetylene.............................  .115
  Air Contaminants......................  .99
  Air Receivers.........................  .169(a)(2), .170
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .115
  Asbestos..............................  .99
  Blasting Agents.......................  .115
  Color Codes...........................  .150
  Combustible Gases.....................  .115
  Combustible Liquids...................  .115
  Compressed Gas Equipment..............  .170
  Compressed Gases......................  .115
  Cranes................................  .189
  Derricks..............................  .189
  Dip Tanks.............................  .115
  Egress Means..........................  .39
  Environmental Controls................  .99, .150
  Explosives............................  .115
  First Aid.............................  .153
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .115
  Guarding Machinery....................  .221
  Hand-Held Equipment...................  .246
  Hazardous Materials...................  .115
  Hydrogen..............................  .115
  Indoor Storage........................  .189
  Ionizing Radiation....................  .99
  Labor Camps...........................  .150
  Ladders...............................  .31
  Life Safety Code......................  .39
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .115
  Machinery Guarding....................  .221
  Manlifts..............................  .69
  Materials Handling....................  .189
  Medical...............................  .153

[[Page 915]]

  Medical Services......................  .153
  Nitrous Oxide.........................  .115
  Noise Exposure........................  .99
  Nonionizing Radiation.................  .99
  Nonwater Disposal Systems.............  .150
  Occupational Health...................  .99
  Oxygen................................  .115
  Physical Hazards Markings.............  .150
  Platforms, Powered....................  .69
  Powered Industrial Trucks.............  .189
  Powered Platforms.....................  .69
  Powered Tools, Hand and Portable......  .246
  Railings..............................  .31
  Safety Color Codes....................  .150
  Sanitation............................  .150
  Signs and Tags........................  .150
  Special Industries....................  .274
  Spray Finishing.......................  .115
  Tanks, Cargo and Portable.............  .170
  Toeboards.............................  .31
  Toxic Substances......................  .1499
  Vehicle Mounted Work Platforms........  .69
  Ventilation...........................  .99
  Walking-Working Surfaces..............  .31
  Wall Openings.........................  .31
Standpipe and Hose Systems..............  .158
  Equipment.............................  .158(c)
    Hose................................  .158(c)(3)
    Hose Outlets and Connections........  .158(c)(2)
    Nozzles.............................  .158(c)(4)
    Reels and Equipment.................  .158(c)(1)
  Exceptions............................  .158(a)(2)
  Protection............................  .158(b)
  Scope and Application.................  .158(a)(1)
  Tests and Maintenance.................  .158(e)
    Acceptance Tests....................  .158(e)(1)
    Maintenance.........................  .158(e)(2)
  Water Supply..........................  .158(d)
Stands, Ladder: (see also Scaffolds;
 Work Platforms, Mobile)
Stationary Derricks: (see also Derricks)  .181
Static Sparks...........................  .219(p)(2)(ii)
Steps: (see Stairs)
Stepladders:
  Portable Metal........................  .26(a)(3)
Stepladders, Portable...................  .25(c)(2)
Sticking Machines.......................  .213(n)
Stiffleg Derricks: (see also Derricks)..  .181
Stone Setters' Adjustable Multiple-
 Point:
  Suspension Scaffolds..................  .28(h)
Stopping Limits, Mills and Calenders....  .216(f) (1)-(3)
Stops: (see also Safety Devices)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(c)(5), (6)
Storage: (see also Materials Storage:
 Storage Areas; Tank Storage: Tank
 Storage, Portable)
  Ammonium Nitrate......................  .109(i)
  Anhydrous Ammonia.....................  .111
  Blasting Agents.......................  .109(g)(5)
  Buildings.............................  .106(d)(5)
    Mercantile Occupancies..............  .106(d)(5)(iv)
    Office Occupancies..................  .106(d)(5)(iii)
    Warehouses..........................  .106(d)(5)(v)
  Clothing..............................  .107(g)(4)
  Compressed Gases......................  .101(b), .167-.168
  Containers, Bulk Oxygen...............  .104(b)(4), (6)
  Dip Tank Liquids......................  .108(d)
  Explosives............................  .109(c), (e)(2), (b)(1)
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(b), (d)
    Inside Storage Rooms................  .106(d)(4)
    Storage Inside Buildings............  .106(d)(5)
    Storage Outside Buildings...........  .106(d)(6)
  Indoor Rooms..........................  .106(d)(5)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110
  Logs..................................  .265(d)
  Lumber................................  .265(c)(27)
  Pulp and Paper Mills..................  .261(c), (d)
  Pulpwood Logging......................  .266(e)(12)
  Respirators...........................  .134(f)(5)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(1)
Storage Areas:
  Aisles and Passageways................  .176(a)
  Bridge Plates.........................  .178(j), (k)(4)
  Clearance Signs.......................  .176(e)
  Clearances............................  .176(a)
  Dockboards............................  .178(j), (k)(4)
  Drainage..............................  .176(d)
  Housekeeping..........................  .176(c)
  Lighting..............................  .178(h)
  Noxious Gases.........................  .178(i)
  Railroad Cars.........................  .178(k)(2)-(4)
  Securing..............................  .176(b)
  Trucks, Highway.......................  .178(k)(1), (3); (m)
Storage Batteries: (see Battery Changing
 and Charging)
Storage Bridge Cranes: (see Gantry
 Cranes)
Storage, Tanks: (see Tank Storage; Tank
 Storage, Portable)
Straight Ladders, Portable Metal........  .26(a)(2)
Surface Grinders........................  .215(b)(5)
Swing Frame Grinders....................  .215(b)(6)
Swing-Head Lathes.......................  .213(o)
Swinging Locomotive Cranes..............  .180(i)(6)
Swinging Scaffolds: (see also Two-Point   .28(g)
 Suspension Scaffolds).
Switches:
  Electric..............................  .305(c)

[[Page 916]]

  Cranes................................  .179(g)(5)
  Trip and Emergency....................  .216(e)
Table Saws..............................  .213(d)
Tags: (see Signs and Tags)
Tanks: (see also Cargo Tanks--Portable
 Tanks)
  Hardening.............................  .108(h)(1)
  Tempering.............................  .108(h)(1)
  Vapor Degreasing......................  .94(d)(12)
Tanks, Dip: (see also Dip Tanks)........  .108
Tanks, Storage:
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(b)
    Atmospheric Tanks...................  .106(b)(1)(iii)
    Construction........................  .106(b)(1)
    Corrosion...........................  .106(b)(1)(vi)
    Diking..............................  .106(b)(2)(vii)
    Ignition Sources....................  .106(b)(6)
    Installation:
      Above Ground, Outside.............  .106(b)(2)
      Inside Buildings..................  .106(b)(4)
      Underground.......................  .106(b)(3)
    Low Pressure Tanks..................  .106(b)(1)(iv)
    Materials...........................  .106(b)(1)(i)
    Pressure Vessels....................  .106(b)(1)(v)
    Supports............................  .106(b)(5)
    Testing.............................  .106(b)(7)
    Venting.............................  .106(b)(2)(iv), (v), (vi),
                                           (3)(iv), (4)(ii), (iii)
Tanks, Storage, Portable:
  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.....  .106(d)
    Application.........................  .106(d)(1)(i)
    Capacity............................  .106(d)(2)
    Design..............................  .106(d)(2)
    Exceptions..........................  .106(d)(1), (2)
    Fire Protection.....................  .106(d)(7)
    Indoor Storage......................  .106(d)(4), (5)
    Outdoor Storage.....................  .106(d)(6)
    Storage Cabinets....................  .106(d)(3)
Temporary Floor Openings................  .23(a)(7)
Temporary Labor Camps: (see also Labor    .142
 Camps, Temporary).
Temporing Tanks.........................  .108(h)(1)
Tenoning Machines.......................  .213(k)
Tanks, Open Surface.....................  .94(d)
Telecommunications......................  .268
Testing:
  Bulk Oxygen...........................  .104(b)(8)(v)
  Cranes................................  .179(k), .180(e)
  Derricks..............................  .18(e)
  Fire Extinguishers:                     .157(e)
  Gaseous Hydrogen Systems..............  .103(b)(1)(vi)
  Liquefied Hydrogen Systems............  .103(c)(1)(vii)
  Piping................................  .106(c)(7)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(g)
  Radiation Alarm.......................  .96(f)(3)
  Sprinkler Systems.....................  .159(c)(3)
  Standpipe and hose systems............  .158(e)
  Storage Tanks.........................  .106(b)(7)
Textiles:
  Acid Carboys..........................  .262(nn)
  Bleaching.............................  .262(p)
  Calenders.............................  .262(ee)
  Caustics..............................  .262(oo)
  Color-Mixing Room.....................  .262(kk)
  Cotton Cards..........................  .262(e)
  Cotton Combers........................  .262(j)
  Drawing Frames........................  .262(j)
  Drying Cans...........................  .262(w)
  Drying Tumblers.......................  .262(cc)
  Dyeing Jigs...........................  .262(u)
  Dye Vats..............................  .262(mm)
  Extractors............................  .262(y)
  First Aid.............................  .262(pp)
  Flat Work Ironers.....................  .262(x)
  Folders, Overhead.....................  .262(jj)
  Garnet Machines.......................  .262(f)
  Gill Boxes............................  .262(k)
  Hand Boiling Machines.................  .262(hh)
  Kiers.................................  .262(q)
  Lappers...............................  .262(m)
  Looms.................................  .262(n)
  Mercerizing Ranges....................  .262(s)
  Nip Guards............................  .262(dd)(1), (v), (z)
  Openers...............................  .262(d)
  Padders...............................  .262(v)
  Personal Protective Equipment.........  .262(qq)
  Pickers...............................  .262(d)
  Power Transmission....................  .219(a)(3)
  Printing Machines.....................  .262(dd)
  Rings Frames..........................  .262(j)
  Roll Bench............................  .262(ii)
  Rope Washers..........................  .262(bb)
  Sanforizing and Palmer Machines.......  .262(aa)
  Shearing Machines.....................  .262(o)
  Slashers..............................  .262(h)
  Slubbers..............................  .262(j)
  Spinning Mules........................  .262(g)
  Standards Sources.....................  .262(a)(2), .265(j)
  Staple Cullers........................  .262(ff)
  Tanks, Open...........................  .262(ll)
  Tenter Frames.........................  .262(t)
  Tumblers..............................  .262(cc)
  Warpers...............................  .262(i)
  Worsted Drawing.......................  .262(l)
Toe Protection: (see Foot Protection)
Toeboards:
  Cranes................................  .179(d)(3)
  Definition............................  .21(a)(9)
  Power Transmission Apparatus..........  .219(o)(5)
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66(f)(5)(i)(G)
  Walking-Working Surfaces..............  .23(a)(2), (3)(ii), (e)
Toilet Facilities: (see also Toilets)...  .141(c)
  Construction..........................  .141(c)(2), (3)
  Hazardous Waste.......................  .120(n)(3)

[[Page 917]]

  Labor Camps...........................  .142(d)
  Lavatories............................  .141(d)(2)
  Minimum Numbers.......................  .141(c)(1), (d)(2)
  Towels................................  .141(d)(3)(v)
  Washing Facilities....................  .141(e)(1)(vii), (d)
Tongs, Upsetters........................  .218(h)(4)
Tooling.................................  .217(d)(5)
Torch Valves, Welding...................  .252(a)(4)(ii)
Towels..................................  .141(d)(3)(v)
Towers, Scaffolds: (see Ladder Stands     .29
 and Scaffolds; Scaffolds; Work
 Platforms, Mobile).
Tractors: (see also Powered Industrial    .178
 Trucks).
Trailers................................  .111(d)(7)
Training Personnel......................  .96(i), .217(e)(3)
  Bloodborne pathogens, exposure to.....  .1030(e)(5), (g)(2)
  Electrical safety-related work          .332
   practices.
  Fire brigades.........................  .156
  Fire extinguishers....................  .157(g)
  Hazardous chemicals...................  .1200
  Hazardous chemicals, highly, process    .119(g)
   safety management.
  Hazardous waste operations............  .120(e), (p)(7), (q)(6)
  Respirators...........................  .134(b)(3), (e)(5)
  Telecommunications....................  .268(c)
  Truck Operators.......................  .178(l)
  Working platform operations...........  .66(i)(1)
Transmission Pipeline Welding...........  .252(d)(1)
  Construction Standards................  .252(d)(1)(v)
  Electric Shock........................  .252(d)(1)(iii)
  Field Shop Operations.................  .252(d)(1)(ii)
  Flammable Substances..................  .252(d)(1)(vi)
  Pressure Testing......................  .252(d)(1)(iv)
  X-ray Inspection......................  .252(d)(1)(vii)
Transportation:
  Blasting Agents.......................  .109(g)(6)
  Explosives............................  .109(d)
    Fire Extinguishers..................  .109(d)(2)(iii)
    Markings............................  .109(d)(2)(ii)
    Vehicles............................  .109(d)(2), (3)
Trapdoors...............................  .23(a)(5)
Traps, Air Receivers....................  .169(b)(2)
Treads, Stairs..........................  .24(f)(k)
Treadles................................  .217(b)(4)
Trestle Ladders, Portable:
  Metal.................................  .26(a)(4)
  Wood..................................  .25(c)(3)(v)
Trimming Presses........................  .218(g)
Trips, Two-Hand.........................  .217(b)(6)
Trolley Bumpers, Cranes.................  .179(e)(3)
Trolley Ladders, Portable...............  .25(c)(5)
Trolley Stops, Cranes...................  .179(e)(1)
Truck Cranes: (see Crawler, Locomotive    .180
 and Truck Cranes).
Trucks..................................  .178(k), (m)
  Forklift..............................  .261(c)(1)
  Hand..................................  .261(m)(1)
  Highway...............................  .178(k), (m)
  Powered Industrial....................  .178
Trucks, Powered Industrial: (see also     .178
 Powered Industrial Trucks).
Tube and Coupler Scaffolds..............  .28(c)
Tube and Coupler Scaffolds, Mobile......  .29(d)
Tubing: (see Piping, Fittings, and
 Tubing)
Tubular Welded Frame Scaffolds..........  .28(d)
Tubular Welded Frame Scaffolds, Mobile..  .29(b)
Tubular Welded Sectional Folding          .29(c)
 Scaffolds.
Turning Machines........................  .213(o)
Two-Point Suspension Scaffolds..........  .28(g)
Two-Section Rung Ladders................  .25(c)(3)(iii)
U-Guards................................  .219(m)(3)
Underground Storage Tanks, Flammable and  .106(b)(3)
 Combustible Liquids.
  Location..............................  .106(b)(3)(i)
  Depth and Cover.......................  .106(b)(3)(ii)
  Corrosion Protection..................  .106(b)(3)(iii)
  Vents.................................  .106(b)(3)(iv)
Unit Physical Operations................  .106(e)(3)(v)
Upsetters...............................  .218(h)
  Dies Changing.........................  .218(h)(5)
  Lockouts..............................  .218(h)(2)
  Manual Controls.......................  .218(h)(3)
  Supporting Foundations................  .218(h)(1)
  Tongs.................................  .218(h)(4)
Valves: (see also Piping, Valves, and
 Fittings)
  Air Receivers.........................  .169(b)(3)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(7)
  Non-DOT Containers....................  .110(d)(3)
Vapor Degreasing Tanks..................  .94(d)(12)
Vaporizers:
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(11)
  Liquid Hydrogen.......................  .103(c)(1)(viii)
  Liquid Oxygen.........................  .104(b)(7)
Vehicles, slow-moving, signs............  .145(d)(10)
Veneer Machinery........................  .30(c)
  Cutters...............................  .213(q), (s)(13)
Ventilation.............................  .94, .107(d)
  Abrasive Blasting.....................  .94(a)
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(c)(1)(ii)
  Bulk Oxygen Systems...................  .104(b)(3)(xii)
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(2)(iii)
  Confined Spaces.......................  .255(e)(4)(ii), (f)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(b)
  Effective Dates.......................  .98
  Electrostatic Spraying................  .107(i), .107(r)(9)
  Grinding, Polishing, and Buffing......  .94(b)
  Inside Storage Rooms..................  .106(d)(4)(iv)
  Laundries.............................  .262(c)(4)(ii), (d)(1)(ii)
  Open Surface Tanks....................  .94(d)(3)
  Powder Coatings.......................  .107(1)(2)

[[Page 918]]

  Processing Buildings..................  .106(h)(3)(iii)
  Sawmills..............................  .265(c)(7)
  Spray Finishing.......................  .94(c)(5)
  Spraying Operations...................  .94(c), .107(d)
  Exhaust Duct System...................  .107(d)(3), (7)
    Fan-Rotating Element................  .107(d)(4)
    Independent Exhaust.................  .107(d)(3)
    Room Intakes........................  .107(d)(11)
  Standards Sources.....................  .99
  Tanks, Open Surface...................  .94(d)
Venting, Tanks:
  Aboveground...........................  .106(b)(2)(iv)-(vi)
  Inside................................  .106(b)(4)(ii)
  Portable..............................  .106(d)(2)(ii)
  Underground...........................  .106(b)(3)(iv)
Vents: (see Venting)
Vermin Control..........................  .141(a)(5)
Vinyl Chloride..........................  .1017
  Emergency situations..................  .1017(i)
  Hazardous operations..................  .1017(h)
  Medical surveillance..................  .1017(k)
  Methods of compliance.................  .1017(f)
  Monitoring............................  .1017(d)
  Permissible exposure limit............  .1017(c)
  Regulated area........................  .1017(e)
  Respiratory protection................  .1017(g)
  Signs and labels......................  .1017(l)
  Training..............................  .1017(j)
Walking-Working Surfaces:
  Aisles................................  .22(b)
  Covers................................  .22(c)
  Definitions...........................  .21
  Fixed Industrial Stairs...............  .24
  Floor Loading.........................  .22(d)
  Floor Openings Guard..................  .23
  General Requirements..................  .22
  Guardrails............................  .22(c)
  Housekeeping..........................  .22(a)
  Ladders:
    Fixed...............................  .27
    Portable:
      Metal.............................  .26
      Wood..............................  .25
    Stands..............................  .29
  Passageways...........................  .22(b)
  Scaffolding Safety....................  .28
  Scaffolds (Towers)....................  .29
  Stairs, Fixed Industrial..............  .24
  Standards Sources.....................  .31
  Wall Openings Guarding................  .23
  Working Surfaces......................  .30
Wall Cranes: (see Gantry Cranes)
Wall Openings (Holes)...................  .23(b)
Warehouses:
  Ammonium Nitrate......................  .109(i)(4)
  Flammable Liquids.....................  .106(d)(5)(v)
Warning Devices and Signs: (see also
 Signs and Tags)
  Bloodborne pathogens..................  .1030(g)(1)
  Cranes................................  .179(i)
  Ionizing Radiation....................  .96(f)
  Manlifts..............................  .68(c)(7)
  Nonionizing Radiation.................  .97(a)(3)
Washing Facilities......................  .141(d), .142(f), .120(n)(6)
Waste Disposal..........................  .141(a)(4)
  Asbestos..............................  .1001(h)(2)
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(7)
  Containers............................  .141(g)(3)
  Dip Tanks.............................  .108(f)(2)
  Ionizing Radiation....................  .96(k)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(e), (h)
  Processing Plants.....................  .106(h)(8)(iii)
  Radiation.............................  .96(k)
  Service Stations......................  .106(g)(7)
  Spraying..............................  .107(g)(3)
Water Gels..............................  .109(h)
Water Spray Extinguishing Systems, Fixed  .163
Water Supply:
  Hazardous waste operations............  .120(n)
  Labor Camps...........................  .142(c)
  Nonpotable Water......................  .141(b)(2)
  Potable Water.........................  .141(b)(1)
  Sprinkler Systems.....................  .159(c)(4)
  Standpipe and Hose Systems............  .158(d)
Weather Protection Manlifts.............  .68(b)(15)
Welding: (see also Acetylene Generators;  .251-.257
 Arc Welding; Flash Welding Equipment;
 Resistance Welding Equipment; Welding
 Machines, Portable).
  Beryllium.............................  .252(c)(8)
  Cadmium...............................  .252(c)(1)(v), (9)
  Chemicals, highly hazardous, process    .119(k)
   safety management; hot-work permits.
  Cleaning Compounds....................  .252(c)(11)
  Concentrations, Maximum Allowable.....  .252(c)(1)(iii)
  Containers............................  .252(a)(3)
  Contamination.........................  .252(c)(1)(i)
  Definitions...........................  .251
  Exhaust Hoods.........................  .252(c)(3)
  Fire Protection.......................  .252(a)(2)(i), (ii), (xv)
  First Aid Equipment...................  .252(c)(13)
  Fluorine Compounds....................  .252(c)(1)(v), (5)
  Labels................................  .252(c)(1)(iv)
  Ladders, Fixed........................  .27(b)(6)
  Lead..................................  .252(c)(7)
  Liquefied Petroleum Gases.............  .110(b)(4)
  Mercury...............................  .252(c)(10)
  Piping Systems, Mechanical............  .252(d)(2)
  Personnel Protection..................  .252(b)
  Precautions...........................  .252(a)(2), .255(e)
  Prohibited Areas......................  .252(a)(2)(vi)
  Screens...............................  .252(c)(1)(ii)
  Spot and Seam.........................  .255(b)
  Stainless Steels......................  .252(c)(12)
  Supervisory Responsibility............  .252(a)(2)(xiv)

[[Page 919]]

  Transmission Pipelines................  .252(d)(1)
  Ventilation...........................  .252(c)(1)(ii), (c)(2)-(4)
  Zinc..................................  .252(c)(6)
Welding Machines, Portable..............  .255(c)
  Clevis................................  .255(c)(3)
  Counterbalance........................  .255(c)(1)
  Grounding.............................  .255(c)(6)
  Holder, Movable.......................  .255(c)(5)
  Safety Chains.........................  .255(c)(2)
  Switch Guards.........................  .255(c)(4)
Wharves:
  Bulk Plants...........................  .106(f)(4)
  Chemical Plants.......................  .106(i)(2)
  Distilleries..........................  .106(i)(2)
  Explosives............................  .109(f)
  Marine Service Stations...............  .106(g)(4)
  Refineries............................  .106(i)(2)
Wheels, Multi-Piece Rim: Servicing......  .177
Winch Heads, Derricks...................  .181(i)(5)
Wind Indicators.........................  .179(b)(4)
Window-Jack Scaffolds...................  .28(r)
  Guardrails............................  .28(r)(3)
  Use...................................  .28(r)(1), (2)
Wood Heel Turning Machines..............  .213(o)
Wood Ladders, Portable: (see also         .25
 Ladders, Portable Wood).
Wood Pole Scaffolds.....................  .28(b)
Wood Shapers............................  .213(m)
Wooden Guards...........................  .219(o)(2)
Woodworking Machinery...................  .213
  Band Saws and Resaws..................  .213(i)
  Boring Machines.......................  .213(l)
  Circular Resaws.......................  .213(e)
  Construction..........................  .213(a)
  Controls..............................  .213(b)
  Crosscut Table Saws...................  .213(d)
  Definitions...........................  .211(a)
  Drag Saws.............................  .213(r)
  Effective Dates.......................  .220
  Glue Spreaders, Roll-Type.............  .213(r)
  Hand-Fed Crosscut Table Saws..........  .213(d)
  Hand-Fed Ripsaws......................  .213(c)
  Inspection............................  .213(s)
  Jointers..............................  .213(j)
  Maintenance...........................  .213(s)
  Matching Machines.....................  .213(n)
  Molding Machines......................  .213(n)
  Mortising Machines....................  .213(l)
  Planing Machines......................  .213(n)
  Profile Lathes........................  .213(o)
  Radial Saws...........................  .213(h)
  Ripsaws...............................  .213(c)
  Sanding Machines......................  .213(p)
  Self-Fed Circular Saws................  .213(f)
  Standards Sources.....................  .221
  Sticking..............................  .213(n)
  Swing Cutoff Saws.....................  .213(g)
  Swing Head Lathes.....................  .213(o)
  Table Saws............................  .213(d)
  Tenoning Machines.....................  .213(k)
  Turning Machines......................  .213(o)
  Veneer Cutters........................  .213(q)
  Wood Heel Turning Machines............  .213(o)
  Wood Shapers..........................  .213(m)
Woodworking Tools, Portable Powered.....  .243(a)
  Belt Sanding Machines.................  .243(a)(3)
  Circular Saws.........................  .243(a)(1)
  Cracked Saws..........................  .243(a)(4)
  Dead-Man Controls.....................  .243(a)(2)
  Grounding.............................  .243(a)(5)
  Sanding Machines......................  .243(a)(3)
Work Platforms..........................  .66, .67
  Elevating and Rotating................  .67
  Powered Platforms.....................  .66
  Vehicle-Mounted.......................  .67
    Application.........................  .67(b)(1)
    Design..............................  .67(b)(2)
Work Platforms, Mobile: (see also         .29(e)
 Scaffolds).
Working Surfaces: (see also Walking-      .30
 Working Surfaces).
X-ray Inspections, Mechanical Piping      .252(d)(2)(ii)
 Systems.
Zinc....................................  .252(c)(6)
  Confined Spaces.......................  .252(c)(6)(i)
  Indoors...............................  .252(c)(6)(ii)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 921]]

<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------



  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.
  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 923]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                      (Revised as of July 1, 1998)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


29 CFR (PART 1900 TO 1910.999)

OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
                                                                  29 CFR
  (Copies of the documents listed in this table 
  are available through the Technical Data Center, 
  U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, D.C., and 
  through Regional Offices of the Occupational 
  Safety and Health Administration. For a complete 
  listing of these addresses, see the end of this 
  table.)


Agriculture Ammonia Institute--Rubber Manufacturers Association

  1400 K Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005
AAI--RMA Specifications for Anhydrous Ammonia Hose              1910.111


American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists

  P.O. Box 1937, Cincinnati, OH 45201
ACGIH Manual ``Industrial Ventilation'' (1970)....               1910.94
Threshold Limit Values and Biological Exposure                  1910.120
  Indices for 1986-87 (1986).


American Society of Agricultural Engineers (ASAE)

  2950 Niles Road, P. O. Box 229, St. Joseph, MO 
  49085
ASAE Emblem for Identifying Slow Moving Vehicles,               1910.145
  ASAE S276.2 (1968).


American National Standards Institute

  11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036 
  Telephone: (212) 642-4900
ANSI A10.2-44 Safety Code for Building                          1910.144
  Construction.
ANSI A10.3-70 Safety Requirements for Explosive-                1910.243
  Actuated Fastening Tools.
ANSI A11.1-65 (R 70) Practice for Industrial        1910.219; 1910.261; 
  Lighting.                                                     1910.265
ANSI A11.1-65 Practice for Industrial Lighting....    1910.262; 1910.265
ANSI A12.1-67 Safety Requirements for Floor and       1910.66; 1910.68; 
  Wall Openings, Railings, and Toe Boards.                      1910.261
ANSI A13.1-56 Scheme for the Identification of      1910.253; 1910.261; 
  Piping Systems.                                               1910.262
ANSI A14.1-68 Safety Code for Portable Wood                     1910.261
  Ladders, Supplemented by ANSI A14.1a-77.
ANSI A14.2-56 Safety Code for Portable Metal                    1910.261
  Ladders, Supplemented by ANSI A14.2a-77.
ANSI A14.3-56 Safety Code for Fixed Ladders.......   1910.68; 1910.179; 
                                                                1910.261

[[Page 924]]

ANSI A17.1-65 Safety Code for Elevators,                        1910.261
  Dumbwaiters and Moving Walks, Including 
  Supplements, A17.1a (1967); A17.1b (1968); 
  A17.1c (1969); A17.1d (1970).
ANSI A17.2-60 Practice for the Inspection of                    1910.261
  Elevators, Including Supplements, A17.2a (1965), 
  A17.2b (1967).
ANSI A90.1-69 Safety Standard for Manlifts........               1910.68
ANSI A92.2-69 Standard for Vehicle Mounted             1910.67; 1910.268
  Elevating and Rotating Work Platforms.
ANSI A120.1-70 Safety Code for Powered Platforms                 1910.66
  for Exterior Building Maintenance.
ANSI B7.1-70 Safety Code for the Use, Care and       1910.94; 1910.215; 
  Protection of Abrasive Wheels.                                1910.218
ANSI B15.1-53 (R 58) Safety Code for Mechanical        1910.68; 1910.261
  Power Transmission Apparatus.
ANSI B20.1-57 Safety Code for Conveyors,            1910.218; 1910.261; 
  Cableways, and Related Equipment.                             1910.265
ANSI B30.2-43 (R 52) Safety Code for Cranes,                    1910.261
  Derricks, and Hoists.
ANSI B30.2.0-67 Safety Code for Overhead and          1910.179; 1910.261
  Gantry Cranes.
ANSI B30.5-68 Safety Code for Crawler, Locomotive,    1910.180; 1910.261
  and Truck Cranes.
ANSI B30.6-69 Safety Code for Derricks............    1910.181; 1910.268
ANSI B31.1-55 Code for Pressure Piping............              1910.261
ANSI B31.1a-63 Addenda to ANSI B31.1 (1955).......              1910.261
ANSI B31.1.0-67 and Addenda B31.1.0a (1969) Code    1910.103; 1910.104; 
  for Pressure Piping.                                1910.218; 1910.261
ANSI B31.2-68 Fuel Gas Piping.....................              1910.261
ANSI B31.3-66 Petroleum Refinery Piping...........              1910.103
ANSI B31.5-66 Addenda B31.5a (1968) Refrigeration     1910.103; 1910.111
  Piping.
ANSI B56.1-69 Safety Standard for Powered             1910.178; 1910.261
  Industrial Trucks.
ANSI B57.1-65 Compressed Gas Cylinder Valve Outlet              1910.253
  and Inlet Connections.
ANSI B71.1-68 Safety Specifications for Power Lawn              1910.243
  Mowers.
ANSI B175.1-1991, Safety Requirements for                       1910.266
  Gasoline-Powered Chain Saws.
ANSI C1-71 National Electrical Code...............               1910.66
ANSI D8.1-67 Practices for Railroad Highway Grade               1910.265
  Crossing Protection.
ANSI H23.1-70 Seamless Copper Water Tube                        1910.110
  Specification.
ANSI H38.7-69 Specification for Aluminum Alloy                  1910.110
  Seamless Pipe and Seamless Extruded Tube.
ANSI J6.4-71 Standard Specification for Rubber                  1910.268
  Insulating Blankets.
ANSI J6.6-71 Standard Specification for Rubber                  1910.268
  Insulating Gloves.
ANSI K13.1-67 Identification of Gas Mask Canisters              1910.261
ANSI K61.1-60 Safety Requirements for the Storage               1910.111
  and Handling of Anhydrous Ammonia.
ANSI K61.1-66 Safety Requirements for the Storage               1910.111
  and Handling of Anhydrous Ammonia.
ANSI O1.1-54 (R 61) Safety Code for Woodworking                 1910.261
  Machinery.
ANSI S1.4-71 (R 76) Specification for Sound Level                1910.95
Meters.
[[Page 925]]

ANSI S1.11-71 (R 76) Specification for Octave,                   1910.95
  Half-Octave and Third-Octave Band Filter Sets.
ANSI S3.6-69 Specifications for Audiometers.......               1910.95
ANSI Z4.1-68 Requirements for Sanitation in Places              1910.261
  of Employment.
ANSI Z4.2-42 Standard Specifications for Drinking               1910.142
  Fountains.
ANSI Z9.1-51 Safety Code for Ventilation and           1910.94; 1910.261
  Operation of Open Surface Tanks.
ANSI Z9.2-60 Fundamentals Governing the Design and     1910.94; 1910.261
  Operation of Local Exhaust Systems.
ANSI Z12.12-68 Standard for the Prevention of                   1910.261
  Sulfur Fires and Explosions.
ANSI Z12.20-62 (R 69) Code for the Prevention of                1910.265
  Dust Explosions in Woodworking and Wood Flour 
  Manufacturing Plants.
ANSI Z21.30-64 Requirements for Gas Appliances and              1910.265
  Gas Piping Installations.
ANSI Z24.22-57 Method of Measurement of Real-Ear                1910.261
  Attenuation of Ear Protectors at Threshold.
ANSI Z33.1-61 Installation of Blower and Exhaust      1910.261; 1910.265
  Systems for Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal or 
  Conveying.
ANSI Z33.1-66 Installation of Blower and Exhaust                 1910.94
  Systems for Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal or 
  Conveying.
ANSI Z35.1-68 Specifications for Accident                       1910.261
  Prevention Signs.
ANSI Z41.1-67 Men's Safety Toe Footwear...........   1910.94; 1910.136; 
                                                                1910.261
ANSI Z41-91, Personal Protection-Protective                     1910.136
  Footwear.
ANSI Z48.1-54 Method for Marking Portable           1910.103; 1910.110; 
  Compressed Gas Containers to Identify the                     1910.253
  Material Contained.
ANSI Z48.1-54 (R 70) Method for Marking Portable      1910.111; 1910.134
  Compressed Gas Containers To Identify the 
  Material Contained.
ANSI Z49.1-67 Safety in Welding and Cutting.......              1910.252
ANSI Z53.1-67 Safety Color Code for Marking            1910.97; 1910.145
  Physical Hazards and the Identification of 
  Certain Equipment.
ANSI Z54.1-63 Safety Standard for Non-Medical X-                1910.252
  Ray and Sealed Gamma Ray Sources.
ANSI Z87.1-68 Practice of Occupational and          1910.133; 1910.252; 
  Educational Eye and Face Protection.                          1910.261
ANSI Z87.1-89, Practice for Occupational and                    1910.133
  Educational Eye and Face Protection.
ANSI Z88.2-69 Practices for Respiratory Protection   1910.94; 1910.134; 
                                                      1910.261; 1910.266
ANSI Z89.1-69 Safety Requirements for Industrial    1910.135; 1910.261; 
  Head Protection.                                              1910.266
ANSI Z89.1-86, Protective Headwear for Industrial               1910.135
  Workers Requirements.
ANSI Z89.2-71 Safety Requirements for Industrial                1910.268
  Protective Helmets for Electrical Workers, Class 
  B.


American Petroleum Institute

  1220 L Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005
API 12A (Sept. 1951) Specification for Oil Storage              1910.106
Tanks With Riveted Shells, 7th Ed.
[[Page 926]]

API 12B (May 1958) Specification for Bolted                     1910.106
  Production Tanks, 11th Ed., With Supplement No. 
  1, Mar. 1962.
API 12D (Aug. 1957) Specification for Large Welded              1910.106
  Production Tanks, 7th Ed.
API 12F (Mar. 1961) Specification for Small Welded              1910.106
  Production Tanks, 5th Ed.
API 620, Fourth Ed. (1970) Including Appendix R,    1910.103; 1910.106; 
  Recommended Rules for Design and Construction of              1910.111
  Large Welded Low Pressure Storage Tanks.
API 650 (1966) Welded Steel Tanks for Oil Storage,              1910.106
  3rd Ed.
API 1104 (1968) Standard for Welding Pipelines and              1910.252
  Related Facilities.
API 2000 (1968) Venting Atmospheric and Low                     1910.106
  Pressure Storage Tanks.
API 2201 (1963) Welding or Hot Tapping on                       1910.252
  Equipment Containing Flammables.


American Society of Mechanical Engineers

  Service Center, 22 Law Drive, P.O. Box 2900, 
  Fairfield, NJ 07007, Telephone (610) 832-9585, 
  FAX (610) 832-9555
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII,      1910.110; 1910.111
  1949, 1950, 1952, 1956, 1959, and 1962 Ed.
ASME Code for Pressure Vessels, 1968 Ed...........    1910.106; 1910.217
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII,    1910.103; 1910.104; 
  1968.                                             1910.106; 1910.107; 
                                                    1910.110; 1910.111; 
                                                                1910.169
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII,                1910.104
  Paragraph UG-84, 1968.
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sec. VIII,    1910.261; 1910.262; 
  Unfired Pressure Vessels, Including Addenda                   1910.263
  (1969).
Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels for Petroleum                 1910.110
  Liquids and Gases of the API and the ASME, 1951 
  Ed.
ASME B56.6-1992 (with addenda), Safety Standard                 1910.266
  for Rough Terrain Forklift Trucks.


American Society for Testing and Materials

  100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 
  19428-2959, Telephone (610) 832-9585, FAX (610) 
  832-9555
ASTM A 47-68 Malleable Iron Castings..............              1910.111
ASTM A 53-69 Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe.......    1910.110; 1910.111
ASTM A 126-66 Gray Iron Casting for Valves,                     1910.111
  Flanges and Pipe Fitting.
ASTM A 391-65 (ANSI G61.1-1968) Alloy Steel Chain.              1910.184
ASTM A 395-68 Ductile Iron for Use at Elevated                  1910.111
  Temperatures.
ASTM B 88-69 Seamless Copper Water Tube...........              1910.110
ASTM B 88-66A Seamless Copper Water Tube..........              1910.252
ASTM B 117-64 Salt Spray (Fog) Test...............              1910.268
ASTM B 210-68 Aluminum-Alloy Drawn Seamless Tubes.              1910.110
ASTM B 241-69 Standard Specification for               1910.110(b)(8)(i)
  Aluminum--Alloy Seamless Pipe and Seamless 
  Extruded Tube.
ASTM D 5-65 Test for Penetration by Bituminous                  1910.106
  Materials.
ASTM D 56-70 Test for Flash Point by Tag Closed                 1910.106
Tester.
[[Page 927]]

ASTM D 86-62 Test for Distillation of Petroleum                 1910.106
  Products.
ASTM D 88-56 Test for Saybolt Viscosity...........              1910.106
ASTM D 93-71 Test for Flash Point by Pensky                     1910.106
  Martens.
ASTM D 323-68 Standard Method of Test for Vapor          1910.106(a)(30)
  Pressure of Petroleum Products (Reid Method).
ASTM D 445-65 Test for Viscosity of Transparent                 1910.106
  and Opaque Liquids.
ASTM D 1692-68 Test for Flammability of Plastic                 1910.103
  Sheeting and Cellular Plastics.
ASTM D 2161-66 Conversion Tables For SUS..........              1910.106


American Welding Society

  550 N.W. LeJeune Road, Miami, FL 33126
AWS A3.0 (1969) Terms and Definitions.............              1910.251
AWS A6.1 (1966) Recommended Safe Practices for Gas              1910.254
  Shielded Arc Welding.
AWS B3.0-41 Standard Qualification Procedure......               1910.67
AWS D1.0-1966 Code for Welding in Building                       1910.27
  Construction.
AWS D2.0-69 Specifications for Welding Highway and               1910.67
  Railway Bridges.
AWS D8.4-61 Recommended Practices for Automotive                 1910.67
  Welding Design.
AWS D10.9-69 Standard Qualification of Welding                   1910.67
  Procedures and Welders for Piping and Tubing.


Commerce, Department of

  National Technical Information Service, 5285 
  Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA 22161
Commercial Standard, CS 202-56 (1961) ``Industrial               1910.30
  Lifts and Hinged Loading Ramps''.
Pub., ``Model Performance Criteria for Structural               1910.156
  Fire Fighters' Helmets''.


Compressed Gas Association

  1235 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington, VA 
  22202
CGA C-6 (1968) Standards for Visual Inspection of               1910.101
  Compressed Gas Cylinders.
CGA C-8 (1962) Standard for Requalification of                  1910.101
  ICC-3HT Cylinders.
CGA G-1 (1966) Acetylene..........................              1910.102
CGA G-1.3 (1959) Acetylene Transmission for                     1910.102
  Chemical Synthesis.
CGA G-1.4 (1966) Standard for Acetylene Cylinder                1910.102
  Charging Plants.
CGA G-7.1 (1966) Commodity Specification..........              1910.134
CGA G-8.1 (1964) Standard for the Installation of               1910.105
  Nitrous Oxide Systems at Consumer Sites.
CGA P-1 (1965) Safe Handling of Compressed Gases..              1910.101
CGA P-3 (1963) Specifications, Properties, and                  1910.109
  Recommendations for Packaging, Transportation, 
  Storage and Use of Ammonium Nitrate.
CGA S-1.1 (1963) and 1965 Addenda. Safety Release     1910.101; 1910.103
  Device Standards--Cylinders for Compressed 
  Gases.
CGA S-1.2 (1963) Safety Release Device Standards,     1910.101; 1910.103
  Cargo and Portable Tanks for Compressed Gases.
CGA S-1.3 (1959) Safety Release Device Standards--  1910.103; 1910.104; 
  Compressed Gas Storage Containers.                            1910.111
CGA 1957 Standard Hose Connection Standard........              1910.253

[[Page 928]]

CGA and RMA (Rubber Manufacturer's Association)                 1910.253
  Specification for Rubber Welding Hose (1958).
CGA 1958 Regulator Connection Standard............              1910.253


Crane Manufacturer's Association of America, Inc.

  1 Thomas Circle, NW, Washington, DC 20005
CMAA Specification 61, Specifications for                      1910.179
  Electric Overhead Traveling Cranes.


General Services Administration

GSA Pub. GG-B-0067b, Air Compressed for Breathing               1910.134
  Purposes, or Interim Federal Specifications, 
  Apr. 1965.


Health and Human Services, Department of

Publication No. 76-120 (1975), List of Personal                  1910.95
  Hearing Protectors and Attenuation Data.


Institute of Makers of Explosives

  420 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10017
IME Pamphlet No. 17, 1960, Safety in the Handling               1910.261
  and Use of Explosives.


National Electrical Manufacturer's Association

  2101 L Street, NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 
  20037 Telephone: (202) 457-8400
NEMA EW-1 (1962) Requirements for Electric Arc                  1910.254
  Welding Apparatus.


National Fire Protection Association

  1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269-9101 FAX 
  (617) 770-3500
NFPA 30 (1969) Flammable and Combustible Liquids                1910.178
  Code.
NFPA 32-1970 Standard for Dry Cleaning Plants.....              1910.106
NFPA 33-1969 Standard for Spray Finishing Using                  1910.94
  Flammable and Combustible Material.
NFPA 34-1966 Standard for Dip Tanks Containing                   1910.94
  Flammable or Combustible Liquids.
NFPA 35-1970 Standard for the Manufacture of                    1910.106
  Organic Coatings.
NFPA 36-1967 Standard for Solvent Extraction                    1910.106
  Plants.
NFPA 37-1970 Standard for the Installation and Use    1910.106; 1910.110
  of Stationery Combustion Engines and Gas 
  Turbines.
NFPA 51B-1962 Standard for Fire Protection in Use               1910.252
  of Cutting and Welding Processes.
NFPA 54-1969 Standard for the Installation of Gas               1910.110
  Appliances and Gas Piping.
NFPA 54A-69 Standard for the Installation of Gas                1910.110
  Piping and Gas Equipment on Industrial Premises 
  and Certain Other Premises.
NFPA 58-1969 Standard for the Storage and Handling    1910.110; 1910.178
  of Liquefied Petroleum Gases (ANSI Z106.1-1970).
NFPA 59-1968 Standard for the Storage and Handling              1910.110
  of Liquefied Petroleum Gases at Utility Gas 
  Plants.
NFPA 62-1967 Standard for the Prevention of Dust                1910.263
  Explosions in the Production, Packaging, and 
  Handling of Pulverized Sugar and Cocoa.
NFPA 68-1954 Guide for Explosion Venting..........               1910.94
NFPA 70-1971 National Electrical Code.............               1910.66
NFPA 78-1968 Lightning Protection Code............              1910.109
NFPA 80-1968 Standard for Fire Doors and Windows..              1910.106
NFPA 80-1970 Standard for the Installation of Fire              1910.253
Doors and Windows.
[[Page 929]]

NFPA 86A-1969 Standard for Oven and Furnaces          1910.107; 1910.108
  Design, Location and Equipment.
NFPA 91-1961 Standard for the Installation of                   1910.107
  Blower and Exhaust Systems for Dust, Stock, and 
  Vapor Removal or Conveying (ANSI Z33.1-61).
NFPA 91-1969 Standards for Blower and Exhaust                   1910.108
  Systems.
NFPA 96-1970 Standard for the Installation of                   1910.110
  Equipment for the Removal of Smoke and Grease 
  Laden Vapors from Commercial Cooking Equipment.
NFPA 101-1070 Code for Life Safety From Fire in                 1910.261
  Buildings and Structures.
NFPA 203M-1970 Manual on Roof Coverings...........              1910.109
NFPA 251-1969 Standard Methods of Fire Tests of                 1910.106
  Building Construction and Materials.
NFPA 302-1968 Fire Protection Standard for Motor-               1910.265
  Craft (Pleasure and Commercial).
NFPA 385-1966 Recommended Regulatory Standard for               1910.106
  Tank Vehicles for Flammable and Combustible 
  Liquids.
NFPA 496-1967 Standard for Purged Enclosures for                1910.103
  Electrical Equipment in Hazardous Locations.
NFPA 505-1969 Standard for Type Designations,                   1910.110
  Areas of Use, Maintenence, and Operation of 
  Powered Industrial Trucks.
NFPA 566-1965 Standard for the Installation of                  1910.253
  Bulk Oxygen Systems at Consumer Sites.
NFPA 656-1959 Code for the Prevention of Dust                   1910.263
  Ignition in Spice Grinding Plants.
NFPA 1971-1975 Protective Clothing for Structural               1910.156
  Fire Fighting.


National Food Plant Institute

  1700 K Street, NW, Washington, DC 20006
Definition and Test Procedures for Ammonium                     1910.109
  Nitrate Fertilizer (Nov. 1964).


National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health

  NIOSH Publications, 4676 Columbia Parkway, Mail 
  Stop C-13, Cincinnati, OH 45226-1998 Telephone 
  (800) 356-4674
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances,                1910.20
  1978.
Development of Criteria for Fire Fighters Gloves;               1910.156
  Vol. II, Part II; Test Methods, 1976.
NIOSH Recommendations for Occupational Safety and               1910.120
  Health Standards (September 1987).


Society of Automotive Engineers

  400 Commonwealth Dr., Warrendale, PA 15096, 
  Telephone: (412) 776-4841
SAE J185, June 1988, Recommended Practice for                   1910.266
  Access Systems for Off-Road Machines.
SAE J231, January 1981, Minimum Performance                     1910.266
  Criteria for Falling Object Protective Structure 
  (FOPS).
SAE J386, June 1985, Operator Restraint Systems                 1910.266
  for Off-Road Work Machines.
SAE J397, April 1988, Deflection Limiting Volume--              1920.266
  ROPS/FOPS Laboratory Evaluation.
SAE 765 (1961) SAE Recommended Practice: Crane                  1910.180
Loading Stability Test Code.
[[Page 930]]

SAE J1040, April 1988, Performance Criteria for                 1920.266
  Rollover Protective Structures (ROPS) for 
  Construction, Earthmoving, Forestry and Mining 
  Machines.


The Fertilizer Institute

  1015 18th. Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036
Standard M-1 (1953, 1955, 1957, 1960, 1961, 1963,               1910.111
  1965, 1966, 1967, 1968), Superseded by ANSI 
  K61.1-1972.


Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.

  Available from: Global Engineering Documents, 15 
  Inverness Way East, Englewood, CO 80112, 
  Telephone (800) 854-7179 or
  Global Engineering Documents, 7730 Carondelet 
  Ave., Suite 470, Clayton, MO 63105, Telephone 
  (800) 854-7179
UL 58-61 Steel Underground Tanks for Flammable and              1910.106
  Combustible Liquids, 5th Ed.
UL 80-63 Steel Inside Tanks for Oil-Burner Fuel...              1910.106
UL 142-68 Steel Above Ground Tanks for Flammable                1910.106
  and Combustible Liquids.


United States Public Health Service

  Available from: United States Pharmacopeia 
  Convention, 2601 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, 
  MD 20852
U.S. Pharmacopeia.................................              1910.134
Publication No. 934 (1962), Food Service                        1910.142
  Sanitation Ordinance and Code, Part V of the 
  Food Service Sanitation Manual.


Addresses

  Technical Data Center: Frances Perkins 
  Department of Labor Building, Room N2625, 200 
  Constitution Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20210.
  Boston Regional Office--Region I: Regional 
  Administrator, U.S. Department of Labor--OSHA, 
  JFK Federal Bldg., Rm. E-340, Boston, MA 02203.
  New York Regional Office--Region II: Regional 
  Administrator, U.S. Department of Labor--OSHA, 
  201 Varick St., Room 670, New York, NY 10014.
  Philadelphia Regional Office--Region III: 
  Regional Administrator, U.S. Department of 
  Labor--OSHA, Gateway Bldg., Suite 2100, 3535 
  Market St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.
  Atlanta Regional Office--Region IV: Regional 
  Administrator, U.S. Department of Labor--OSHA, 
  1375 Peachtree St., N.E., Suite 587, Atlanta, GA 
  30367.
  Chicago Regional Office--Region V: Regional 
  Administrator, U.S. Department of Labor--OSHA, 
  32nd Fl., Room 3244, 230 S. Dearborn St., 
  Chicago, IL 60604.
  Dallas Regional Office--Region VI: Regional 
  Administrator, U.S. Department of Labor--OSHA, 
  555 Griffin St., Room 602, Dallas, TX 75202.
  Kansas City Regional Office--Region VII: 
  Regional Administrator, U.S. Department of 
  Labor--OSHA, 1100 Main St., Kansas City, MO 
  64106.
  Denver Regional Office--Region VIII: Regional 
  Administrator, U.S. Department of Labor--OSHA, 
  1999 Broadway, Suite 1690, Denver, CO 80202-
  5716.

[[Page 931]]

  San Francisco Regional Office--Region IX: 
  Regional Administrator, U.S. Department of 
  Labor--OSHA, 71 Stevenson St., Suite 420, San 
  Francisco, CA 94105.
  Seattle Regional Office--Region X: Regional 
  Administrator, U.S. Department of Labor--OSHA, 
  1111 Third Avenue, Suite 715, Seattle, WA 98101-
  3212.
  Note: Addresses of standards organizations are 
  also listed at 29 CFR 1910.6.



[[Page 933]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 29, 1998)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)

[[Page 934]]

      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture

[[Page 935]]

         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Northeast Dairy Compact Commission (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]

[[Page 936]]

    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 937]]

       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 938]]

      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 939]]

        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

[[Page 940]]

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--deral 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)

[[Page 941]]

        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)

[[Page 942]]

      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense

[[Page 943]]

       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

[[Page 944]]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)

[[Page 945]]

            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 946]]

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 947]]

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)

[[Page 948]]

        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 949]]

        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 951]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 29, 1998)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development, United      22, II
     States
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
   Compliance Board
[[Page 952]]

Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Corporation for National and Community Service    45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII

[[Page 953]]

  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII

[[Page 954]]

Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
     of Certain Employees
[[Page 955]]

  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II

[[Page 956]]

  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, United States        22, II; 48, 7
       Agency for
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II

[[Page 957]]

Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Dairy Compact Commission                7, XIII
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
[[Page 958]]

  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A

[[Page 959]]

  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances            41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S., Scholarship Foundation          45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 961]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers to Federal Register pages. The 
user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985'', published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

29 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1901  Authority citation revised; subpart, section, and paragraph 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1902  Authority citation revised; subpart, section, and paragraph 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1903  Authority citation revised; subpart, section, and paragraph 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1904  Authority citation revised; subpart, section, and paragraph 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1905  Authority citation revised; subpart, section, and paragraph 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1907  Authority citation revised; subpart, section, and paragraph 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1908  Authority citation revised; subpart, section, and paragraph 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1910  Authority citation removed...................................24526
1910.1--1910.6 (Subpart A)  Authority citation added; section 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1910.11--1910.19 (Subpart B)  Authority citation added; section 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1910.19  (a) revised........................................22733, 37004
1910.20 (Subpart C)  Authority citation added; section authority 
        citation removed...........................................24526
1910.21--1910.32 (Subpart D)  Authority citation added; section 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1910.35--1910.40 (Subpart E)  Authority citation added; section 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1910.66--1910.70 (Subpart F)  Authority citation added; section 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1910.68  (e)(3) revised............................................34560
1910.94--1910.100 (Subpart G)  Authority citation added; section 
        authority citations removed................................24526
1910.96  (b) Table G-18 corrected; CFR correction..................45427
1910.101--1910.116 (Subpart H)  Authority citation added; section 
        authority citations removed................................24526
    Authority citation amended.....................................45663
1910.106  (g)(1)(i)(g) removed.....................................34560
1910.120  Added; interim...........................................45663
1910.132--1910.140 (Subpart I)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526

[[Page 962]]

    Authority citation added.......................................24527
1910.141--1910.149 (Subpart J)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
    Authority citation revised.....................................33260
1910.145  (f) revised..............................................33260
1910.151--1910.153 (Subpart K)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
1910.155--1910.165 (Subpart L)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
    Authority citation revised.....................................34560
1910.157  (f)(16) revised..........................................34560
1910.169--1910.171 (Subpart M)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
1910.176--1910.190 (Subpart N)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
    Authority citation revised.....................................34560
1910.179  (j)(2) (iii) and (iv) and (m)(1) introductory text and 
        (2) revised................................................34560
1910.180  (d)(6), (g)(1) introductory text and (2)(ii) revised.....34561
1910.181  (g)(1) introductory text and (3) revised.................34561
1910.211--1910.222 (Subpart O)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
    Authority citation revised.....................................34561
1910.217  (e)(1) (i) and (ii) revised..............................34561
1910.218  (a)(2) (i) and (ii) revised..............................34561
1910.241--1910.247 (Subpart P)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
1910.251--1910.254 (Subpart Q)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
    Authority citation revised.....................................34562
1910.252  (c)(6) revised...........................................34562
1910.261--1910.275 (Subpart R)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation added.......................................24527
1910.301--1910.399 (Subpart S)  Authority citation revised.........24527
1910.401--1910.441 (Subpart T)  Section authority citations 
        removed....................................................24526
    Authority citation revised.......................24527, 33033, 34562
1910.430  (e)(1) revised...........................................33033
1910.440  (a)(1) removed...........................................34562

                                  1987

29 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1910.16  (b)(2)(ix) added..........................................36026
1910.19  (i) added.................................................34562
    (j) added......................................................46291
1910.101--1910.116 (Subpart H)  Authority citation corrected.......16241
1910.120  (a)(2)(iii) and (3), (e)(1) introductory text, (6) and 
        (9), (f)(1) introductory text, (i) and (ii), (2) 
        introductory text, (3)(i), (6)(i)(B), (7) (i) and (ii) 
        introductory text and (D), (g)(1)(i), (2) and (3)(v), 
        (h)(1), (j)(5)(iv), (l)(2) (i) and (ii)(A) introductory 
        text, (B), (C), (D), and (E), (4)(i), (n)(6), (o) 
        introductory text, (3) and (5), (p)(4), Note, and Appendix 
        A corrected................................................16241
    (f)(1)(iii), (2)(iv), and (7)(ii)(B), (g)(1)(ii), (h)(4), 
(l)(1) (i) and (ii) introductory text, (2) heading, (3)(ii)(D), 
and (4)(ii) correctly revised; (f)(1)(iv), (7)(iii), (j)(2)(v), 
and (l)(4)(iv) correctly removed; (j)(1)(xii) and (l)(3)(ii)(J) 
correctly added; (j)(2) (vi) and (vii) correctly redesignated as 
(j)(2) (v) and (vi)................................................16242
1910.177  (a)(2) revised...........................................36026
1910.261--1910.275 (Subpart R)  Authority citation revised.........49625
1910.268  (c) revised..............................................36387
1910.272  Text and Appendixes A, B, and C added (effective date 
        pending in part)...........................................49625

                                  1988

29 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1907  Removed......................................................12120

[[Page 963]]

1910.1--1910.7 (Subpart A)  Authority citation revised.............12120
1910.7  Added......................................................12120
    Appendix A added; OMB number...................................12123
    (b)(2)(i) corrected............................................16838
1910.20 (Subpart C)  Authority citation revised....................38162
      Revised (effective date pending in part).....................38163
      Effective in part 12-13-88; OMB number.......................49981
1910.28  (f)(2) introductory text, (g)(3), (h)(2), and (i)(1) 
        revised....................................................12121
1910.35  (h) revised...............................................12121
1910.95  Existing regulations unchanged............................26437
1910.101--1910.120 (Subpart H)  Authority citation revised.........12121
1910.103  (a)(1)(ii) revised.......................................12121
1910.106  (a)(35) revised..........................................12121
1910.107  (a)(8) revised...........................................12121
1910.108  (a)(3) revised...........................................12121
1910.109  (d)(2)(iii)(a) revised...................................12122
1910.110  (a)(14), (b)(2)(iii), (c)(5)(i)(g)(1) and (f)(5)(iv) 
        revised....................................................12122
1910.111  (b)(1)(ii) revised; (b)(1)(vi) added.....................12122
1910.155--1910.165 (Subpart L)  Authority citation revised.........12122
1910.155  (c)(3)(i) revised; (c)(3)(iv)(E) added...................12122
1910.176--1910.190 (Subpart N)  Authority citation revised.........12122
      Authority citation revised...................................34737
1910.177  (b) amended; (d)(5) and Appendix B revised...............34737
1910.178  (a)(7) revised...........................................12122
1910.180  (i)(4)(i) revised........................................12122
1910.181  (j)(4)(i) revised........................................12122
1910.211--1910.222 (Subpart O)  Authority citation revised..........8352
1910.211  (d)(11)(iii) and (12) revised; (d)(11)(iv) and (61) 
        through (66) added..........................................8353
1910.217  (c)(3)(iii)(b) revised; (h) added.........................8353
    Appendixes A through D added....................................8358
1910.251--1910.254 (Subpart Q)  Authority citation revised.........12122
1910.251  (b) revised..............................................12122
1910.261--1910.275 (Subpart R)  Authority citation revised.........12123
1910.265  (d)(2)(iv)(c) revised....................................12123
1910.266  (c)(4)(iii) and (iv) revised.............................12123
1910.272  Appendixes A and C corrected; OMB number.................17696
1910.399  (a)(1) revised...........................................12123

                                  1989

29 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1902.3  Amended (OMB numbers)......................................24333
1903.11  Amended (OMB numbers).....................................24333
1908.6  Amended (OMB numbers)......................................24333
1908.7  Amended (OMB numbers)......................................24333
1908.9  Amended (OMB numbers)......................................24333
1908.10  Amended (OMB numbers).....................................24333
1910  Guide and bibliography.......................................12792
    Corrected......................................................14909
    Technical correction..........................................28154,
                                                            37531, 41364
    Authority citation corrected............................28059, 47513
    Grain handling facilities; supplemental statement of reasons 
                                                                   49971
1910.7  Amended (OMB numbers)......................................24333
1910.20 (Subpart C)  Amended (OMB numbers).........................24333
1910.66  Amended (OMB numbers).....................................24333
    Revised........................................................31456
1910.68  Amended (OMB numbers).....................................24334
1910.95  Amended (OMB numbers).....................................24333
1910.101--1910.120 (Subpart H)  Authority citation amended..........9317
1910.120  Revised...................................................9317
1910.141--1910.149 (Subpart J)  Authority citation revised.........36687
1910.147  Redesignated as 1910.150; new 1910.147 and Appendix 
        added......................................................36687
    Amended; OMB number............................................42498
    Effective date extended........................................46610
1910.150  Redesignated from 1910.147...............................36687

[[Page 964]]

1910.217  Amended (OMB numbers)....................................24333
1910.252  Amended (OMB numbers)....................................24334
1910.268  Amended (OMB numbers)....................................24334
1910.272  Amended (OMB numbers)....................................24334
1910.421  Amended (OMB numbers)....................................24334

                                  1990

29 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1910  Interpretation...............................................52840
1910  Technical correction.........................................23433
1910.20  Regulation at 53 FR 38163 eff. 12-13-88...................26431
1910.21--1910.32 (Subpart D)  Authority citation correctly revised
                                                                   46054
1910.26  (c)(3)(viii) revised......................................32014
1910.66--1910.70 (Subpart F)  Authority citation correctly revised
                                                                   46054
1910.67  (b)(4) revised............................................32014
1910.68  (b)(4) and (c)(5)(iv)(c) revised..........................32014
1910.94--1910.100 (Subpart G)  Authority citation correctly 
        revised....................................................46054
1910.94  (a)(2)(iii) amended.......................................32015
1910.101-120 (Subpart H)  Authority citation revised...............25094
    Authority citation revised.....................................32015
    Authority citation correctly revised...........................46054
1910.103  (b)(3)(iii)(e) revised...................................32015
1910.106  Tables H-18 and H-19 amended; (h)(7)(iii)(a) revised.....32015
1910.110  (i)(2)(iii) amended......................................25094
    Table H-28 amended.............................................32015
1910.120  (a)(2)(iii), (3), (e)(3)(iv), (e)(9), (f)(2)(iii), 
        (g)(1)(ii), (h)(1)(i), (l)(1)(i), (ii), (p)(7)(i), (q)(1), 
        (3)(iii), (viii), (6)(i), (7) amended; (a)(3)(B) and (p) 
        introductory text revised..................................14073
    Appendixes A, B, C, and D amended..............................14074
1910.147  (b) amended, (c)(1), (2)(iii), (6)(i)(B), (7)(i) 
        introductory text, (8), (d) introductory text, (2), 
        (e)(2)(ii), (f)(2)(ii), (4) and Appendix A revised.........38685
1910.176--1910.190 (Subpart N)  Authority citation correctly 
        revised....................................................46054
1910.178  (c)(2) introductory text revised.........................32015
1910.179  (g)(1)(i) revised........................................32015
1910.180  (j) revised..............................................32015
1910.181  (j)(5) revised...........................................32015
1910.251--1910.257 (Subpart Q)  Revised............................13696
1910.252  (f)(4)(iv)(B) revised....................................32015
    Heading correctly designated; (f)(4)(iv)(B) correctly revised 
                                                                   46053
1910.261--1910.275 (Subpart R)  Authority citation revised.........25094
    (Subpart R)  Authority citation revised........................32015
    Authority citation correctly revised...........................46054
1910.261  (g)(1)(iv) and (r)(16) revised...........................32015
1910.265  (c)(12) removed..........................................32015
1910.266  (c)(6)(xxii) removed.....................................32015
1910.272  (f)(2) and Appendix A amended............................25094
1910.301--1910.399 (Subpart S)  Authority citation revised.........32015
    Authority citation correctly revised...........................46054
1910.304  (b)(1) removed...........................................32015
1910.331  Added....................................................32016
1910.332  Added; eff. 8-6-91.......................................32016
1910.333  Added....................................................32016
    (b)(2)(i) and (v) corrected....................................46053
    (c)(3) and table corrected.....................................46054
1910.334  Added....................................................32019
    (a)(2)(ii) and (c)(2) corrected................................46054
1910.335  Added....................................................32020
1910.399  Designations removed; text amended.......................32020
    (a) correctly amended; (b) through (d) correctly removed.......46054

                                  1991

29 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1910.120  (a)(3) corrected; (e)(9) correctly revised...............15832

[[Page 965]]

                                  1992

29 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1910.101--1910.120 (Subpart H)  Authority citation revised..........6403
1910.11--1910.19 (Subpart B)  Authority citation revised...........42388
1910.19  (k) added.................................................42388
    (i) revised....................................................35666
1910.109  (k) revised...............................................6403
1910.119  Added.....................................................6403
    (b), (e)(1)(i), (iii), (v), (e)(3)(iii), (f)(1), Appendix A 
and Appendix C corrected............................................7847
    (f), (h), (j) and (l) eff. 8-27-92.............................38600
      Regulation at 57 FR 6403 stayed in part until 8-6-92.........23061

                                  1993

29 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1910.1--1919.7 (Subpart A)  Authority citation revised.............35308
1910  Determination................................................16612
1910.5  (c)(1) amended.............................................35308
1910.11--1910.19 (Subpart B)  Authority citation revised...........35308
1910.13  Removed...................................................35308
1910.14  Removed...................................................35308
1910.15  Revised...................................................35308
1910.35--1910.40 (Subpart E)   Authority citation revised..........35308
1910.40  Amended...................................................35308
1910.94  (a)(5)(i), (c)(6)(iii)(a) and (d)(9)(vi) amended..........35308
1910.96  (a)(7)(v), (i)(1), (k), (l)(1) introductory text, (2) 
        introductory text, (m)(1), (p) heading, (1), (2), (3) 
        introductory text, (i) and (ii) amended....................35309
1910.100  Amended..................................................35309
1910.103  (c)(2)(iii)(i), (3)(i)(c), (d), (ii)(d), (iii)(b) and 
        (e) amended................................................35309
1910.109  (g)(4)(v) corrected; CFR correction......................16496
    (i)(1)(ii)(b) amended..........................................35309
1910.110  (d)(11) corrected; CFR correction........................15089
    (b)(10)(i) amended.............................................35309
1910.116  Amended..................................................35309
1910.132--1910.140 (Subpart I)  Authority citation revised.........35309
1910.134  (b)(11) revised..........................................35309
1910.141--1910.150 (Subpart J)  Authority citation revised..........4549
1910.146  Added.....................................................4549
    (c)(4), (5)(ii)(H), (8)(i), (d) heading, introductory text, 
(13), (14) and Appendix A corrected................................34845
    Appendixes B, C, D-1A and D-1B corrected.......................34847
    Appendix D-2 corrected.........................................34849
    Appendix E corrected...........................................34851
1910.155--1910.165 (Subpart L)  Authority citation revised.........35309
    Appendixes B, C and D amended..................................35309
1910.166--1910.171 (Subpart M)  Authority citation revised.........35309
1910.171  Amended..................................................35309
1910.184  (f)(4)(ii) Table N-184-7 amended.........................35309
    (i)(6)(iii) Tables N-184-20, N-184-21 and N-184-22 amended.....35310
1910.190  Amended..................................................35310
1910.275  Amended..................................................35310
1910.401--1910.441 (Subpart T)  Authority citation revised.........35310
1910.401  (a)(2)(iii) amended......................................35310

                                  1994

29 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1903  Authority citation revised...................................66613
1903.14  Heading revised; (f) added................................66613
1904  Authority citation revised...................................15600
    Technical  correction..........................................16895
1904.8  Revised....................................................15600
1910  Determination................................................15339
    Technical correction...........................................55208
1910.19  (a) revised...............................................41057
1910.120  Appendix B revised; appendix E added.....................43270
1910.132--1910.140 (Subpart I)  Authority citation revised...4435, 16360
1910.132  (d), (e) and (f) added; eff. 7-5-94......................16360
    (g) correctly added............................................33910
    Regulation at 59 FR 16366 eff. date stayed through 10-5-94.....34580
1910.133  Revised; eff. 7-5-94.....................................16360
    Table corrected................................................33911
1910.135  Revised; eff. 7-5-94.....................................16362

[[Page 966]]

1910.136  Revised; eff. 7-5-94.....................................16362
    (a) corrected..................................................33911
1910.137  Revised...................................................4435
    (a)(3)(ii)(B),  (b)(2)(vii)(B) and (ix) corrected..............33662
1910.138  Added; eff. 7-5-94.......................................16362
    Corrected......................................................33911
1910.132--1910.140 (Subpart I)  Appendixes A and B added; eff. 7-
        5-94.......................................................16362
1910.146  (k)(3)(ii) and appendix E amended........................26115
1910.261--1910.275 (Subpart R)  Authority citation revised..........4437
1910.266  Revised..................................................51741
1910.269  Added; eff. in part 5-31-94 and 1-31-95...................4437
    Note  added....................................................33660
    (a)(1)(i)(B)(3),  (C), (D), (ii) introductory text, (2), 
(d)(1) Note 2, (2)(ii)(C), (8)(ii), (v), (B), (e)(7) note, (11) 
note, (14) note, (g)(2)(v), (i)(4)(iv), (l) designation, (2)(iii) 
note, Tables R-6, R-7, R-8, (m)(1), (2)(i), (iii) and 
(o)(4)(iii)(B) note corrected......................................33662
    (p)(4)(iii)(C)(4)  note, (q)(1)(i) note, (3)(i), (viii)(A), 
(xiv), (4)(iv), (r)(1)(ii)(A), (iv) note, (u)(1) note, (v)(3) 
note, (11)(x), (w)(3), (5)(ii), (7), (x), Appendixes A-2 and B 
through E amended..................................................33663
    (g)(2)(i) revised..............................................40729
    (r)(5) introductory text revised...............................51748
1910.331  (c)(1) Note 2 redesignated as Note 3 and revised; new 
        (c)(1) Note 2 added.........................................4476
1910.333  (c)(3) introductory text note amended.....................4476

                                  1995

29 CFR
                                                                   60 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1910  Technical correction.........................................11194
1910.266  Note added................................................7449
    Note revised...................................................40458
    (c), (d)(1)(iv), (v) and (2)(i) amended; (d)(1)(iii), (vii), 
(2)(iii), (5), (6)(iii), (9)(iii) and (iv) revised.................47035
    (e)(2)(iv), (vi), (xiii), (f)(2)(iv), (x), (xi), (3)(vii), 
(viii), (7)(i), (ii), (g)(1), (2), (h)(1)(iii), (ix), (2)(i), 
(vi), (vii), (3) heading, (i), (5)(v), (viii) and (6)(ii) revised; 
(f)(3)(i) and (ii) amended; (f)(3)(ii) redesignated as 
(f)(3)(ii)(C); (f)(3)(ii)(A) and (B) added.........................47036
    (i)(7)(ii) removed; (i)(7)(iii) redesignated as (i)(7)(ii); 
Appendix A revised.................................................47037

                                  1996

29 CFR
                                                                   61 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter XVII
1901  Removed.......................................................9230
1902.1  (a) revised.................................................9230
1910.1--1910.7 (Subpart A)  Authority citation revised........5508, 9231
1910.6  (a), (b) and (c) redesignated as (a)(1), (3) and (2); new 
        (a)(3) revised; (a)(4) and (b) through (w) added............9231
1910.7  OMB number..................................................5508
1910.8  Added (OMB numbers).........................................5508
1910.11--1910.19 (Subpart B)  Authority citation revised.....9235, 56831
1910.17  (a) and (b) removed; (c) amended...........................9235
1910.19  (l) added.................................................56831
1910.20  (Subpart C)  OMB number....................................5508
    Removed........................................................31430
    (c)(13)(i) amended..............................................9235
    Redesignated as 1910.1020......................................31430
1910.21--1910.32 (Subpart D)  Authority citation revised............9235
1910.30  (a)(3) amended.............................................9235
1910.31  Removed....................................................9235
1910.32  Removed....................................................9235
1910.39  Bemoved....................................................9235
1910.40  Removed....................................................9235
1910.66--1910.70 (Subpart F)  Authority citation revised............9235
1910.66  OMB number.................................................5508
    (k) removed.....................................................9235
1910.67  (b)(1) and (c)(5) amended..................................9235
1910.68  (b)(3), (4), (c)(7)(ii)(b) amended; note removed...........9235
1910.69  Removed....................................................9235
1910.70  Removed....................................................9236
1910.94--1910.100 (Subpart G)  Authority citation revised...........9236

[[Page 967]]

1910.94  (a)(2)(iii), (4)(i), (5)(v)(a), (b)(5)(i)(a), (c)(1)(ii), 
        (4)(iii), (5)(i)(a), (iii)(e), (6)(ii), (iii)(a), 
        (7)(iv)(e), (d)(2)(iv) and (7)(iv) amended..................9236
1910.95  OMB number.................................................5508
    (h)(2) and Appendixes G and H amended...........................9236
1910.96  OMB number.................................................5508
    Redesignated as 1910.1096......................................31430
1910.97  (a)(3)(ii) amended.........................................9236
1910.99  Removed....................................................9236
1910.100  Removed...................................................9236
1910.101--1910.120 (Subpart H)  Authority citation revised..........9236
1910.101  (a), (b) and (c) amended..................................9236
1910.102  (a), (b) and (c) amended..................................9236
1910.103  (b)(1)(i)(a)(1), (c) and (iii)(b) amended.................9236
    (c)(1)(i)(a), (iv)(a)(1), (v)(b) and (d) amended................9237
1910.104  (b)(4)(ii), (5)(ii) and (6)(iii) amended..................9237
1910.105  Amended...................................................9237
1910.106  (a)(5), (14)(i), (ii), (17), (30), (b)(1)(i)(a), 
        (iii)(a) introductory text, (iv)(b) introductory text, 
        (2)(ii)(b), (iv)(b)(1), (d)(3)(ii) introductory text, 
        (4)(i) and (j)(6) introductory text amended.................9237
1910.107  (d)(1), (e)(5) and (j)(1) amended.........................9237
1910.108  (b)(1) and (2) amended....................................9237
1910.109  (i)(1)(ii)(b), (2)(iii)(c) and (6)(ii) amended............9237
1910.110  (b)(3)(i), (iii), (5)(i) introductory text and (iii) 
        amended.....................................................9237
    (b)(8)(i) introductory text, (a), (ii), (20)(iv) and 
(e)(2)(iv) amended..................................................9238
1910.111  (b)(1)(i), (7)(iii), (iv), (vi), (d)(1)(ii), (4)(ii)(b) 
        and (e)(1) amended..........................................9238
1910.114  Removed...................................................9238
1910.115  Removed...................................................9238
1910.116  Removed...................................................9238
1910.119  (b) amended...............................................9238
1910.120  (a)(1)(i) and (3) amended.................................9238
1910.132--1910.140 (Subpart I)  Authority citation revised.........19548
1910.133  (b)(1) and (2) amended....................................9238
    (a)(1), (2), (3) and (5) amended...............................19548
1910.134  OMB number................................................5508
1910.135  (b)(1) and (2) amended....................................9238
    (a)(1) and (2) amended.........................................19548
1910.136  (b)(1) and (2) amended....................................9238
    (a) amended....................................................19548
    (a) corrected..................................................21228
1910.139  Removed...................................................9238
1910.140  Removed...................................................9238
1910.142  OMB number................................................5508
    (c)(4) and (i)(1) amended.......................................9238
1910.144  (a)(1)(ii) amended........................................9239
1910.145  OMB number................................................5508
    (d)(2)(i), (4)(i) and (6)(i) redesignated as (d)(2), (4) and 
(6); (a)(2), new (d)(2) and (d)(10) amended.........................9239
1910.147  OMB number................................................5508
1910.148  Removed...................................................9239
1910.149  Removed...................................................9239
1910.150  Removed...................................................9239
1910.151--1910.153 (Subpart K)  Authority citation revised..........9239
1910.153  Removed...................................................9239
1910.156  OMB number................................................5508
    (e)(3)(ii) introductory text, (4)(i) introductory text and 
(5)(i) amended......................................................9239
1910.157  (c)(5) amended............................................9239
1910.158  (c)(3)(iii) and (4) amended...............................9239
1910.155--1910.165 (Subpart L)  Appendix D amended..................9239
1910.169  (a)(2)(i) amended.........................................9239
1910.170  Removed...................................................9239
1910.171  Removed...................................................9239
1910.176--1910.190 (Subpart N)  Authority citation revised..........9239
1910.177  Appendix B amended........................................9239
1910.178  (a)(2), (f)(1) and (2) amended............................9239
1910.179  (b)(2), (6)(i) and (c)(2) amended.........................9239
1910.180  (b)(2), (c)(1)(i), (iii) and (d)(3) introductory text 
        amended.....................................................9239
1910.181  (b)(2) amended............................................9240
1910.182  Removed...................................................9240
1910.184  (e)(4) amended............................................9240
1910.189  Removed...................................................9240
1910.190  Removed...................................................9240

[[Page 968]]

1910.211--1910.222 (Subpart O)  Authority citation revised..........9240
1910.215  (b)(12) amended...........................................9240
1910.216  (a)(1) and (2) removed....................................9240
1910.217  OMB number................................................5508
    (b)(12), (c)(1)(ii), (3)(v), (5)(i), (d)(1) introductory text, 
(f)(4) table and (g) amended........................................9240
1910.218  (d)(4), (e)(1)(iv), (j)(3) and (5) amended................9240
1910.219  (c)(5)(iii) amended.......................................9240
1910.220  Removed...................................................9240
1910.221  Removed...................................................9240
1910.222  Removed...................................................9240
1910.241--1910.247 (Subpart P)  Authority citation revised..........9240
1910.243  (d)(1)(i) and (e)(1)(i) amended...........................9240
1910.245  Removed...................................................9240
1910.246  Removed...................................................9240
1910.247  Removed...................................................9240
1910.251  (c) amended...............................................9240
1910.252  (a)(1), (b)(2)(ii)(I), (d)(1)(v), (vi) and (vii) amended
                                                                    9240
1910.253  (b)(1)(ii), (iii), (4)(iv), (d)(1)(i)(A) introductory 
        text, (2), (4)(ii), (e)(4)(iv), (v), (5)(i) and 
        (f)(6)(i)(I) amended........................................9241
1910.254  (b)(1) and (d)(1) amended.................................9241
1910.256  Removed...................................................9241
1910.257  Removed...................................................9241
1910.261--1910.277 (Subpart R)  Authority citation revised..........9241
1910.261  (a)(3) introductory text and (4) introductory text 
        amended; (n) removed........................................9241
1910.262  (c)(6), (7) and (h)(1)(i) amended.........................9241
1910.263  (i)(24)(ii) and (k)(2)(i) amended.........................9241
1910.265  (c)(2), (15), (18)(i), (20)(i), (30)(iv), (31)(i), 
        (d)(2)(i)(a) and (iv) introductory text amended; (j) 
        removed.....................................................9241
1910.266  (d)(3)(iv) and (e)(2)(i) amended..........................9241
    (f)(3)(ii), (iii), (iv), (4) and (5)(i) amended.................9242
1910.268  (f)(1), (g)(2)(i)(A), (h)(3), (i)(1), (j)(4)(iv)(E) and 
        (s)(1)(v) am
</pre></body></html>
